Mr. Wittig (Germany): In today's briefing, I
would like to provide an update on the activities and
achievements of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) since my last
briefing in May (see S/PV.6536).

In my briefing, I would like to focus on the
following three aspects: first, reflecting the current
threat of Al-Qaida; secondly, enhancing the
implementation of measures; and thirdly, implementing
the enhanced mandate of the Ombudsperson. A more
detailed version of this statement will be distributed as
hard copy today and made accessible on the
Committee's website.

In June, the Security Council decided to split the
former list related to sanctions under resolution 1267

(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban by
adopting resolution 1988 (2011) and 1989 (2011). As
of 17 June, the Al-Qaida sanctions list has included
only the names of those individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities associated with Al-Qaida. At
the same time, and in line with resolutions 1988 (2011)
and 1989 (2011), Taliban individuals formerly
designated under the 1267 consolidated list were
transferred to the sanctions regime established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011) - the Taliban sanctions
Committee. As the Chairperson of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), I have
communicated my intention to brief this Council in
January 2012 for the first time since the establishment
of the Committee and thereafter every six months.

Since 17 June, the Committee, supported by the
Secretariat and the Monitoring Team, has been
committed to implementing step by step the provisions
of resolution 1989 (2011. The Committee aims at concluding consultations over new guidelines before
the end of this month. The new guidelines will be made
available on the Committee's website.

I turn now to the first aspect of the Committee's
work that I should like to highlight, namely, reflecting
the current threat of Al-Qaida. The Committee
Members share the view that the threat posed by
Al-Qaida continues to evolve. Therefore, the
Committee, with the assistance of the Monitoring
Team, will continue to analyse the threat and take
necessary decisions to ensure that the evolving nature
of the threat is reflected adequately in the list in a
timely manner.

The Al-Qaida sanctions list currently has 344
entries, comprised of 253 Al-Qaida individuals and
91 Al-Qaida entities. Since the last Chairman's briefing
to the Security Council, the Committee has added the
names of eight individuals and four entities. Over the
same period, it has amended eight entries based on
additional information gathered, and removed
12 individuals and three entities from the list.

The Committee will continue its efforts aimed at
keeping the list up to date. The Committee has
concluded its first specialized review of reportedly
deceased individuals pursuant to resolution 1904
(2009), and will conduct a number of specialized and
periodic reviews in line with the provision set out in
resolution 1989 (2011).
The Committee relies on the cooperation of
Member States for the successful conduct of these
reviews. As Chair of the Committee, I would like to
thank all Member States for their continued willingness
to cooperate constructively in recent reviews. The
Committee will make every effort to devise review
modalities that will allow for an effective and credible
review process, without over-burdening Member

States.

Regarding linkages between Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, the Committee has received the Monitoring
Team's 90-day report pursuant to resolution 1989
(2011). The Committee continues to analyze the report
in a comprehensive manner and is drafting a position
paper on the recommendations presented by the
Monitoring Team, to be transmitted with the
Monitoring Team's 90-day report to the Security
Council in due course. The Monitoring Team will
continue to report periodically on linkages between
Al-Qaida and the Taliban. The Committee, recognizing
that there are linkages in some cases between Al-Qaida
and the Taliban, will continue to consider questions
related to those linkages in a comprehensive manner.

The Committee has continued its cooperation
with INTERPOL and has approved a new agreement on
areas of cooperation beyond the issuance of
INTERPOL-United Nations Security Council Special
Notices.

Allow me to turn now to the second aspect of the
work of the Committee, namely, enhancing the
implementation of measures. The Committee has taken
note of information provided by the Monitoring Team
in accordance with its mandate regarding cases in some
Member States where sanctions have not yet been fully
implemented. The Committee will request the
Monitoring Team to provide custom-tailored proposals
for working together with the States in question on
further enhancing the implementation of sanctions
measures. The Committee would like to take advantage
of today's open briefing and remind all Member States
of their obligation to fully implement the sanctions
measures stipulated in resolution 1989 (2011).

Coming to the third aspect of our work, namely,
fair and clear procedures and implementing the
enhanced mandate of the Ombudsperson. At the outset,
the Chair would like to highlight the fact that the
Committee, with the valuable assistance of the
Monitoring Team, has succeeded in making publicly

available narrative summaries of the reasons for all
listings on the Committee's website in all the official
United Nations languages. That marks an important
milestone regarding transparency in the work of the
Committee.

With the adoption of resolution 1904 (2009) the
Security Council established the Office of the
Ombudsperson. As of today, the Ombudsperson has
forwarded 18 de-listing requests to the Committee. She
has submitted eight comprehensive reports to the
Committee. The Committee commends the
Ombudsperson for her continued commitment and for
her substantive contributions to the work of the
Committee.

The Committee has concluded its consideration
of six of those comprehensive reports on specific
de-listing requests, resulting in the de-listing of four
petitioners. In one case the petitioner withdrew his
request before a decision of the Committee. That
clearly indicates that the Ombudsperson process
continues to deliver substantive results. The members
of the Committee also take note that the comprehensive
reports of the Ombudsperson provide the petitioner
with an opportunity to be heard and to present his or
her view of the matter. At the same time it is important
to note that the Committee has so far provided to the
Ombudsperson reasons for all its decisions on
de-listing requests submitted through the Office of the
Ombudsperson.

Through the adoption of resolution 1989 (2011)
the Security Council has further and significantly
strengthened the mandate of the Ombudsperson. The
Ombudsperson is now mandated to provide to the
Committee a recommendation on each de-listing
request. Since the adoption of those new procedures in
June 2011, two individuals have been de-listed on the
basis of the Ombudsperson's recommendation.

Furthermore, resolution 1989 (2011) stipulates
that in cases where the Ombudsperson recommends
de-listing, the petitioner is removed from the Al-Qaida
sanctions list 60 days after the Committee has
completed its consideration of the comprehensive
report, unless there is consensus in the Committee to
retain the listing, or a member of the Committee
requests a referral to the Security Council. With that
provision the Security Council has substantially raised
the bar for members of the Committee who do not
share the Ombudsperson's recommendations to de-list,
by requiring unanimity to retain the listing. The Chair
notes that this new provision has provided a new
dynamic of decision-making within the Committee.

Resolution 1989 (2011) introduced the same
decision-making process with a reversed consensus
requirement when de-listing requests are submitted by
designated States. That should similarly facilitate
de-listing in cases where an individual no longer meets
the listing criteria. So far the Committee has not
received a de-listing request pursuant to the new
provisions set out in paragraph 27 of resolution 1989
(2011).

The Committee would like to take this
opportunity today to encourage all Member States to
ensure that those important and substantial
improvements are made publicly known. At the same
time the Committee underlines that it is essential to
continue to ensure that procedures are fair and clear,
that the Office of the Ombudsperson is adequately
resourced and that its comprehensive reports are
translated into all official languages in a timely
manner. We are satisfied that work is underway to
ensure that that continues to be the case.

Allow me to conclude with some words on the
work of the Monitoring Team. The Monitoring Team
continues to actively support the Committee in all
areas of its work. On behalf of the Committee I would
like to thank Coordinator Richard Barrett and the entire
team for their dedicated work and commitment. A
detailed overview of the activities of the Monitoring
Team since the last briefing in May 2011 (see S/PV.6536) will be included in the hard copy of the
Chair's briefing and made accessible on the
Committee's website.

That concludes my briefing, but allow me to add
some comments in my national capacity regarding the
work of the three counter-terrorism committees.
Regarding the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
Germany remains committed to the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery to non-State actors. The 1540 Committee is an
important tool in this regard.
In our view, one priority is the provision of
assistance, channelled through the Committee. We also
attach great importance to the effective implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and resolution 1977 (2011).
Therefore Germany stands ready to continue
supporting the Committee's work by facilitating the
Working Group on monitoring and implementation. We
welcome its constructive and extremely informative
country visit to the United States in mid-September.
We expect the Committee to make more use of that
important new tool.

We are planning to organize a seminar related to
resolution 1540 (2004) in Germany in April 2012. The
German Foreign Ministry and other competent
agencies are jointly preparing an outreach event for
international, regional and subregional industry
associations, in close cooperation with the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs. We are
convinced that business associations can significantly
contribute to the implementation by States of
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004). We will stay
in close touch with the Chair and other members of the
1540 Committee in the course of further preparations.

About the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, recognizing that promoting human rights
and countering terrorism are mutually reinforcing,
Germany would like to encourage that Committee and
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate to further enhance activities aimed at
promoting human rights while countering terrorism,
including through integrated country visits. Germany
would like to reiterate its view that the General
Assembly and the Counter-Terrorism Task Force, in the
framework of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, should play a leading role in the
field of terrorism prevention.

I wish to say a last word on the work of the 1267
and 1989 Committee - the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee. The Al-Qaida sanctions list must reflect
the evolving threat of the terrorist network. Germany
has a preference for keeping the focus of the list on key
activists. As Chair of the 1267 Committee and the 1989
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, Germany attaches
great importance to ensuring that the Ombudsperson's
current mandate is fully implemented and that the
Office of the Ombudsperson will continue to be
adequately resourced. Regarding implementation,
Germany would like to see the Committee, assisted by
the Monitoring Team, take a more proactive role in
working with Member States to ensure the full
implementation of measures.

