Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): As my first order ofbusiness, I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
informative briefing today. I also thank Ambassador
Cardi, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), for his work.

Bolivia once again strongly condemns the launch
yesterday, 28 November, of a ballistic missile by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, which is
thought to be the most powerful and longest range
device to date. We reiterate our urgent appeal to that
country to abandon its nuclear and ballistic missile
programme in a complete, verifiable and irreversible
manner. We call on the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to comply with the provisions of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

Bolivia, as a country in the first region to be declared
a nuclear-weapon-free zone under the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean, better known as the Tlatelolco Treaty,
will always condemn the development and manufacture
of nuclear weapons, which constitute a grave violation
of international law and pose a direct threat to the
survival of our species on this planet. Similarly,
Bolivia, in its capacity as a pacifist State that promotes
the culture of and the right to peace, rejects any form
of the use of force or threat of the use of force as an
instrument to resolve disputes and conflicts among
States. In that regard, we urge all the parties involved
to avoid raising tensions and an escalation of the war of
words that jeopardize international peace and security,
particularly in the Korean peninsula.

We urge all parties to refrain from any act of
provocation, unilateral action or any action taken outside
international law and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. We reiterate our support for the
Chinese initiative of a double freeze, which would
allow for a simultaneous halt of relevant activities in the
Korean peninsula. Likewise, in the framework of the
provisions of paragraph 27 of resolution 2371 (2017),
we must act to promote the resumption of the Six-Party
Talks, taking as a starting point the Russian-Chinese
proposal and its related road map, which is currently
the only tangible proposal that has been put forward for
resolving the situation.

Over the past six months, the Security Council has
adopted one of the most draconian sets of sanctions
of recent decades. States must work towards their
implementation so that they can serve their stated
purpose. We underscore that for Bolivia, sanctions
cannot be an end in themselves, but rather must serve
as a tool to encourage parties to bring the parties to
the negotiating table in a transparent dialogue that will
achieve a negotiated end to the conflict.

We wish to remind the membership that, in line
with Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations,
we have the responsibility to maintain international
peace and security. To that end, we must take decisions
promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes, and of
this one in particular. In that spirit, we propose that the
Council endow the Secretary-General with the mandate
necessary to use his good offices to find a peaceful
settlement to this complex situation.

Finally, Bolivia reiterates its call on all the parties
involved to rule out any alternative military solution
or threat of the use of force, and to return to dialogue
and negotiations to achieve a peaceful, diplomatic and
political solution that, we reiterate, will result in the
denuclearized Korean peninsula.

