Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, and the delegation of
Croatia on convening this debate. We would also like
to acknowledge the Croatian delegation's work in
heading the Counter-Terrorism Committee.

First of all, we would like to express the
solidarity and condolences of Mexico to the families of
the victims and to the people and the Government of
India for the tragic events of 26 November in Mumbai.
We regret the loss of so many human lives, among
them that of a Mexican citizen.

Terrorist attacks that have occurred in various
regions of the world require us to redouble our efforts
in international cooperation in combating terrorism,
and we firmly reiterate our rejection of terrorist
activity in any form or manifestation.

Mexico would like to stress the central role of the
Organization in combating terrorism and would recall
the framework that is the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. However, its effectiveness
will depend on the coordinated and comprehensive
implementation of the Strategy, and that is based on its
four pillars.

I would like to refer to the human rights pillar.
For my delegation, that is a central element in any
activity to combat terrorism. Since 2001, Mexico has
consistently urged that States ensure that the measures
that they adopt to combat terrorism comply with their
obligations with regard to international law, in
particular those relating to human rights, refugees and
humanitarian law. During our most recent term as a
member of the Security Council in 2003, we supported
the adoption of this approach in resolution 1456
(2003). Some weeks ago, the Third Committee of the
General Assembly took up this issue in a substantive
way, and we hope that in the next few days the
Assembly will adopt the resolution entitled "Protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the fight
against terrorism".

In view of the intensification of communications
in the globalized world in which we live, it is easy for
terrorist organizations to use advanced technology and
resources to achieve their objectives. For this reason,
we consider the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) especially
important, particularly the work to strengthen measures
to detect and withhold financing for terrorist purposes.
Also, we should prevent those organizations from
having recourse to activities such as transnational
organized crime, trafficking in illicit drugs, money-
laundering and arms trafficking for their own purposes.

Mexico believes that it would be timely to
strengthen cooperation among the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004), as well as among the
respective groups of experts, and to clarify differences
in their mandates and activities.

Mexico is fully committed to combating
terrorism. My country has actively participated in the
drawing up of treaties on this issue and seeks to
faithfully implement relevant Security Council
resolutions. Mexico is a party to the 13 international
legal instruments on terrorism and the two that exist in
the inter-American sphere.

We are especially concerned about the access
terrorist organizations have to conventional weapons
and the ease of that access due to the existing legal
vacuums that promote illicit arms trafficking,
constituting a threat to the security of many States.
Additionally, combating the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction is essential to preventing access to
those weapons by terrorist organizations. Mexico
recognizes the value of resolution 1540 (2004) in this
regard, as well as the efforts made by States to achieve
its full implementation.

Mexico believes that the United Nations should
give priority to comprehensive strategies in combating
terrorism in order to seek a lasting solution that deals
with the causes of conflicts and corrects at their roots
the impulses that lead to terrorism.

In this sense, the most effective actions against
terrorism are those that promote economic and social
development, because this scourge is not produced in a
void. Its origins and development are linked to specific
social, political and economic conditions, as well as to
concrete historical conflicts that have not been
resolved. It is in this framework that attempts are made
to foment or justify terrorist acts.

Also, specific and timely attention is necessary
for humanitarian problems and promoting education
and health in regions with the most severe structural
problems in order to prevent the emergence and
proliferation of terrorist organizations. For this reason,
Mexico believes that for an effective fight against
terrorism, the international community must maintain a
comprehensive and coordinated strategy. Insofar as the
international community can remain united, respecting
its values and strengthening international cooperation,
our chances of success will be better. We will fight
terrorism while promoting, defending and ensuring
respect for our own values.

