Mr. Feltman: The Council meets today at a
moment of heightened Middle East diplomacy.
Discussions are ongoing on both immediate crises and
long-standing sources of tensions in the region, from
the Syria catastrophe to the Middle East peace process
to questions regarding nuclear proliferation. We believe
that last month's general debate in the General Assembly
in New York reaffirmed the importance of the United
Nations as a forum for engagement between States and
for real diplomatic progress when there is international
unity as opposed to division. While the challenges on
each front should not be underestimated, it is important
to maintain and even increase the momentum behind
diplomacy. We encourage and remain committed to
supporting the Security Council and its members in
fully exploring all the opportunities at hand to resolve
peacefully, though dialogue, the difficult issues that
bedevil peace and security in the region.

Central to many statements by world leaders
in the general debate was the urgent importance of
shaping more favourable dynamics across the region
and addressing the decades-long Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The test will be whether and at what pace
current efforts can be sustained and gain traction in
response to such concerns and expectations. Many
have acknowledged the opportunity at this juncture to
save the two-State solution and realize the vision of a
viable independent Palestinian State living side by side
in peace with a secure Israel.

On 27 September, for the first time in 17 months,
the Quartet principals met in New York. They were
joined by the Israeli and Palestinian chief negotiators
for a joint briefing on the progress of the negotiations.
Minister Livni and Mr. Erekat reiterated their personal
and official commitment to reaching a comprehensive
permanent status agreement, and asked for the Quartet
and the international community's support. Both
stressed that their shared objective is to end the conflict,
based on a vision of two States for two peoples.

The Quartet reaffirmed its determination to lend
effective support to their efforts during the prescribed
time frame. Acknowledging the leadership of Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas, the Quartet commended
their efforts and their commitment to remaining
engaged in the negotiations. Quartet partners stressed
the importance of reversing negative trends on the
ground in order to advance the direct talks. The
Representative of the Quartet, Tony Blair, briefed
the group on the Palestinian Economic Initiative,
which aims to bring transformative economic growth
to the Palestinian economy, running in parallel with
the renewed negotiations. The Quartet discussed the
humanitarian needs of Gaza's residents and emphasized
the importance of increased access to Gaza through
legal crossings, while welcoming recent steps taken by
Israel in that regard.

In discussing the importance of international
support for the negotiations, the Quartet commended
the League of Arab States for its constructive role
and recognized that many others in the international
community have made important contributions. The
Quartet envoys will meet again soon as part of their
now monthly meetings to report on progress. Since the
Quartet meeting, negotiators have picked up the pace
of talks and have stated their commitment to abiding
by the understanding of not revealing the contents of
such discussions. It is encouraging to see an intensified
dialogue that demonstrates that both sides are taking
ownership.

On 25 September, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians met at the ministerial level and expressed
its full support for the ongoing peace negotiations. The
Secretary-General called on donors to step up efforts to
assist the Palestinian Authority, stressing that

"[t]he situation is volatile and the status quo in the
occupied Palestinian territory is not sustainable. In
the long run, the occupation is deeply damaging to
both Israelis and Palestinians".

Most participants welcomed the positive gestures
announced by Israel, including the easing of restrictions,
as yielding visible improvements on the ground in the
West Bank and Gaza Strip.

Despite the welcome intensification of negotiations,
there have been worrisome developments on the ground
that we cannot ignore. I wish to reiterate the unequivocal
call by the United Nations on all to refrain from violence
and incitement, reinforce calm and reverse negative
trends in order to preserve the tentative opening in the
political process.

During the reporting period, Palestinians shot
and killed two Israeli soldiers in apparently unrelated
incidents on 20 and 22 September. President Abbas
publicly condemned the incidents, and Israeli and
Palestinian security officials held coordination meetings
to prevent an escalation ofviolence. Palestinians injured
seven Israeli soldiers, including one on 17 October
when a Palestinian attacked an Israeli military base
with a bulldozer prior to being shot dead. Israeli
security forces carried out a total of 334 operations.
One resulted in the killing of an Islamic Jihad militant
in the Jenin refugee camp. Demonstrations, including
some against the barrier, resulted in numerous injuries.
During the reporting period, Israeli forces injured at
least 290 Palestinians, including 114 children and two
women. A total of 311 Palestinians were arrested.

The Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) reported
numerous incidents of stones and Molotov cocktails
thrown at both civilian and military targets. It
announced the arrest of Palestinian terror suspects and
the confiscation of weapons and improvised explosive
devices. Palestinian security forces, continuing their
work to maintain security in the West Bank, safely
defused three unexploded devices. Intra-Palestinian
clashes with armed militants during a large security
operation on 5 October in Jenin refugee camp resulted
in several injuries, including to Palestinian security
personnel, and about 100 arrests.

Settlement activity is an obstacle to peace and
against international law. Clashes between Palestinians
and settlers were also ongoing. In an incident still under
investigation, a Palestinian beat to death one Israeli
settler, a retired IDF colonel, in the Jordan Valley on
11 October. In another Palestinian attack, five Israeli
settlers were injured, including a nine-year old girl, on
5 October in the settlement of Psagot near Ramallah.

Israeli settlers injured eight Palestinians, including
three children. So-called price tag attacks included the
desecration in two instances of tombstones in Christian
cemeteries in Jerusalem and a mosque in the Palestinian
village of Burqa on 10 October. On 6 October, Israeli
security forces reported the arrest of 14 Israeli minors
from Jerusalem, allegedly involved in such attacks in
recent months.

Multiple incidents of settler attacks against
Palestinian farmers and orchards damaged over 1,080
trees and saplings. This is of particular concern given
that the olive-picking season - a source of livelihood
for thousands of Palestinians - is currently under way.
We welcome the enhanced efforts of the Israeli military
in recent years to provide protection for Palestinian
farmers and facilitate access to their olive groves at this
time of year, and we urge that such efforts be expanded
year round.
In a worrying development, clashes broke out on
the Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount between Israelis
and Palestinian worshippers, in what Palestinians see as
growing provocations on that holy site. This drew sharp
criticism, including from the Palestinian Authority and
Jordan. Incitement from any quarter must cease and the
sanctity of holy sites of all faiths must be respected.

The demolition of a total of 5 8 structures -the third
such incident of collective demolitions in recent months
-displaced the 48-member Bedouin community of Kfar
Makhoul. On 3 October, the Israeli military demolished
the tents subsequently established by the community,
some with assistance provided by international
humanitarian agencies. Such incidents reinforce the
United Nations conviction that Palestinians require
access to a fair planning and zoning regime so as not
to be compelled to resort to the building of structures
without an Israeli permit, which leads to demolitions.
We also remind Israel of its obligations to facilitate
humanitarian assistance to communities in need.

We welcome the recent implementation by the IDF
of some of UNICEF's recommendations from its March
2013 report "Children in Israeli military detention". We
encourage further measures to improve the treatment of
Palestinian children in Israeli military custody.

The calm in the Gaza Strip is showing worrying
signs of erosion. On 13 October, the IDF announced
that it had uncovered a mile-long tunnel constructed
with slabs ofconcrete, from Gaza into Israel * the third
tunnel discovered in a year. Hamas senior leadership
claimed responsibility for the construction, suggesting
its potential use for kidnapping operations to facilitate
the release of Palestinian prisoners. We condemn the
construction of such tunnels, which are in violation of
the November 2012 ceasefire understanding. The use
of hundreds of tons of cement in the construction of
the tunnel, when cement is critically needed for civilian
goals in Gaza, is also deeply disturbing. Furthermore,
in rejecting Hamas' stated justification for the tunnel,
the United Nations continues to reject any incitement
to violence or attempted denial of Israel's right to exist.

In another violation of the November ceasefire
understanding, Palestinians launched a total of five
rockets and one mortar shell into Israel, resulting
in no injuries or damage, while another nine rockets
reportedly dropped into Gaza. Israel conducted seven
incursions into the Gaza Strip. Israeli forces shot one
Palestinian militant dead on 30 September and injured
another on 17 September. Three Palestinian civilians
were reportedly injured by Israeli live fire in the border
area.
Following the tunnel discovery, the Government of
Israel temporarily suspended the transfer of construction
material through the Kerem Shalom crossing into
Gaza. We fully recognize Israel's legitimate security
concerns, but we remind Israeli officials of the needs
of Gaza's residents, including for construction material
for civilian use that must enter Gaza through legal
crossings. The people of Gaza are suffering from the
rise in food insecurity, a significant energy problem
affecting the health, water and sanitation sectors, and
restrictions imposed on movement of people for medical
and educational reasons, with Rafah crossing open for
16 out of 36 days during this period.

We are grateful for Turkey's donation of $850,000
to the Palestinian Authority for the purchase of fuel to
generate electricity for essential health and sanitation
services in Gaza, to be implemented with United
Nations assistance. While longer-term engagement will
be needed to address structural issues affecting service
provision to Palestinians in the Gaza Strip, this is a
welcome stopgap measure to provide a safety net and
mitigate the humanitarian situation in Gaza. Turkey
also donated 10,000 metric tons of flour to the United
Nations Reliefand Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) - a critical contribution to
the Agency's emergency food assistance.

On 2 October, a man convicted of murder was
executed in Gaza. The United Nations position against
such executions is well-known.

At a complex juncture for the Middle East, we
remind Member States that UNRWA continues to face
serious financial difficulties. A deficit of $48 million in
its budget for education, health and poverty mitigation
work threatens the provision of essential services to
more than 5 million Palestinian refugees in Palestine,
Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. In a special meeting chaired
by the Secretaries-General of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States on 26 September, participants
agreed to sustain and increase support to the agency.
Reports of Palestine refugees fleeing Syria being lost
in boat that capsized off Egypt, and an increase in the
death toll of Palestinian refugees in Syria from the
escalation of fighting in Dera'a, Yarmouk and other
camps in Rif Damascus, underline the urgent need
to address the extreme vulnerability of Palestinian
refugees in the current conflict and thereby uphold the
promise of sustained engagement with UNWRA.

In Lebanon, security continues to be affected by
cross-border shelling and shooting from Syria, leading
to the injury of at least three soldiers on 28 September.
President Sleiman condemned a missile attack by a
Syrian helicopter on the border town of Aarsal on
7 October. Progress has been made in the investigations
into the bomb attacks in the southern suburbs of Beirut
on 15 August and in Tripoli on 23 August, leading to
several arrests. The Lebanese army and security forces
deployed heavily around the southern suburbs of Beirut
to assume security responsibility in place of Hizbullah,
and also in Tripoli. In a welcome development, nine
Lebanese pilgrims who had been held in captivity for
17 months in Syria were released on 19 October and
returned to Lebanon. At the same time, two Turkish
pilots who had been abducted on 9 August in Beirut
were also released.

In the light of the multiple impacts of the Syrian
crisis on Lebanon, on 25 September on the margins of
the General Assembly, the Secretary-General convened
the inaugural meeting to launch the International
Support Group for Lebanon. The high-level meeting
reaffirmed international support for Lebanon's stability
and policy of disassociation, for President Sleiman
and for the institutions of the State, and encouraged
assistance to the Lebanese Armed Forces, refugees,
host communities, and the Lebanese Government.
We anticipate an expansion of the International
Support Group to embrace additional countries and
organizations that share the goal of helping Lebanon,
and we welcome the World Bank's recent meeting on
Lebanon.

The tragedy in Syria continues to test our collective
resolve and ability to end the violence there. While
important progress has been made on the chemical
weapons file, it will by no means bring an end by itself
to the appalling suffering of the Syrian people. The
Secretary-General continues to insist that the only way
to bring peace to Syria is an inclusive and Syrian-led
political process.

We are working hard to convene the Geneva conference
in mid-November. Joint Special Representative Lakhdar
Brahimi is in the region on a tour that will include visits
to Syria and key States that can bring influence to bear
on the prospects for peace. I myself returned late last
week from visits to London and Moscow, where the
focus was on convening the Geneva conference. The
conference will aim to help the Syrian sides launch a
political process, which would lead to an agreement
on how to fully implement the Geneva communique
of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex) and establish by
consent a new transitional governing body with full
executive authority. We highly value the Security
Council's strong support to that effort, as reflected in
resolution 2118 (2013), of 27 September.

We are working at all levels and hope that a common
vision for a political solution can soon emerge among
the Syrians, in the region and globally. We continue
to call on all who truly wish to work for peace and a
new democratic Syria to focus not on military actions
or transferring arms to either side of the conflict but,
rather, on ensuring the holding and the success of the
Geneva conference. With a political process, however
difficult it may be, there is hope that a new Syria
will emerge. Without it, there is little on the horizon
but the further destruction of Syria and the further
destabilization of the region as a result of the conflict.

The situation in the Golan continues to be volatile,
with ongoing heavy clashes between the Syrian Arab
Armed Forces and armed members of the opposition
occurring inside the area of separation, jeopardizing
the ceasefire between Israel and Syria. On 9 October,
the Israel Defense Forces informed the United Nations
Disengagemetn Observer Force (UNDOF) that Syrian
artillery fire had hit an IDF position, wounding two
IDF soldiers, and that the IDF was going to retaliate.
UNDOF asked the IDF not to take such action, and also
asked Syrian authorities to stop the Syrian Arab Armed
Forces from firing towards the ceasefire line to prevent
escalation between the two sides. Subsequently, the
IDF fired at a Syrian position in the area of limitation
on the Bravo side, wounding two Syrian soldiers. Upon
inspection of the location, UNDOF observed the impact
of artillery fire on the Alpha side.

In conclusion, let me return to where I started,
with an acknowledgment of the emerging opportunities
for diplomacy before us across a range of issues that
foment tension across an interconnected region. On the
Middle East peace process, we should do all we can
to take advantage of the opening that now exists. That
can only help the Palestinian and Israeli people, and
the entire region. After 20 years of talks and too many
negative developments on the ground, we do not need
lengthy negotiations. What we and the parties need are
decisions - the right decisions - and leaders who are
committed to usher in an agreed political solution. The
United Nations, through the Quartet, alongside broader
engagement with all the relevant partners, stands ready
to contribute to what we all so fervently hope to see
come to fruition, that is, the creation of two States for
two peoples living side by side in peace and security.
Despite the difficult regional context and the challenges
on the ground between Israel and Palestine, this is not
an opportunity that either can afford to lose.

