Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your skilful steering of this Council and express our
gratitude to you for convening this meeting.

I should like to welcome Mr. Al-Malki to the
Security Council. It is a pleasure to have him with us. I
should also like to thank Mr. Lynne Pascoe in absentia
for starting the meeting off this morning.

It would not be unjust to say that we associate
ourselves completely and wholeheartedly with the
statements made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Alignment Movement and by the
representative of Syria on behalf of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference.

It has been a long-held common objective of the
international community to find a comprehensive peace
in the Middle East. Earlier this year, this Chamber
witnessed discussions at length on this very subject
and, in fact, it is a very sad statement on what we are
doing here today that we continue to discuss the same
subject, with all its very important components and
aspects that create for the international community a
problematic situation that just does not go away but
festers and festers.

The consequences of our inadequate response
create, to my mind, a situation wherein the people of
the area wait endlessly for social justice and for the
rights and causes which they uphold as completely
principled to be given in effect some recognition by
this Chamber. Unfortunately, that has not yet happened,
and as we sit here today, we express our serious
concerns over the ongoing humanitarian situation in
Gaza and the West Bank, where the people endure
threats to their lives, liberty and livelihoods. The
closure of Gaza's borders to the free flow of people
and commerce has strangulated the local economy and
public services and is a continuing threat to human
security.

Amidst this great human tragedy, when I spoke
here last year I reminded the people of Israel of their
background, their culture and their deep belief in
taking the right path. I said to them, and repeat here
again today, that the magnificent report (A/HRC/ 12/48)
of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the
Gaza Conflict, headed by Mr. Goldstone, speaks
volumes about what people can achieve if they rise
above it all and wish to see the entire situation from
above, and not just subjectively. I think the report, in
the manner in which it reflects the situation, deserves
commendation by this house. It deserves to be
commended and read in complete understanding and
without reservation, because it speaks in a very strong
and truthful voice.

If this house will not recognize the great work on
the subject put together by its own rapporteurs, let me
say that not much of what the report describes is
unknown to us. We have spent months deliberating on
these issues in committee and in this Council Chamber,
but all I can say is that we do not somehow seem to
have the eyes to read, the ears to hear or the lips to
speak.

I believe that while we speak to condemn what is
happening, we must also be more progressive and try
to move beyond this phase. I should like to raise before
this house today issues that can re-engage this Council,
and I would set out four parameters for its
consideration that should, in a way, be beneficial to the
working of this house.

First, the Security Council, especially its five
permanent members, should show the political will to
achieve real progress towards peace and security in the
Middle East. It is important that the Council seek firm
commitments from relevant parties to relaunching
negotiations aimed at achieving the two-State solution.
To start afresh, we do not have to reinvent the wheel.
The framework for peace is already determined in the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, as well as
in the Madrid terms of reference, the Road Map, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the understandings reached
in Annapolis in 2007.

Secondly, the Middle East Quartet must utilize
the full potential of its statement of 24 September 2009
and support the peace process through a transparent
and objective engagement.

Thirdly, there is a pressing urgency to address the
humanitarian plight in the Palestinian territories and to
rebuild the Palestinian institutions battered by conflict
and violence. We must support the efforts to achieve
intra-Palestinian reconciliation, which is also a
prerequisite for credible and comprehensive peace. We
urge our Palestinian brothers to put aside their
differences and pool their energies in the pursuit of
peace.

Lastly, to achieve a lasting settlement of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, it is imperative to address its root

cause, which is the Israeli occupation of the Arab
territories. The solution therefore requires Israel's
complete withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and other occupied
Arab territories, including the Syrian Golan. Israel
should also immediately cease all settlement activities.
Crucial to this equation would be parallel progress on
the Syria-Israel and Lebanon-Israel tracks in order to
achieve comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

It is the sincere belief of my delegation that a
sustained engagement by the international community
and the Security Council on the parameters I have
outlined will lead to the political settlement that we
have long hoped for and dreamed of.

