Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): At the outset, let me
join previous speakers in welcoming you, Mr. Minister,
and in congratulating the Singapore presidency on
convening today's open debate on a very important and
practical issue - strengthening cooperation with
troop-contributing countries (TCCs). We would also
like to thank the delegation of Singapore for preparing
an excellent and thought-provoking background paper
for this meeting. The wide response of Member States,
in particular troop contributors, to this topic testifies to
its significance, and, I am sure, will contribute to
fostering the efficiency of United Nations
peacekeeping.

My delegation approaches today's topic from a
number of perspectives. From the point of view of its
substance, we firmly believe that close cooperation
between troop-contributing countries, the Security
Council and the Secretariat is a decisive factor in
conducting peacekeeping operations, at all of their
stages, in the most effective manner possible. The role
of each player in this triangle is indispensable, and
therefore the importance of the right relationship
between them, as well as an adequate level of
understanding, mutual support and trust, cannot be
overestimated. Obviously, some recent failures of
United Nations peacekeeping prove that much has yet
to be done to remedy the situation.

From the point of view of timing, today's
discussion is being held at a most appropriate moment,
given the continuous increase in United Nations
peacekeeping in recent years and the growing need to
expand and improve the consultative process and
cooperation with the TCCs. It should be noted that last
year alone, the number of United Nations peacekeepers
deployed around the globe almost tripled and that the
number of troop-contributing countries reached 88. Our
debate acquires additional relevance in the light of the
ongoing process of the reform of the United Nations
peacekeeping mechanism, which was brought about by
the Brahimi report and endorsed by the Millennium
Summit and Security Council resolution 1318 (2000).

From the point of view of our own national
experience as a troop contributor and a Security
Council member, Ukraine would note that it has been
involved in United Nations peacekeeping operations
for over eight years. About 13,000 military and civilian
personnel from my country have discharged their noble
duty for the cause of peace in 21 United Nations
peacekeeping operations and missions around the
globe. Last year alone, my country increased 23-fold
its contribution in personnel to newly established or
ongoing peacekeeping operations. As a matter of fact,
there was no operation going on in 2000 without
Ukraine's participation. Currently, over 1,400
representatives of my country are serving with 10
United Nations peacekeeping operations and missions.

Ukraine fully shares the widespread perception
that the existing mechanism of consultations between
the troop contributors, the Security Council and the
Secretariat needs to be further streamlined and
institutionalized. All necessary measures should be
undertaken to ensure that the troop contributors are
consulted at all stages of the operations. Against this
background, we are largely satisfied with the real
progress achieved in this field following the adoption
of Security Council resolution 1327 (2000) and
General Assembly resolution 55/135, both of which
endorsed the recommendations of the Brahimi report.
We attach great importance to the speedy and effective
implementation of these resolutions. At the same time,
we agree that the new arrangements formalized in that
Security Council resolution have not been fully
implemented.

We would also like to note with particular
satisfaction an innovative step undertaken under the
Jamaican presidency last July, when a meeting of the
Security Council with the TCCs was called to discuss a
draft resolution on the impact of HIV/AIDS on
peacekeeping operations. Similarly, in our view, it
would also be wise for all participants in the process to
continue making full use of the procedures set out in
the statement by the President of the Security Council
of 4 November 1994 (S/PRST/l994/62) and of 28
March 1996 (S/PRST/1996/13), many of which are still
relevant today.

My delegation regards as an achievement the
formalization in resolution 1327 (2000) of a new type
of private meeting with troop contributors in the format
of the 4 October 2000 meeting on the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone. In our View, this model of
consultations, in the form of interactive and informal
exchange of views between the TCCs and the Security
Council members after substantive briefings by the
Secretariat, should be followed in the future.

In the context of Security Council resolution
1327 (2000), we place special importance on the
provision that such private meetings with TCCs be held
at the latter's request. For us, the right of a troop-
contributing country to request such private meetings,
especially in cases of rapid deterioration of the security
situation on the ground, is particularly meaningful and
sensitive. Ukraine's history of participation in United
Nations peacekeeping operations includes at least four
such cases in which its peacekeepers were held
hostages in zones of conflict.

In our View, improvements in the practice of TCC
meetings, and thus of cooperation with them, can be
made by all partners in the process. First of all, this
relates to the troop contributors themselves. It is
evident that the effectiveness of these meetings
depends on their readiness and willingness to hold an
active dialogue with the Security Council members and
the Secretariat.

The active participation of Security Council
members in such meetings is also extremely important
to ensure that the Council issues clearly defined,
credible and achievable mandates for peacekeeping
operations, taking into account the views, advice and
expertise of TCCs.

The Secretariat's role in the process of
consultations with the TCCs could also be improved, in
our view, through regular briefings at a higher level of
expertise and analysis and the circulation of informal
background papers well in advance. We feel that more
frequent invitations to TCC meetings of commanders
of peacekeeping operations and/or special
representatives of the Secretary-General could also be
very productive.

As regards other mechanisms to strengthen the
link between the Security Council and TCCs, we think
that the idea of creating a working group of the Council
on peacekeeping operations to address these issues
deserves our further consideration. My delegation
stands ready to discuss this idea in practical terms.

Finally, we believe that the presentations made
earlier today, which contained profound analysis and
an array of very practical suggestions, will become the
subject of very careful study by Council members. We
hope that the implementation of these proposals will
create a new basis for increased cooperation between
the Security Council, the troop contributors and the
Secretariat. My delegation intends to continue its
worthy contribution to this lofty task.

