Mr. Gama (Portugal): The position of Portugal on
the tragic situation in East Timor was made abundantly
clear to the Security Council last Saturday; so was the
firm and unequivocal condemnation by the international
community of the crimes perpetrated against the East
Timorese people, as was demonstrated by the impressive
number of speakers who took the floor during that
meeting. We have all been witnesses to the outcry of
indignation that is being heard worldwide.

Sadly, the security and humanitarian conditions in
East Timor have not improved since then. On the
contrary, we have been confronted with alarming reports
of continued brutality, of violence against refugees and
internally displaced persons, of major food and medicine
shortages. The United Nations Mission in East Timor
(UNAMET) itself, in spite of the guarantees given by the
Indonesian authorities, has been forced to withdraw from
its headquarters. The same happened to Portugal's
Observer Mission, created by the New York Agreements.

Those events are completely unacceptable. They are
hard evidence, moreover, of Indonesia's inability to
maintain peace and stability in the Territory. Indonesia
has finally recognized this fact. The eruption of violence

 

led Portugal to call for an immediate end to this tragedy,
namely through the deployment of an international military
presence in East Timor with a United Nations mandate.
We therefore congratulate the Security Council for the
approval of a resolution authorizing the establishment of a
multinational force under a unified command structure. We
see it as the first step towards restoring a security
environment which, without further delay, will allow the
East Timorese to begin to rebuild their lives free from any
fear and interference. It will also make it possible for
humanitarian assistance to reach those in such desperate
need.

The multinational force will have to respond to the
shocking situation on the ground. That must be the sole
precondition for its structure and composition. The force
must be strong and effective enough not only to
immediately restore peace and stability, but also to make
the fulfilment of the New York Agreements possible. It is
the responsibility of the international community to ensure
that the will of the East Timorese people will be respected
without any additional suffering. We urge Indonesia to
cooperate fully with this endeavour, in the light of the
decision announced by the Indonesian Government on
Sunday.

For its part, Portugal stands ready to participate in this
multinational force, together with other interested countries,
whose commitment we highly appreciate and commend.

The humanitarian crisis in both East and West Timor
is also a matter of priority and urgency. We are encouraged
by the response provided by the competent United Nations
agencies and by many non- governmental organizations. The
ongoing persecution of East Timorese forcibly taken to
West Timor must cease immediately. Relief actions must
begin at once. Here, too, Portugal is already prepared to
deploy a significant aid operation, in coordination with the
United Nations.

Portugal will continue to honour its commitments to
the New York Agreements. We must advance, in all its
components, the road map of the transition period that will
ultimately lead to an independent and democratic East
Timor. This entails the restoration of the confidence of the
East Timorese people in this process. We are determined to
continue the negotiations under the auspices of the
Secretary-General, and we welcome his decision to convene
a trilateral meeting that will take place tomorrow. In this
spirit, the Portuguese mission which was agreed to at the
last trilateral round is also ready to arrive in Dili as soon
as the adequate security conditions are met.

The extent of the human rights Violations that have
taken place in East Timor since the announcement of the
result of the popular consultation has been eloquently
described in the report of the Security Council Mission to
Indonesia. Those crimes cannot be allowed to remain
unpunished. We are encouraged by the announcement
made by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights that the President of Indonesia accepted
her proposal to set up a joint commission of inquiry into
those violations. These endeavours have to be thoroughly
pursued.

Nothing can ever justify the loss of life, the
deportations and the massive destruction that have
occurred in East Timor. Nevertheless, this resolution gives
us confidence that the international community is resolved
to support and implement the overwhelming and
irreversible choice made by the East Timorese people. An
independent East Timor must now be our only goal.

