Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the statesmanship and professionalism of your
presidency of the Security Council during the month of
March. I should also like to pay tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador John Bolton, for his efforts
during his Council presidency last month.

We meet today at a time when the Middle East
region is witnessing accelerating crises. In Iraq, there
are unstable security and political conditions; in the
occupied Palestinian territory, there are daily Israeli
violations of the rights of the Palestinian people; and in
Lebanon, which has long endured Israeli occupation of
its lands, there are thousands of Palestinian refugees
who were expelled from their land and their homes.

Following last year's free parliamentary elections
and the formation of the Government of President
Fouad Siniora, Lebanon is on the road to full
sovereignty, securing its freedom, building its
institutions and promoting a culture of democracy.
Perhaps the most notable of these democratic activities
is the national dialogue currently taking place among
various political groups with the confidence and
encouragement of the international community.
During the first meetings of the dialogue,
agreement was reached on the need to support the
international investigation into the crime of the
assassination of Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and his
colleagues, and on the need to create an international
tribunal to punish those involved in that crime. It was
also agreed that the Shab'a farms and the Kafr Shuba
hills occupied by Israel must be recovered and that the
Lebanese Government must take the necessary steps to
ensure the Lebanese character of Shab'a farms, in
accordance with United Nations procedures. Those
participating in the dialogue also agreed that sovereign
relations must be established with sisterly States.

The Lebanese Government, in cooperation with the
international community, has adopted a comprehensive
approach with regard to Palestinian refugees. The
Lebanese people reject naturalization, and we reaffirm
their right to return to their homes in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III). Concerning
Palestinian weapons, we have decided to address that
issue through dialogue, while reaffirming that the
Palestinian Government must exercise full sovereignty
over all its land.

Lebanon is suffering from Israel's continued
policy of threatening our sovereignty and from its
continuing breaches of the sanctity of Lebanese land
and airspace. We call on the international community
to shoulder its responsibility and move immediately to
demand that Israel put an end to these aggressive
practices.

Lebanon calls on the international community to
demand the release of all Lebanese prisoners in Israeli
jails and to compel Israel to provide to the United
Nations all maps of mines left by its armed forces
during its occupation of Lebanese land.

Our respect for democratic values and principles
compels us to respect the democratic choice of the
Palestinian people and to call for preventing any
collective punishment of them because of their choice.
The arbitrary measures taken by Israel against
Palestinian citizens such as closing harbours and
crossing points, freezing assets, withholding all other
aid, acts of assassination, violation of Palestinian
sovereignty and others, including the raid of the
Jericho prison and the detention of detainees from that
prison, as well as the continuing building and
expansion of settlements and the wall, call us to
demand in today's meeting that the international
community pressure Israel to cease and desist in the
building and expansion of settlements and prevent it
from continuing to build the separation wall, in
accordance with the decision by the International Court
of Justice. The international community should also
urge Israel to withdraw from all occupied Palestinian
territory and respect the principles upheld by the
international community.

Arabs have made peace as a strategic choice and
have worked towards it. The Israeli party must rise to
this choice in order to achieve a just, comprehensive
peace in the Middle East based on the principle of land
for peace, the principles of the Madrid Conference and
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978), as
well as the Arab Peace Initiative adopted at the Beirut
summit of 2002 and since reaffirmed by the Arab
summit of Khartoum, which concluded on 29 March
2006.

Peace is a collective responsibility, and with good
will the page of the past can be turned towards a better
future.

