Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the honour to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), and to begin by
welcoming you, Mr. President, as you preside over the
Council today, and by expressing the Movement's
appreciation for today's briefing by Mr. Robert Serry,
United Nations Special Coordinator and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

The Non-Aligned Movement believes that, at this
critical juncture, the international community must
renew its resolve to uphold its long-standing
commitment to the realization of the two-State solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, on the basis of
international law and the well-known terms of
reference of the 20-year peace process. There is an
international understanding that we must reach the end
of the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian and Arab
lands occupied since 1967; the independence of the
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
based on the borders of4 June 1967; a just solution to
the plight of the Palestine refugees, and thus the
establishment of a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace.

It is therefore regrettable that all serious efforts
made to date by the concerned international and
regional parties, including by the Quartet in its last
meeting on 11 July in Washington, DO, have not yet
led to the resumption and advancement of direct
negotiations on the Palestinian-Israeli track. It is
equally alarming to the Movement that the mere
issuance of a Quartet statement has become an issue in
itself, highlighting the serious need to improve the
efficacy of that mechanism and to resolve the conflict,
which remains a threat to international peace and
security.
It is also greatly to be regretted and condemned
that Israel, the occupying Power, continues to pursue
its illegal settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, along
with many other unlawful policies and practices that
continue to exacerbate the situation on the ground and
to raise tensions. Such illegal practices also constitute
the main obstacle to efforts to resume credible peace
negotiations and are making it nearly impossible to
realize the two-State solution on the basis of the
borders of 4 June 1967. In that regard, NAM. strongly
condemns the boycott law enacted by the Israeli
Knesset earlier this month, which penalizes people or
organizations who call for a boycott of the illegal
Israeli settlements. It is a law that many in Israel itself
find unconstitutional and anti-democratic.

Recent declarations regarding the establishment
of thousands more illegal settlement units, as well as
the continuing and unprecedented pace of Israeli
demolition of Palestinian homes and properties,
especially in neighbourhoods of occupied East
Jerusalem, in order to build new settlements in the
heart of the City, all affirm Israel's hostile intentions
and belie its Government's alleged commitment to the
peace process and a two-State solution. All current
indications, from provocative declarations to
accelerated construction on the ground and continued
revocation of Palestinian residency rights, are that
Israel is clearly choosing settlements over peace.
Indeed, to date, Israel has persisted in its unlawful
attempts to alter the geographic and demographic
composition of the Palestinian territory, particularly
East Jerusalem, the annexation of which remains and
will remain rejected and unrecognized by the
international community.

The sponsorship by the vast majority of the
Non-Aligned Movement member States of the draft
resolution (S/2011/24) presented earlier this year to the
Council, calling for the immediate cessation of all
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, reflects the
international position on this important issue. NAM
regrets that the draft resolution was not adopted by the
Council, as we had hoped for and expected in
accordance with the Council's duty under the Charter
to address Israel's deliberate destruction of the
attainment of peace and security in the Middle East.
The Non-Aligned Movement emphasizes its position,
clearly stated at the NAM. Ministerial Conference held
in May in Bali, Indonesia, and reiterates its call for the
Council to be resolute in demanding that Israel, the
occupying Power, abide by its legal obligations.

Moreover, we believe that calls for compliance
must be backed by credible action. Israel must be
called on to abide forthwith by all its obligations under
the Fourth Geneva Convention, the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Road Map, without
exception, and must be held accountable for their
violation. That includes the obligation to immediately
and completely cease all settlement activities and to
respect the international consensus on that issue,
including the calls from the United Nations, NAM, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the European
Union, the Quartet and all other concerned
international and regional bodies and actors.

NAM. also emphasizes the need to compel Israel,
the occupying Power, to fully lift its illegal blockade of
the Gaza Strip, in line with its obligations under
international law, resolution 1860 (2009) and all other
relevant United Nations resolutions. This inhumane
blockade continues to provoke the deep concern of
people all over the region and the world, reflected,
inter alia, in acts of solidarity such as the freedom
flotilla. In this context, the Movement expresses its
concern about and condemnation of the Israeli
military's boarding and seizure on 19 July of the
French civilian boat Dignite-Al Karama, which was
sailing to Gaza to lend much-needed support to the
people of Gaza, and calls for the blockade of Gaza to
be lifted immediately.

In this connection, the Movement re-emphasizes
the need for the reconstruction of Gaza, and calls on
Israel to open all its crossing points into Gaza and to
allow for the sustained and regular movement of
persons and goods, including essential construction
materials and those necessary for reconstructing United
Nations facilities and United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) schools. Normal commercial flows must
also be permitted, since they are imperative to the
rehabilitation of livelihoods and economic recovery.
NAM. also reiterates the need to empower UNRWA
with all the financial and human support necessary for
it to carry out its mission effectively.

NAM. also expresses its deep concern about
Israel's continuing arrest and imprisonment of
Palestinian civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, in the recent period.
NAM. strongly condemns the continued detention and
imprisonment of thousands of Palestinians in Israeli
jails, where ill treatment and torture are common. The
Movement welcomes all international efforts aimed at
raising awareness of the plight of Palestinian political
prisoners, including through the meetings held in
Algeria in December 2010 and in Morocco in January
2011, as well as the convening of the United Nations
international meeting on Palestinian political prisoners
in Austria in March. NAM. particularly stresses the

importance of the declaration on Palestinian political
prisoners adopted in May at the NAM. Ministerial
Conference in Bali, Indonesia. It is the conviction of
the Movement that those prisoners, who include
children and women, should be immediately released,
and that proper international inspection of their
condition should be a priority for the international
community, particularly the Security Council and the
Human Rights Council.

NAM. stresses that serious, genuine and
meaningful negotiations can be conducted only within
well-defined parameters and a specified time frame.
NAM. highly appreciates the initiatives launched in the
past few months to restart the negotiations on this
basis. These include President Obama's speech on
19 May; the Russian initiative to dispatch a mission by
the Security Council to the region and to convene an
international conference to resume the negotiations; the
parameters presented by the United Kingdom, France
and Germany to be taken as a basis for the resumption
of negotiations by the Quartet; and the French initiative
to start negotiations for one year, ending with the
convening of an international conference; as well as
many other initiatives and efforts by the Non-Aligned
Movement, including the NAM. caucus in the Security
Council. In the meantime, the NAM. regrets the fact
that consensus was not possible among the members of
the Security Council on any of these initiatives. This
casts a negative shadow on the ability of the Security
Council to deal effectively with such a situation, which
continues to endanger international peace and security.

The Movement calls upon the Security Council
and the Quartet to exert maximum efforts to set clear
parameters and a time frame for the negotiations. At
the same time, should those efforts fail to produce the
required results, the international community, including
the members of the Quartet, must do their utmost to
facilitate and support constructive efforts to overcome
the stagnation of the situation and contribute to peace.
This should include actively working towards universal
recognition of the State of Palestine on the basis of the
4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
and receiving the State of Palestine as a full Member of
the United Nations, particularly since we heard today
from Mr. Serry that Palestine was ready for statehood.

Indeed, there is a unanimous conviction that
respect by Israel of its obligations is imperative so as
to enable the resumption of direct negotiations aimed
at achieving a two-State solution on the basis of

Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008), the Madrid
terms of reference, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the road map. At
this critical juncture, it is therefore incumbent upon the
international community to act collectively to compel
Israel to abide by its obligations forthwith and to
resume final status negotiations on the basis of the
internationally agreed terms of reference that form the
foundation of the two-State solution on the basis of the
4 June 1967 borders, so that we can realize this year
the independence of the State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and thus begin a new era in the
Middle East.

Turning now to Lebanon, the NAM. condemns
Israel's ongoing violations of Lebanese sovereignty
and the recurring serious breaches of Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006). The Movement calls on all
concerned parties to implement fully Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006) in order to put an end to the
current fragility and avoid the recurrence of hostilities.

Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken, or to be taken, by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical or
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, as
well as any Israeli measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, are null, void and have no legal
effect. The Non-Aligned Movement demands that
Israel abide by Security Council resolution 497 (1981)
and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to
the borders of 4 June 1967, in implementation of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).

Furthermore, the NAM. condemns in the strongest
terms the excessive use of force and the killing of
unarmed civilian protesters by the Israeli forces on
15 May and 5 June 2011 and calls for those responsible
for those brutal acts to be brought to justice.

