Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Nigeria joins other
delegations in thanking Prime Minister Hariri for
taking the time to come to New York to preside over
today's Security Council meeting. We also welcome
the presence of Mr. Alistair Burt, Under-Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the
United Kingdom, and thank him for his very insightful
contribution. We welcome the Secretary-General and
appreciate his thoughtful remarks. Both the theme and
the presence of Prime Minister Hariri attest to
Lebanon's commitment to the ideals and objectives of
the United Nations.

After all the statements that have been made
around this table this morning, we are left in no doubt
that dialogue and understanding are important
instruments for international peace and security,
particularly in a pluralistic society like ours. The
United Nations is a fitting mosaic of our diversity, yet
its Members are united in the common purpose of
practicing tolerance and living together in peace with
one another.

Therein lies the significance of the theme chosen
by Lebanon for this debate. One cannot place a limit on
the power and value of dialogue in promoting mutual
cooperation, understanding, tolerance, respect for the
views and interests of others, and, ultimately, unity in
diversity. The idea of a culture of peace, dialogue of
civilizations, interfaith dialogue and other similar
concepts are not new to the United Nations. Indeed,
they are the bedrock of international cooperation. It
would seem, however, that there is a gap that
Lebanon's initiative today will, we hope, help to fill.
What is required is the political will and determination
to promote these concepts as genuine tools for conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
There is no doubt that the search for international
peace and security would benefit from new approaches
and new perspectives.

Living as we do in a world that is integrated and
interdependent, we should cultivate and embrace a
culture of dialogue and understanding, rather than guns
and soldiers, to settle our differences. Nigeria knows at
first-hand the great challenges and benefits of a
pluralistic society. The bringing together of peoples of
diverse languages, traditions, cultures and religions has
culminated in an expansive country that has witnessed
enormously trying times and moments, but whose
innate capacity to remain united has become almost
unbreakable.
Nigeria is determined to preserve its unity and
diversity, not only for itself but also to help its
neighbours. We draw from our diversity the strength to
promote peace and contribute to efforts to maintain
peace and security elsewhere. Indeed, our national
ideals are encapsulated in our motto of "Unity and
faith, peace and progress". Inter-community and

interfaith dialogues are some of the key instruments
promoted and encouraged by my Government, with the
full participation of civil society, united in the
objective of promoting harmony and peaceful
coexistence.

While considerable progress is being made within
countries to promote dialogue and understanding for
peace and stability, we believe that a great deal needs
to be done at the international level. We risk missing
out on the benefits of the global village in which all are
able to realize their different aspirations and potential
in peace and harmony. For this reason, we must all
commit to promoting dialogue as a real tool of
preventive diplomacy.

Nearly four decades ago, the late Emperor Haile
Selassie of Ethiopia warned that a philosophy that
holds one race to be superior and another inferior could
lead to war. This admonishment has played out in
different theatres around the world, fuelled by
differences in religion, ethnicity, language and culture,
with dire consequences. The time has come for us to
heed the words of Article 1 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights: "All human beings are
born free and equal in dignity and rights". Respect for
diversity is necessary for durable peace and security.

Let me thank you once again, Mr. President, for
choosing the theme of intercultural dialogue for peace
and security as a complement to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

