Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing on the most recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/818) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I would
like to take this opportunity to wish a warm welcome to
Mr. Ivan Mrkic', Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and to Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.

During the reporting period covered by the
Secretary-General's report, the security situation
remained calm and stable overall, despite certain
persistent and sporadic incidents, which particularly
affected the Serb minorities in the north of Kosovo
and could undermine the momentum of recent months.
However, positive signs are on the rise following the
formation of a new Serb Government, and there is
reason for hope, as seen in the willingness of the
two parties' leaders to step up their commitment to
resolving their differences. Indeed, the discussions
between the two parties, under the auspices of the
European Union, have reached a new phase in terms of
technical issues. However, substantial issues have not
seen much progress. Thus, negotiations on the question
of regional cooperation, civil registration, land registry
and joint border crossing management have seen
progress, but such issues as the freedom of movement
and the certification of degrees have not.

The progress achieved must not overshadow
incidents affecting minorities, be they acts of
vandalism, religious intolerance or the destruction of
religious sites. These incidents are not likely to bring
the communities together, much less reconcile them.
They serve only to promote the agenda of those opposed
to peace and stability in the region.

On another question entirely, that of investigations
into war crimes, forced disappearances, murders
and money laundering, we would encourage the
investigations led by the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo. We would also encourage UNMIK
to continue to carry out its mandate.

The region has suffered too long from the ravages of
war and fratricidal conflicts. It is now up to Serbia and
Kosovo to work fervently to resolve their differences.
In this respect, we welcome the commitment and efforts
made by UNMIK and the Kosovo Force, who continue
to play a very important role with the parties with a
view to making progress on the questions that divide
them, and above all to finding a comprehensive and
inclusive political solution, in line with the provisions
of resolution 1244 (1999).

