Mr. Matuszewski (Poland): On behalf of the Polish
delegation, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month.

May I also pay tribute to your predecessor,
Ambassador Somavia of Chile, for the outstanding way in
which he conducted the business of the Security Council
during the month of April. My delegation thanks the
entire delegation of Chile.

I wish to thank the Chairman of the delegation of
Angola for his intervention this afternoon.

We wish to express our gratitude to the Secretary-
General for his excellent report on the situation in Angola
and on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III), whose mandate has just been extended.

Since the Polish delegation associated itself with the
statement made by the representative of Italy on behalf of
the European Union, I would like to take this opportunity
to highlight only some issues which are of particular
importance for my delegation.

We are encouraged by the parties' willingness to
maintain political dialogue, including contacts on the
highest level, although, in our opinion, they have to
become more frequent. The military situation remains

 

stable and the cease-fire is respected. Those are also
positive elements in the present Angolan picture.

The rest, however, is not that optimistic. The pace of
the peace process is, as the Secretary-General put it,
disappointingly slow. With three months having passed
after the Security Council decided to extend the mandate of
UNAVEM. III, the parties in Angola remain well behind
their agreed schedule in implementing the Lusaka Protocol,
and an overall assessment of the current situation in Angola
is far from satisfactory.

We are anxious, in particular, about the degree of
UNITA's compliance with the obligation to quarter its
troops. The large number of desertions from the quartering
camps, as well as the condition of weapons handed over to
UNAVEM. III, raise serious doubts as to intentions of that
party to fulfil its commitments.

Another disquieting factor is the lack of final
agreement between the two parties on the formation of the
Angolan Armed Forces. We concur with the opinion of the
Secretary-General that this could affect the peace process
as a whole. The same seems to be true of another crucial
element of the process of stabilization in Angola, namely,
the formation of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation, which should be completed by July.

Demining continues to draw our attention. We
welcome the progress already made in that respect. The
pace of demining, however, has to be accelerated. Any
restrictions imposed by UN ITA that hinder that process are
totally unacceptable.

The Polish delegation believes that the parties
concerned still have, as they continue to declare, the will
and potential to advance the peace process, and that they -
UNITA in the first place - will speed up fulfilment of
their obligations.

With that in mind, we voted for the resolution the
Security Council has just adopted. UNAVEM. is still, in our
view, an indispensable element for securing as favourable
conditions for peaceful developments in Angola as the
international community can afford at this crucial juncture.
We expect the parties to take full advantage of this, yet
further, proof of the United Nations commitment to the
peace and prosperity of Angola. We also expect them to
respect the UNAVEM. III mandate and to guarantee the
security and safety of its personnel, as well as of all the
international personnel working in their country.

Finally, the Polish delegation supports the idea of
holding an open debate on the situation in Angola before
the current UNAVEM. III mandate expires, in order to
assess the progress made by the parties and to discuss
related issues, including the future of the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission.

