Mr. Song Young-wan: I would like to thank the
Spanish presidency for inviting me to address the
Security Council in my capacity as Chair of the Nuclear
Suppliers Group (NSG). This is a welcome opportunity
for the NSG to further strengthen its cooperation
with the United Nations and continue the tradition of
consultations with the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004).
As we know, the Council's adoption of resolution
1540 (2004) was motivated in part by an egregious case
of nuclear proliferation. The discovery of a far-reaching
proliferation network that provided nuclear technology,
expertise and designs to at least three countries revealed
gaps in the international non-proliferation regime that
were exploited by non-State actors. Resolution 1540
(2004) aimed at closing those gaps by obliging all
States to take binding steps to prevent the acquisition
of weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear
weapons, by terrorist groups and criminal organizations.

Consequently, the work of the 1540 Committee
and the NSG is complementary and mutually
reinforcing. For its part, the NSG seeks to contribute
to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons through the
implementation of two sets of guidelines, the first for the
export of nuclear material, equipment and technology,
and the second for transfers of nuclear-related dual-use
equipment, materials, software and related technology.

The purpose of the NSG guidelines is to prevent
the proliferation of nuclear weapons and to limit the
risk of such proliferation by controlling transfers that
could contribute to the making of nuclear weapons
or other nuclear explosive devices. The guidelines
not only assist NSG participating Governments in
implementing paragraph 3 of resolution 1540 (2004),
but have also found application outside the Group. In
fact, NSG guidelines and control lists increasingly
represent the global standard for nuclear and dual-use
nuclear-related trade. The final document of the 2010
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons makes reference
to them, and they are cited in the International
Atomic Energy Agency's Model Additional Protocol.
Moreover, NSG watch lists have been adopted by United
Nations sanctions committees, where they are used
to trigger catch-all controls for shipments to certain
countries. In addition, 15 NSG outreach partners have
harmonized their national controls with the guidelines
and control lists, and several more are in the process
of harmonization. All told, approximately 80 States
Members of the United Nations implement nuclear-
export control lists.

Since the key objective of today's high-level
meeting is to reflect on the practical measures that
Member States and other actors can take to prevent
non-State actors from acquiring or using WMDs, let
me simply state the obvious: the NSG guidelines could
be used by any State as part of its efforts to establish
an effective export-control system consistent with
international non-proliferation norms, including the
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004). The NSG
welcomes voluntary adherence to the guidelines by
non-participating Governments and works hard to
ensure that the guidelines and control lists remain
relevant, keep pace with emerging and evolving
technologies and reflect the growing and globalizing
supply chain. In order to promote adherence, the NSG
troika, which is composed of the current, previous and
future Chairs of the Group, engages in outreach with
interested States.

With regard to the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), although the NSG as an organization
is not in a position to provide technical assistance,
40 NSG participating Governments have registered
with the 1540 Committee for the purposes of offering
their expertise and experience to States requesting
assistance. In addition, individual requests for
assistance are circulated to participating Governments
for consideration. Moreover, a number of participating
Governments have outreach programmes in place
that give effect to the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004) by further developing and enhancing export-
control systems with partner countries. In 2014, the
NSG informed the 1540 Committee of the publication
of a document entitled "Good Practices for the
Implementation of Brokering and Transit/Transhipment
Controls", authored by Germany with the help and
support of a number of participating Governments. The
document outlines good national practices intended
to assist interested States considering introduction or
further development of national controls on brokering
or transit/transshipment and was published on the 1540
Committee's website.

The comprehensive review notes that closer
engagement to coordinate activities with relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations is
needed to avoid duplication and to focus on areas most
in need of action. The NSG stands ready to engage fully
in productive discussions with the 1540 Committee
and other interested parties in order to achieve our
common goal of strengthening the international
non-proliferation regime.

