Mr. Dejammet (France)(spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to thank you, Mr. Minister, for being here with
us to preside over this discussion, for which you took the
initiative, a discussion that deals with all humanitarian
aspects of the Council's activities. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and, through him, all the
departments of the Secretariat that contribute so well to the
preparation of our work, and in particular the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which keeps us
regularly informed of the humanitarian aspects of situations
with which we have to deal.

I would like to express our gratitude to the Secretary-
General for the statement he has just made. We note its
relevance, and we would like to say that we agree with his
observations.

I shall be altogether brief in saying that the French
delegation associates itself in advance with the much more
substantial statement to be made shortly by the
representative of Portugal in its capacity as President of
the European Union. But I would like to point out that
France is also in agreement with the draft statement the
President of the Council is proposing for adoption at the
end of this debate. The draft statement, undertaken on his
initiative, takes up in their various aspects the overall
humanitarian issues that the Council has already had to
deal with in its previous debates on this subject. Those
are issues that we should bear in mind when we are
called upon to act.

The Security Council has the primary responsibility
to deal with situations in which violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights threaten international
peace and security - as, for example, in East Timor, The
Council therefore has the responsibility for continuing to
deal with humanitarian situations in all aspects of its
activities - as is the case with Iraq.

I would like to emphasize three subjects that the
Security Council should bear in mind when it deals with
specific situations. First, in the Council we should deal
with humanitarian crises in a timely manner; otherwise
they will degenerate, and finding a solution to them will
become even more complicated. I refer as an example to
the situation in eastern Zaire in 1996-1997. The Council
had at the time begun to work on a response and had
agreed on proposals, on which France supported and
which had been drawn up with the very active support of
Canada. But the Council did not ultimately follow up on
those proposals, which it had agreed in the fall of 1996.
The planned deployment of a humanitarian assistance
protection force for refugees did not take place.

Unfortunately, today we can see the consequences of
our inaction. Developments in the region force us to act
under conditions that are much more difficult, in a place
where prior intervention may perhaps have enabled us to
avoid violations of international peace and security and
may have helped us to save human lives. This is therefore
an example of the need for the Council to act quickly
when a serious humanitarian situation is brought to its
attention.

Secondly, addressing the humanitarian aspects of
crises is not a substitute for political action and for
dealing with the causes of such crises. We should not
confuse humanitarian responses with overall reactions of
a more political nature, which the Security Council is
duty-bound to provide. Relieving the suffering of civilians
is a necessity, and it is the task of United Nations
agencies and humanitarian organizations. But this is not

 

enough and it should not absolve the Council of its
responsibilities for dealing with crises and conflicts.

Finally, humanitarian crises can reach such degrees of
seriousness that, as has just been emphasized, the response
can only be a political one and, in certain circumstances,
one that will also require the use of force in order to put an
end to large-scale violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. Those violations in
themselves threaten international peace and security and
therefore fully justify the use of such action, in accordance
with the United Nations Charter. That was the case in
Kosovo. Under those circumstances the Council cannot but
exercise the responsibilities assigned to it under the Charter.

