Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic): I have the
honour to make this statement on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC). Allow
me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you warmly on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would also like to extend the
warm congratulations of the OIC to the new members
of the Security Council: Lebanon, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon and Nigeria. I would also
like to express the OIC's appreciation to the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, for the decent, sober and genuine
briefing he gave this morning.

The OIC expresses its serious concerns about the
grave situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, in
particular the continuing inhumane Israeli blockade
and dire humanitarian crisis being imposed on the
Palestinian civilian population in the Gaza Strip, and
the ongoing illegal and still unpunished colonization
campaign being carried out by Israel, the occupying
Power, in the West Bank, particularly in and around
Al-Quds Al-Sharif.

The international community has repeatedly
witnessed and condemned Israel's illegal measures in
the occupied Palestinian territory, at the forefront of
which is Israel's untrammelled, deliberate campaign to
change the Palestinian Arab identity and character of
the holy city of Al-Quds. These activities, deemed null
and void by the international community, include, but
are not limited to: the ongoing settlement activities; the
persistent aggression against Islamic and Christian
holy places in Al-Quds Al-Sharif; the continued
construction of the separation wall; the revocation of
Palestinian residency rights in the city; the eviction of
Palestinian families from the city; the demolition of
Palestinian houses; the imposition of severe restrictions
on movement, which has already isolated the city from
the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory; and
continued dangerous and provocative digging and
excavation work in and around the Al-Agsa mosque
and its vicinity.

The OIC strongly condemns these Israeli
violations and calls for the immediate cessation of all
such illegal Israeli activities in accordance with the
occupying Power's obligations under international law,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and
the many relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, of which, as members know,
there are hundreds, including 37 Security Council
resolutions. In this regard, the OIC recalls, inter alia,
Security Council resolutions 446 (1979), 465 (1980)
and 478 (1980), which all remain valid and must be
implemented.

The OIC recalls paragraph 4 of resolution 2/36-
PAL, adopted at the thirty-sixth ministerial meeting of
the OIC in Damascus, in which the members
reaffirmed that all the Israeli colonial settlement
measures and practices in Al-Quds and the rest of the
occupied Palestinian territory are null and void, in line
with the resolutions of international legitimacy, as well
as international covenants and conventions that
consider all Israeli legislative, administrative and
colonial settlement procedures and measures aimed at
altering the legal, demographic, architectural, cultural
and heritage-related status of the holy city to be
illegitimate. The resolution urgently requests the
Security Council to revive the International Supervision
and Monitoring Committee to prevent and prohibit
colonial settlement in Al-Quds and the occupied Arab
territories.

We also strongly condemn the attacks by the
Israeli occupying forces, including extremist aggressive
settlers under the supervision of the occupying Power,
perpetrated against Palestinian civilians and worshippers
at Al-Aqsa mosque and the Al-Haram Al-Sharif
compound in Al-Quds Al-Sharif. The OIC emphasizes
that the question of the holy Haram in Al-Quds is a red
line that cannot be addressed with laxity or the subject
of any debate, and that any provocative or illegal
unilateral actions against the holy Al-Aqsa mosque will
have very serious repercussions for the Islamic world
and be likely to destabilize the region.

The OIC calls upon the international community,
particularly the Security Council, to shoulder its
responsibilities, especially towards occupied Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, and to take urgent action to bring a complete
halt to all illegal Israeli measures and actions aimed at
changing the demographic composition, character,
geographic nature and legal status of the holy city.

One year ago, the international community
witnessed with horror the Israeli military aggression
against the Gaza Strip that killed and injured thousands
of besieged unarmed Palestinian civilians, including
children, and caused vast destruction to property,
infrastructure and agricultural land. The OIC welcomes
the adoption of resolution 64/10 of 5 November 2009
by the General Assembly on the follow-up to the report
of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the
Gaza Conflict. The group is of the view that that
resolution constitutes an important first step in pursuing
accountability for those Israeli violations, which were
authenticated and confirmed by evidence in the
Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48). Thus, further action
should be taken by the relevant United Nations organs
and bodies, including the Security Council, in order to
bring the Israeli perpetrators of those crimes to justice
and to put an end to Israel's impunity and above-the-
law attitude.

The OIC condemns Israel's inhumane and
unlawful blockade of the Gaza Strip and expresses
serious concern about the grave deterioration of the
socio-economic conditions and the deepening of the
humanitarian crisis of the Palestinian civilians due to
the blockade. The OIC calls on Israel, the occupying
Power, to end its collective punitive measures imposed
on the civilian population in Gaza. It calls for the
immediate lifting of Israel's unjust blockade and the
opening of all crossing points with Gaza, in accordance
with international law and all United Nations
resolutions, in order to ensure the free access of
humanitarian aid and other essential supplies and
goods, including commercial supplies and necessary
reconstruction materials, and to facilitate the crossing
of persons to and from Gaza.

The OIC remains deeply concerned by Israel's
ongoing air and land violations of Lebanon's
sovereignty, in breach of resolution 1701 (2006), and
calls on Israel to withdraw fully from the remaining
Lebanese occupied land in the Shab'a farms, the Kfar
Shuba hills and the northern part of Al-Ghajar village.

The OIC also reaffirms that all measures and
actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the occupying
Power, to alter the legal, physical and demographic
status of the occupied Syrian Golan and its institutional
structure, as well as Israeli measures to impose
jurisdiction and administration there, are null and void
and have no legal effect. The OIC demands that Israel
abide fully and immediately by Security Council
resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the lines of4 June 1967, also
in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).

The OIC calls for an intensification of efforts by
the international community, including this Security
Council in line with its Charter responsibilities, aimed
at accelerating the process of achieving a just and
comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East on
the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid terms of reference, including the principle of
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Road
Map.

In that regard, the OIC reiterates its firm and
unwavering support for the establishment of the State
of Palestine based on commitment to the right of
sovereignty over the Palestinian territory occupied in
1967, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, and for a
just solution to the plight of the Palestine refugees on
the basis of General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

