Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation in Afghanistan. We wish him every success
in his new important post. We carefully listened to the
remarks of the Ambassador of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan, Mr. Mahmoud Saikal.

The situation in Afghanistan, despite all the
efforts invested, does not evoke optimism. We note
the deteriorating trend in the area of security. Fighting
has intensified in various parts of the country. The
elimination of the Taliban leader, Mullah Mansoor,
has led to a strengthening of the influence of the
irreconcilable radicals, first and foremost the Haqqani
Network, which has served only to exacerbate
the situation.

We are particularly concerned by the spread in the
influence and the growth in the numbers of the so-
called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and
its drive to gobble up other armed opposition groups,
mainly in the north of the country. If that process is not
thwarted, then by next year we could face an even more
redoubtable force. In that regard, we were surprised by
the fact that in agreeing to the presidential statement
on Afghanistan (S/PRST/2016/14)adopted today, our
American colleagues refused to include into the text
any wording on the growing threat of ISIL. Russia
expects a more active use of force by the United States
to suppress ISIL fighters in this country.

We strongly condemn the brutal terrorist attacks
that have repeatedly struck Kabul and other Afghan
cities during the past three months. We expect that the
organizers of those crimes will be punished harshly,
and that the Afghan authorities will undertake all the
necessary measures to ensure security. We extend our
heartfelt condolences to the families and friends of
those killed and wish a speedy recovery to the victims.
We support the policy of the Government of
Afghanistan aimed at achieving national reconciliation.
We stand ready to provide assistance in making
progress in the negotiations process, including on our
flexibly approaching the issue of possible easing of the
sanctions regime of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), on the
Taliban, if this does not clash with the national interests
of the Afghan State.

The main task in the reconciliation process, namely,
to draw the Taliban into the peace negotiations, has not
been achieved. The Quadrilateral Coordination Group
format on organizing direct negotiations between Kabul
and the Taliban has not been able demonstrate any
positive results to date. A similar picture emerges in the
negotiations with Hezb-i-Islami Gulbuddin, the Afghan
extremist Islamic party headed by Hekmatyar. There is
little likelihood of a resumption of direct negotiations
between the Taliban and the Afghan authorities by the
end of the year.

We believe that the main responsibility for current
developments in the field of security and the training
of Afghan soldiers and law-enforcement agents lies
with the United States and its NATO allies, which have
not to date achieved the stated goals. Many tasks that
were taken up by the International Security Assistance
Force before the onset of summer remain uncompleted
as well. We hope that keeping 8,400 American military
personnel in the country through to the beginning of
2017, instead of the earlier-planned 5,500, troops as
well as the agreements adopted at the Warsaw NATO
Summit will lead to positive changes in the area of
security. The key to a sustainable situation, in our view,
lies in training and equipping Afghan national security
forces so that they can independently safeguard law and
order in the country.

Narcotics, manufactured in huge quantities in
Afghanistan, threaten the stability of the whole region
and beyond. The flow of opiates substantially fuels the
financing of terrorism. It is especially important to
step up the efforts of the international community in
combating the Afghan drug trade.

We note the growing global understanding of
the importance of the regional context for an Afghan
settlement as well as the increase in the number of
platforms focusing on this issue. We believe that it is
important that in such platforms' activities regional
players should play the decisive role. In that context, we
believe that the Istanbul Process, which was also known
as the Heart of Asia Process, must generate new ideas,
rather than duplicate the work of already successfully
operating regional organizations.

We are convinced that efforts in assisting
Afghanistan must make progress mainly through tried
and tested structures, first and foremost of which is
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO). As is
well known, Afghanistan is an observer of the SCO and
has been so since 2015. In 2015, at the Ufa summit, it
officially requested membership in the organization. To
lend additional momentum to this process, we believe
it would be useful at this stage to re-establish the SCO-
Afghanistan contact group mechanism. Significant
potential in bolstering cooperation in counter-
terrorism and counter-narcotics also lies in cooperation
between Afghanistan and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization.

