Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to express
my gratitude to Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Yemen,
for his comprehensive briefing and his efforts in
supporting Yemen's return to a peaceful political
transition. I appreciate the very objective briefing
by Mr. John Ging, Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Allow me to
share our observations.
Poland is deeply concerned about the continuing
deterioration of the disastrous humanitarian situation
in Yemen, where a record number of 22 million people
are currently in need of humanitarian assistance. Swift
and decisive actions are required in order to put an
end to the worst man-made humanitarian disaster. The
continued flow of food, fuel and medical supplies must
be guaranteed and the continuity of imports must be
ensured. To that end, it is paramount that all Yemeni
ports remain permanently open to both humanitarian
and commercial shipments. We therefore urge all actors
to comply fully with their obligations under international
humanitarian law and to end administrative obstacles
to the delivery of humanitarian and commercial goods.

Poland welcomes the United Nations 2018
humanitarian response plan for Yemen, as well as the
pledge by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
to support humanitarian action in Yemen. We call for
the quick implementation of that initiative in order to
improve the living conditions of the Yemeni people.

We are gravely alarmed by the recent upsurge in
violence in Yemen, especially in Taiz and Hudaydah
governorates, which has resulted in an increase in
civilian casualties and the further displacement of
thousands of Yemeni citizens, who have been forced
to flee their homes. We call on all parties to cease
attacks against civilians as well as the indiscriminate
use of weapons in populated areas, which continues
to exacerbate the humanitarian situation. Under
international humanitarian law, all parties are obliged
to ensure the protection of civilians. Furthermore,
we would like to stress the need for a firm and swift
response to deal with all violations of human rights in
Yemen committed by any party involved in the conflict.
We consider any such action to be a clear violation of
international law.

We strongly believe that there will be no significant
improvement in the security and humanitarian situation
in Yemen until a long-term political solution to the
conflict is reached. We therefore strongly support
the resumption of the United Nations-facilitated
intra-Yemeni inclusive political process with the full
participation of all relevant parties and stakeholders, as
well as all sectors of Yemeni society, including women
and young people.

We look forward to the assumption by Mr. Martin
Griffiths of his post as the new Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General on Yemen. We call on all parties
to engage constructively with him in good faith and
without preconditions. We also call on the parties
to agree on the modalities for a durable cessation
of hostilities.

