Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ambassador Pedersen and Mr. Lowcock for their briefings. We continue to firmly support all genuine efforts to achieve sustainable peace in Syria for all Syrians. Based on that decision and our confidence in international law as the fundamental framework for achieving peace, we welcome this meeting. We welcome it because we see it as an opportunity to strengthen our moral responsibility towards the Syrian people by easing their suffering. Wherever there are reports of children being killed or forced to leave their homes and abandon their education, we must be present. Wherever ceasefire agreements are violated - by either side - and result in the loss of civilian lives, we must be present. Wherever there are civilians in need of protection, we must be present. But we must also act. It is critical to protect the political process. Wherever situations of great violence develop that involve violations of international law, including international humanitarian law, it is impossible to move forward with a negotiated political solution. I would therefore like to put some questions to the Special Envoy. First, in the light of recent developments on the ground, what concrete steps are being taken to achieve an immediate cessation of hostilities and avoid a full- scale confrontation between all parties operating in Idlib? Such a confrontation would put the civilian population at unimaginable risk and must be avoided at all costs. A failure to take preventive action - by any party - would be a black mark on the history of humankind. My second question is with regard to the Constitutional Committee. It is unacceptable, I say unacceptable, that at this stage it has not been possible to move forward. We would therefore like to know the Special Envoy's own assessment of the current situation and the real prospects for progress. We reiterate that while the Constitutional Committee is not an end in itself, it is certainly the key to a comprehensive political process. Finally, we cannot fail to reiterate our position of condemnation of the indiscriminate attacks on the civilian population, which have forced so many people into displacement and created so many humanitarian needs. We therefore call for an immediate cessation of hostilities and that we guarantee the protection of civilians and ensure access for humanitarian assistance to all those in need, who have paid the highest price in this horrific situation.
