Mr. Granovksy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation is grateful to Under-
Secretary-General - Special Adviser on Africa
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari for his comprehensive briefing
on the outcome of his visit to Angola. The very fruitful
contacts he established with the Angolan authorities
and representatives of civil society in Angola will
definitely help strengthen the relationship of that
country with the United Nations and will expand
opportunities to help the Organization make progress
towards a settlement of the Angolan conflict.

The approach of the Russian Federation to the
Angolan settlement was set forth in detail in the recent
statement made in the Council on behalf of the troika,
and it remains unchanged.

We commend the constructive steps taken by the
Angolan Government to establish dialogue with all
sound political forces and civil society in Angola. We
believe that Mr. Savimbi, by his rejection of the
possibility offered by the President of Angola to
resume dialogue on ways to conclude implementation
of the basic principles of the Lusaka Protocol, has
demonstrated a lack of political will to halt the armed
confrontation. With each passing day, the international
community is seeing ever more clearly that UNITA's
actions have become a campaign of terror against its
own people. In this regard, we deem the assessment
made at the Council's September meeting on Angola to
be exceptionally important.

In the context of international efforts to resolve
the situation in Angola, Russia, in its national capacity
and as a member of the troika of international
observers of the peace process, intends to continue to
adhere firmly to the policy of enhancing the
effectiveness of the United Nations sanctions regime
against UNITA, aimed at cutting off channels of supply
from outside sources to the anti-Government group. In
this context, we intend to continue to support the
effectively functioning sanctions monitoring
mechanism that was established in conformity with
Security Council resolution 1295 (2000).

Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) spoke in French):
I would like to express my appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for having organized this public meeting
of the Council, which is devoted to the situation in
Angola. The holding of this meeting attests to the
consistent interest of the Council with regard to the
question of Angola and its commitment to the
settlement of the armed conflict in that country. The
conflict, which has continued for more than a quarter
of a century, has inflicted much suffering and many
losses on the population of the country and has
impeded the development process.

I would also like to commend Ambassador
Ibrahim Gambari for the information that he has
communicated to us about his visit to Angola and the
talks that he had during his stay there.

Despite the gradual improvement in the political-
military situation, my delegation remains concerned at
the persistent confrontations in Angola, which continue
to have a catastrophic effect on the economic, social
and humanitarian situation. We share the concerns
expressed by Ambassador Gambari regarding the
dramatic deterioration of the humanitarian situation,
which has led to a considerable increase in the number
of internally displaced persons - some 4.1 million
persons.

Jonas Savimbi's UNITA, which refuses to honour
the commitments undertaken under the Lusaka
Protocol and continues to defy the international
community and the resolutions of the Security Council,
bears full responsibility for this situation. In spite of
the weakening and reduction of its military capacities,
UNITA is continuing its guerrilla activities, with the
civilian population as its target. This situation is a
source of major concern for the Tunisian delegation.
We reiterate our condemnation of such actions, which
are unacceptable.
We welcome the often reaffirmed commitment of
the Angolan Government to the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol with a view to a peaceful solution to
the conflict. In this regard, we welcome the
implementation by the Angolan authorities of a peace
programme based on a range of political, social and
humanitarian initiatives aimed at implementing the
Lusaka Protocol successfully.

We also welcome the initiatives adopted by civil
society and the churches to promote peace and national
reconciliation, and we support their appeal for the
urgent establishment of a ceasefire. We are convinced
that the Angolan Government has fulfilled its share of
the responsibility. It is now up to UNITA to respond
positively to the appeals of the Angolan Government to
renounce the military option and stop holding hostage
the future of the entire country. We also believe that the
continuation of this conflict constitutes a threat to the
security and stability of southern Africa.

We have said on many occasions, and I repeat,
that there can be no military solution to this conflict.
While awaiting a dialogue between the two parties, we
call once again for strict and rigorous implementation
of the sanctions imposed on UNITA, which, in our
View and in the light of the current circumstances, are
the only means of cutting off the supply routes by
which UNITA obtains weapons and war materiel.

In this context, we would like to emphasize and
recognize the importance of the investigation work that
has been carried out by the Monitoring Mechanism on
Sanctions against UNITA.

