Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): At
the outset of today's discussion, I would like to
recognize and commend the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) inspectors, and Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, for
their efforts to implement the inspection regime
envisioned by this body under exceptionally difficult
circumstances.

We are relieved to know that all of the
UNMOVIC and IAEA personnel have been safely
evacuated from Iraq.

Regrettably, discussion of the topic on today's
agenda, the consideration of the draft programmes of
work, is incompatible with Iraq's non-compliance with
resolution 1441 (2002) and the current reality on the
ground. The UNMOVIC programme of work itself
declares that the programme "is predicated on the
assumption that Iraq will provide immediate,
unconditional and active cooperation."

That is precisely what has been manifestly
lacking. No realistic programme of work or outline of
key unresolved issues can be developed pursuant to
resolution 1284 (1999) while Iraq fails to cooperate
fully, actively and unconditionally, nor can it be
developed absent sound information on Iraqi
programmes since 1998 and all other information that
is lacking.

The fact of the matter is that the situation on the
ground will change, and so will the nature of the
remaining disarmament tasks. Considering a work
programme at this time is quite simply out of touch
with the reality that we confront.

We acknowledge the effort that has gone into
producing the draft programmes of work. While they
cannot be definitive, they and the paper on key
remaining disarmament tasks make clear the multitude
of important issues that Iraq has avoided addressing.
These are the kinds of documents that we would have
been able to discuss if Iraq had met the requirements of
resolution 1441 (2002), but they cannot now lead us to
the results that this Council demanded: the immediate
peaceful disarmament of Iraq.

Under current circumstances we have no choice
but to set this work aside for the time being. That said,
we do not exclude the possibility that it may prove
useful to return to those documents at some time in the
future.

In the meantime, the Council will face new
challenges related to the future of Iraq. While I have
the floor, I would like to touch briefly on an issue that
was raised in our consultations yesterday: the concern
my country shares with other members of the Council
for meeting the humanitarian needs of the people of
Iraq in this time. This is an issue to which my
Government has dedicated significant resources. We
have been planning across all relevant United States
Government agencies and in support of United Nations
efforts to anticipate likely requirements and to be
prepared to administer necessary relief as quickly as
possible. We have also consulted with interested
Governments, regional and international organizations,
civil society and, of course, the United Nations.

We are fielding the largest ever Disaster
Assistance Response Team, known as DART,
composed of United States civilian humanitarian
experts, to the region to assess needs, to liase with
partners and to provide in-field grant-making capacity.
We have pre-positioned $16.5 million worth of food
rations and relief supplies, including water and
purification materials, blankets and shelter supplies in
the region.

In addition, we have contributed over $60 million
to more than a dozen different United Nations
agencies, including the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations
Children's Fund, the World Food Programme and the
World Health Organization, as well as a multitude of
non-governmental organizations. As we increase
United States contributions, we also urge other donors
to contribute to these critical efforts.

As President Bush has said, we recognize the
critical importance of keeping the oil for food
programme running to meet the humanitarian needs of
the people of Iraq. Working with others in the Council,
we are prepared to present soon a draft humanitarian
resolution that would ensure the continuity of the
programme. We have begun consulting with the United
Nations and other Council members on adjustments to
the current oil for food programme that will ensure the
continued delivery of key humanitarian supplies,
particularly food and medicine, to Iraq. We trust that
other members of the Council share our objective, and
the objective of the Secretary-General, of resuming the
flow of humanitarian goods through the oil for food
programme as soon as possible. We hope that progress
on this resolution will be swift in order to minimize
any interruption of the programme.
Mr. President, we look forward to working with
you and our colleagues on issues relating to the
situation in Iraq in the days and weeks to come.

