Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
to begin by thanking you, Sir, for convening this
meeting on a topic to which we attach great
importance.

In our View, the United Nations key role in the
maintenance of peace makes it an essential player in
the post-conflict period. The phase following the end
of hostilities is crucial. If a genuine attempt is to be
made to resolve the problem, reforms must be
undertaken allowing the countries involved to be
economically, politically and socially viable.
Democratic institutions must be established and
consolidated, a police force created and the rule of law
strengthened, while a sustainable and equitable
economy and an effective and responsible
administration must be fostered. Moreover,
programmes for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants must be established,
arms trafficking and the spread of small arms stopped,
refugees and internally displaced persons returned
home, and human rights promoted. All of this is
necessary to the foundation of a country that can
develop freely, democratically and in peace.

Some thoughts about United Nations participation
in post-conflict peace-building situations lead us to
certain conclusions. First, experience teaches us that
the early involvement of the United Nations is
required. It is worth considering the United Nations
mandate at the beginning of the process in order to
define a consistent and strategic position for the
Organization that can foresee the difficulties to be
encountered. Logically, such involvement must in due
course be accompanied by the necessary material and
human resources without which a mission will have a
hard time succeeding. This aspect is essential. The
resources allocated to peacekeeping operations often
totally and abruptly vanish when a conflict ends, with
disastrous consequences. In this regard, in order to
establish the most coherent and complete strategy
possible, it is vital to promote contacts between the
Security Council and the specialized agencies, such as
the United Nations Development Programme, the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.

Secondly, it is essential to ensure the flexibility of
modalities for action, given the need to adapt to a
broad diversity of situations. There is no uniform
structure that can be universally applied to United
Nations missions. In peace-building missions as such,
or in peacekeeping operations with peace-building
functions - such as the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone or the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor - the
concrete requirements of each situation must act to
define the Organization's action. At the same time,
flexibility is vital to adapting the mandate of a mission
to the changing circumstances of the process.
Flexibility is also necessary to establishing structures
that will allow for cooperation with regional
organizations.

Thirdly and lastly, we deem the evolving nature
of United Nations participation throughout the post-
conflict period to be indispensable. The Organization
should be capable of taking on new tasks as the
situation requires, while an exit strategy should be
defined that will allow the gradual reduction and
ultimate elimination of the United Nations presence,
leaving outstanding tasks in the hands of national
authorities. In this regard, we consider it very useful to
minimize the contribution of international personnel,
while building the capacities of local personnel, as has
been done in the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan.

The combination of these three factors - early
involvement, flexibility and evolving participation -
is essential if we wish the United Nations to play its
due role in the context of post-conflict periods, which
is critical if we are to avoid a return to confrontation.

