Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Director of the
Coordination Division ofthe Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), for their detailed
briefings on the political process and the humanitarian
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, my
country remains concerned about OCHA's alarming
statistics showing that 11.7 million Syrians are in need
of humanitarian assistance in their own country as
are about 5.7 million Syrian refugees in neighbouring
States. Besides that, also according to OCHA, tens of
thousands of internally displaced people, including
women, children and the elderly, are in extreme
distress. The number ofinternally displaced persons in
the Al-Hol camp in the north-east, which is sheltering
most of the people fleeing the last pocket of Islamic
State resistance, went up from 9,721 in December to
70,480 on 20 March. As of 16 March, it was estimated
that more than 130 people, of whom 80 per cent
were children, had died in the camp or close to it.
Approximately 200 deaths have been recorded in Idlib
province since September 2018, 90 of them, including
40 children, in February alone.

With respect to the concerns that such statistics
elicit, my country welcomed the third donor conference
under the theme of supporting the future of Syria and
the region, held in Brussels from 12 to 14 March. It
raised $7 billion of the $8.8 billion needed to fund the
humanitarian response plan coordinated by the United
Nations and the regional refugee and resilience plan.
It will undoubtedly a boost for the people in distress
in the Syrian Arab Republic and its neighbours. My
country calls on all the parties involved in military
operations throughout Syria to respect international
humanitarian law regarding the protection of civilians
and hospital infrastructure. I should point out that
creating obstacles to the free movement of people and
goods and violating the rights of displaced persons
constitute serious violations of international law and
are subject to prosecution.

Turning now to the political process, Cote d'Ivoire
welcomes the tireless efforts to reconcile the positions
of the stakeholders that Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, has been
making since taking up his post on 7 January. We
fully support the five priorities he identified in his
briefing to the Security Council on 28 February (see S/PV.8475). My delegation agrees with him that the
dialogue with the Syrian Government, the opposition
and civil society, particularly through the Syrian
Negotiation Commission, should be deepened. That
approach, which consists of direct meetings with all the
parties, will help to build trust and bring Syrians back
to the negotiating table. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the consultations that Mr. Pedersen's team
has conducted over the past two months with more
than 200 Syrian stakeholders from civil society and
the diaspora. Similarly, his two visits to Damascus,
most recently on 18 March, enabled him to exchange
views with the Syrian authorities on establishing the
constitutional committee responsible for drafting a
new Constitution.

The military defeat of Da'esh that has been
announced gives the parties to the conflict a window of
opportunity to silence their guns for good and engage
resolutely in the political settlement of the crisis through
constructive dialogue, while building on the provisions
of resolution 2254 (2015) and the complementary
Astana and Sochi processes.

In conclusion, C6te d'Ivoire once again calls on the
warring parties to maintain the ceasefire in the Idlib
demilitarized zone in order to allow the unimpeded
delivery of aid to Syrians in need, in accordance
with international humanitarian law. Lastly, we
urge the Syrian parties to agree on the definite
establishment of the constitutional committee to draft
the new Constitution, with a view to holding free and
fair elections.

