The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Ukraine.

The rapid deterioration of the situation in the
Republic of Macedonia, which prompted the convening
of today's emergency meeting, is a matter of close
attention in my country. On 5 March, the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine issued a statement, which
reads as follows:

"Ukraine is deeply concerned at the recent
acts of violence perpetrated by the extremist
armed groups in the border area between the
Republic of Macedonia and Kosovo (the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia), which claimed human
lives. Of particular concern is the continuation of
activities by the Albanian extremist forces, which
have not given up the methods of terror and
Violence. A series of armed incidents that have
been recently provoked by these forces are
fraught with a new escalation of tensions in the
whole region.

"Ukraine notes the immediate steps taken
by KFOR with a view to reinforcing the control
of the situation on the border between the FRY
and Macedonia and supports the UN Security
Council in its call on UNMIK and KFOR to
consider further measures aimed at easing the
situation."
In addition to that statement, I would like to put
on record a few more points.

First, we strongly condemn attacks against the
Macedonian soldiers and deplore the violent deaths of
three of them a few days ago.

Secondly, we reaffirm our full support for respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Macedonia.

Thirdly, the armed clashes between the Albanian
fighters and the Macedonian troops that broke out on
the border between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
at its Kosovo section and the Republic of Macedonia
should be seen as a direct consequence of the critical
situation in southern Serbia. It is therefore obvious to
us that remedying the situation on the border between
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republic of
Macedonia will be impossible without finding a viable
solution to the problem of restoring proper security
conditions in the ground safety zone.

In our view, further enhancement of cooperation
between the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), on the one hand, and the Yugoslav
Government, on the other, remains indispensable.

We are encouraged by the ongoing dialogue
between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) and the Yugoslav Government on the problems
in southern Serbia. We support NATO's intention to
carry out a reduction in the size of the ground safety
zone as a good step forward. In our view, swift
implementation of the plan by the Yugoslav
Government, aimed at achieving a political solution to
the existing problems in southern Serbia through
confidence-building measures, will contribute to
significantly curbing the current dangerous
developments in the Republic of Macedonia as well.

Fourthly, Ukraine commends the Macedonian
Government for its measured response to the situation
so far and for its inclination to seek a solution through
political means. In our judgement, the plan of activities
aimed at preventing a spillover of the conflict, as
presented today by the Foreign Minister of the
Republic of Macedonia, makes a lot of sense and
deserves our support.

Fifthly, we welcome NATO's commitment to
support the security, stability and territorial integrity of
that country, as was stated by the Secretary-General of
NATO on 2 March 2001. We also welcome steps
already taken to assist the Macedonian Government in
protecting its frontiers.

We applaud the measures currently being put in
place by NATO to reinforce existing KFOR capabilities
to monitor the border between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia at its Kosovo section and the Republic of
Macedonia, as well as the announcement by the
European Union about the increase in the number of its
monitors in the area. In our View, the Council should
encourage further joint efforts by KFOR and other
relevant international organizations, in coordination
with the Macedonian Government, towards the
implementation of that Government's plan of activities
presented today.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Sweden. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

