Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank you and the
French presidency, Sir, as well as the United Kingdom
for organizing today's important meeting on force
generation for United Nations peacekeeping operations.
It is indeed a very important matter that needs to be
considered seriously by the Security Council as part of
the efforts to reform United Nations peacekeeping. We
are grateful to Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix for his briefing. We also appreciate the remarks
by the Ambassadors of Bangladesh and Canada. We
value their contribution.

Obviously, the United Nations depends upon
Member States to generate forces for its peacekeeping
missions. In that regard, securing sufficient forces
with the necessary capabilities to be deployed on the
ground quickly has been a challenge. Mr. Lacroix was
right in highlighting the enormity of the challenge. The
bureaucratic arrangements in the Secretariat have also
been posing constraints on the speed, mobility and
flexibility of response in the field. That is why there is
a need for a new approach to strategic force generation,
as recommended by the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (HIPPO). That certainly requires
undertaking important reform efforts to change the
way that the United Nations mobilizes and deploys
its uniformed personnel. We take note of the efforts
undertaken in that regard.

The establishment and operation of the Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System in the Secretariat
represents a step in the right direction. We look
forward to the Secretary-General's recommendations
in December, which will be presented to the Security
Council pursuant to resolution 2378 (2017), with
regard to a mechanism to fill the existing gaps in
force generation capabilities, including through more
effective and efficient training and capacity-building.

As the HIPPO report (see S/2015/446) correctly
put it, force generation is not only a technical and
operational issue to be left to the Secretariat. Achieving
progress on the issue requires the mobilization and
political support of Member States. That is why greater
consultation with current and potential contributors is
absolutely imperative for providing timely, adequate and
relevant information, so as to help them make informed
decisions regarding contributing personnel. Therefore,
as stressed by all previous speakers, there is a need to
enhance the triangular cooperation among the Security
Council, the Secretariat and troop/police-contributing
countries. The increase in the number of countries
contributing to United Nations peacekeeping, including
by some permanent members of the Council, is
encouraging. We support the high-level efforts that
have been over the past two years to ensure greater
participation by Member States and secure concrete
commitments and pledges to fill existing gaps with
respect to force generation and capabilities. In that
context, we look forward to the upcoming Defence
Ministerial Meeting, which is scheduled to take place
in Vancouver next month.

While continuing to increase the quantity and
quality ofpledges by Member States remains significant,
equally important is the question of whether or not the

pledges already made are being implemented. That
certainly requires continuous follow-up and regular
updates by the Secretariat on the issue, in line with
resolution 2378 (2017), which is very important.

Finally, the new approach to strategic force
generation should also support and encourage regional
capabilities, such as the African Standby Force. Those
regional forces play an important role as first responders
and have demonstrated their ability to serve as bridging
forces until the United Nations is ready to deploy its
own forces. Therefore, we very much hope that the
Secretariat will develop options for both regional and
global capacity to rapidly deploy capabilities, including
to serve as bridging forces, in accordance with the
HIPPO recommendations.

