Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I thank you, Madame
President, for organizing this very important debate. I
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Kubis, for his briefing.
I want to acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin,
and thank him for his statement, which offers us
considerable hope.

The enthusiastic participation of the people of
Afghanistan in the three-month-long electoral process
is a milestone in the political evolution of the country.
It is also an indication that Afghanistan is on the
path to peace and stability. We commend the efforts
of the Independent Election Commission in ensuring
the integrity of the electoral process. As part of those
efforts, 110,784 electoral observers were accredited
by the Commission prior to the run-off election, and
an additional 2,000 polling stations were established
within existing polling centres to improve accessibility.
Out of the 6,365 polling centres that were open on
election day, it is remarkable that only 140 were closed
for security reasons.

We are concerned that the persistent tension
between political leaders has delayed the conclusion
of the electoral process. We therefore commend the
efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), the United States of America
and other partners in resolving the impasse by brokering
an agreement between the candidates on 12 July. We
believe that the agreement, together with the 8 August
communique, which called for the audit of all votes
case and a commitment of the parties to abide by the
outcome, is a visible, feasible solution to the impasse.

It is particularly significant that the two presidential
candidates also agreed to form a Government of
national unity. We urge them and their supporters to
respect those agreements and ensure that the ongoing
electoral process is resolved peacefully in the higher
interests of the people of Afghanistan. We welcome
the successful conclusion of the auditing exercise on
4 September and expect that the audited results will
be made public as soon as possible, which will seal
the notable achievement of Afghanistan's first-ever
democratic transfer of power.

It is disconcerting that the Taliban and other
insurgent groups have decided to take advantage of the
protracted political electoral impasse and the drawdown
of the international military contingent to carry out their
destructive activities around the country. We are even
more concerned that civilians are the worst affected,
with increasing numbers of deaths and injuries among
women and children. We condemn those attacks and
commend the dedication and courage of the Afghan
National Security Forces as they continue to combat
the terrorists. It is essential to consider expanding the
listing procedure in the sanctions regime established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) to include individuals
in the Taliban who are responsible for the new wave of
terror in Afghanistan.

Afghanistan's continued engagement with its
neighbours in the promotion of regional cooperation in
that regard remains vital. We welcome the plans for the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process ministerial conference
in Tianjin, China, designed to deepen regional
cooperation and urge the Government of Afghanistan
to seize the moment and maximize the benefits of that
mechanism.

Nigeria commends the renewed efforts of the
Secretary-General and his team in seeking a lasting
solution to the situation in Afghanistan. Most notable is
his recent engagement with the parties in an effort that
is already yielding tangible results.

I would like to join colleagues who have spoken
before me in expressing profound appreciation to
Mr. Kubis for his astute leadership at the helm of
UNAMA and for his remarkable achievements and
accomplishments. We wish him the best for the future.

