Mr. Nambiar (India): I wish to congratulate your
delegation on its successful stewardship of the Council
in July, when the Council has addressed some of the
most pressing issues confronting us in Africa and the
Middle East, while also allowing for a detailed review
of the performance of the Council committees on
terrorism.

We thank you, Madame President, for including
in your work programme, consideration of the
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1267 (1999) and its Monitoring Group. A
review of the work of this Committee in an open
meeting of the Council is particularly timely and
essential, given the propensity of organizations like the
Taliban and Al Qaeda to strike at will at different parts
of the world, but equally owing to disturbing recent
developments in Afghanistan's southern and south-
eastern borders, indicating the regrouping and
increasingly damaging activism of the Al Qaeda and
Taliban there. It is Vital that all members of the
international community be united in their
preparedness and, more important, willingness to
tackle this growing menace.

In its first report since the adoption of resolution
1455 (2002), the Monitoring Group has correctly
concluded that despite some marked successes in the
fight against terrorist groups, recent events have
demonstrated that the Al Qaeda and its associated
groups still pose a significant threat to international
peace and security. The fight against terrorism can be
addressed truly and effectively only when all nations
realize that terrorism is a malaise that can strike at will
in any part of the world, including those societies that
currently may see a vested interest in encouraging such
tendencies.

India has been at the forefront of the fight against
terrorism for more than two decades. Only last week, at
least 14 persons were killed in the State of Jammu and
Kashmir in India as a result of terrorist attacks against
pilgrims and at an army camp. While there is no direct
evidence of the involvement of the Al Qaeda or the
Taliban in these attacks, the motivating factors and the
sponsors of such operations are one and the same.
Yesterday, there was an additional bomb blast in the
city of Mumbai.

I shall now briefly touch upon some aspects of
the report of the Monitoring Group to which I append
my delegation's comments. These are as follows. The
Monitoring Group has concluded that the Committee's
list includes only a small subset of known Al Qaeda
operatives.

We understand that, in a welcome development,
the Afghan Government has recently proposed certain
changes to the Taliban section of the Committee's list.
Resolutions 1390 (2002) and 1454 (2002) make it
incumbent upon States to list any member of the
Taliban and Al Qaeda organizations and any
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities
associated with the Taliban and the Al Qaeda
organization.

In our View, Member States should be proactive
in proposing all names available to them for inclusion
on the list, including the names of those who have
participated in training camps or in other activities
associated with the Taliban or Al Qaeda. Without such
an exhaustive listing, the Committee would be severely
handicapped in the implementation of its mandate.

Secondly, the Group has drawn attention to the
possibility of Al Qaeda's having access to nuclear and
chemical weapons.

India has cautioned consistently against the
potential dangers of terrorists acquiring weapons of
mass destruction. We piloted a consensus resolution on
this issue during the fifty-seventh session of the
General Assembly. We urge the Committee to place
emphasis on the study of the possible proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction among non-State actors
such as the Taliban and Al Qaeda.

Thirdly, the Group has commented adversely on
the continued ability of Al Qaeda to finance its
activities through charities and the drug trade. It has
also commented on the ineffectiveness of the travel ban
on members of Al Qaeda and on the continued use of
small arms and light weapons and the possible flow of
illegal weapons across States, resulting in increased
attacks on coalition forces in Afghanistan and the use
of heavy-calibre weapons in the Afghan region
bordering Pakistan - raising questions as to how and
by whom such weapons and ammunition are being
supplied.

The nexus between drug smuggling and
terrorism, the organized flow of arms across
Afghanistan's borders and the increasing attacks on
coalition forces tell their own tale of complicity and
deceit. All of the aforementioned conclusions of the
Group indicate the limitations of the sanctions regime
when applied to nebulous non-State groupings such as
Al Qaeda or the Taliban, which transcend boundaries
and utilize non-formal systems to attain their logistical
objectives. In the light of these conclusions, it is
perhaps necessary that there be a more in-depth expert
examination of new tools that could be applied to make
sanctions more focused and effective against such
terrorist groups.

On the question of procedure, we note that, in
some instances, evaluations of proposals for the listing
of individuals tend to be coloured by extraneous
considerations and political perspectives, thereby not
only delaying but also discouraging States from
making genuine recommendations. While, to some
extent, this may well be the object of a jaundiced
scrutiny by some, it is necessary for the Council to
revise procedures so as to make it necessary for States
to communicate their approval of such a listing within
a very limited and defined period of time.

As of 8 July, it appeared that only around 64
Member States had responded to the call in resolution
1455 (2003) for all States to submit an updated report
to the Committee within 90 days of its adoption. In our
collective effort to strengthen the fight against
terrorism, the Committee should take measures to
ensure that the tradition of prompt reporting is
maintained and is followed up thereafter by a detailed
analysis of the inputs provided by Member States.

We fully support the proposal to supplement the
Monitoring Group with additional human resources
who could assist in the analysis of reports of member
States. Inputs received in the form of reports by
Member States will form a valuable database for the
Committee. It is for this reason that the Monitoring
Group needs to be adequately equipped to present the
best analysis of this resource to the Committee.

We also support ongoing efforts to secure the
requisite coordination in the work of the Council
committees established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) and 1373 (2001), respectively. These could
serve to avoid duplicating calls for information in areas
where such inputs are already available with one of the
two Committees.

In concluding, I wish to congratulate Ambassador
Mufioz, Permanent Representative of Chile, for his
assumption of the chairmanship of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). The
Chairman has already shown considerable initiative in
overseeing the implementation of the provisions of
resolution 1455 (2003) as well as devotion to the
international community's fight against the threat
posed by Al Qaeda and the Taliban. We wish him and
his delegation the very best in this noble endeavour.

We cannot but agree with the conclusion that the
Monitoring Group's work can be meaningful only if all
States take concrete measures against the individuals
and entities on the Committee's list. The will of the
international community to enforce the collective
provisions enshrined in the Security Council's
landmark resolutions against terrorist organizations and
their supporters can be only as strong as its weakest
links will allow.

