Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): My delegation
wishes to express its appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. We align
ourselves with the statement delivered by the
representative of Cuba on behalf on the Non-Aligned
Movement.

We had hoped that this meeting could have been
held much earlier, closer to when the guns fell silent
over Gaza. With our eyes wide open and fresh
memories of the devastation wrought in the wake of
the Israeli Operation Cast Lead, our proceedings would
have more vividly captured the vast sense of outrage
and disappointment that many around the world had
expressed for our collective inability to stop the
unnecessary killings, injuries and destruction. More so,
the prospect for peace in the Middle East was slipping
away very fast.

Nonetheless, the convening of this meeting is still
timely, albeit two months after the tragedy. It would
seem that the world has moved on; or has it? Maybe
the world has, but definitely not the Palestinian
question. International efforts are afoot to try to rebuild
Gaza. Earlier this month, $4.5 billion was pledged at a
conference in Sharm el-Sheikh to reconstruct Gaza.
That is an effort, among few others, that we commend
and applaud, as that contribution will help the
survivors to pick up the pieces of their lives shattered
by that war.

It seems strange, however, from the perspective
of a layman, for someone else to be footing the bill, so
to speak, when it is clear who the perpetrator was that
caused all that damage and destruction and got off
scot-free. Definitely, questions are being raised as to
who caused the killing, destruction and maiming of the
families who lived in their homes. Where are the
perpetrators of those crimes? Why are they not being
brought to justice? Is there no recourse to take action
against those perpetrators, including prosecuting them
for war crimes and crimes against humanity? Is there
not enough evidence to bring them to justice? My
delegation believes that there is.

Recent action by the International Criminal Court
shows us that there is recourse in that direction.
Evidence, including testimonies and accounts by Israeli
soldiers that war crimes were indeed committed, is
beginning to surface.

We await the findings of the Board of Inquiry set
up by the Secretary-General to look into incidents
involving attacks by Israel on United Nations premises
and staff, and we are quite confident about what the
outcome will be. Indeed, we welcome the setting up of
the Board of Inquiry, but we would have expected it to
expand its mandate to include more than just United
Nations premises and staff. There should be no
distinction between attacks on United Nations premises
and staff and attacks on Palestinian civilians and their
homes, as they are both clear violations of international
law. The Council should consider all the evidence,
including the Board of Inquiry's report, with due
seriousness and articulate its position on this issue.

We urge the Council not to remain silent on these
violations but to act appropriately. We are fearful that
inaction on the part of the Council on this matter would
signal that it condones these actions and, worse still,
justify criminality. Malaysia has called for the
establishment of a war crimes tribunal to investigate
and prosecute those who committed war crimes during
the Gaza war. There have been increasing calls towards
this end, including by civil society.

By not taking steps to investigate and prosecute
war criminals, we have failed to set the record straight
on the events that transpired during Operation Cast
Lead. It is our moral obligation to the survivors to give
them at least a sense of closure and succour for their
plight. If we do not do that, we risk seeing another
generation of Palestinians who have witnessed at close
quarters the death of their loved ones become even
more radicalized.

We should recall that, notwithstanding the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009),
the ceasefire which hangs over Gaza was taken
unilaterally. There is no guarantee that Israel will not
launch another strike, as it has done time and time
again, such as in Lebanon in 2006. The establishment
of a war crimes tribunal, inter alia, represents a clear
preventive measure against the recurrence of such
wanton acts.

Some have argued that the violence on Gaza was
self-inflicted. They argued that Israel's attack was
justified as it was a response to the rockets fired into
towns in southern Israel. My delegation could agree
that the war brought on Gaza was not an isolated event
but in fact was part of the siege that at that time had
lasted 18 months - a siege that has choked Gaza, an
open prison to begin with, and cut it off from the
outside world. Under this siege, the people in Gaza are
forced to cope with the challenges of a humanitarian
crisis. For any people, indeed, living under such
circumstances would necessarily breed a sense of
desperation and despondency for the future. The siege
is still in place today and is curtailing the flow of
humanitarian aid that is even more necessary now to
rebuild Gaza.

In no way does my delegation condone violence,
but if some, even among Council members, can find it
in themselves to justify the right of Israel to defend
itself, can the Palestinians not also invoke this same
right, since it is they who have borne the brunt of more
than 40 years of the Occupation?

We should continue to focus on the question of
the occupation and on abolishing it, by which the
Council can contribute to building real security for the
region. We should recall that it is the Security Council
that adopted resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973),
which lay out the framework for the realization of
peace in the Middle East. Israel must cease its policy
of annexation of Palestinian lands and its further
appropriation of such lands. There must also be a just
solution to the Palestinian refugee problem.

In this regard, we should also recognize that the
Arab countries, through the Arab Peace Initiative, have
offered peace and normalized relations with Israel
along the lines of the same terms struck in those
resolutions. However, my delegation fears that this
offer may not remain on the table indefinitely if there
is no sincere overture from Israel to achieve peace on
equal terms with its neighbours.

Indeed, the actions by the Israelis in no way
suggest that they are moving towards finding a
peaceful settlement. On the contrary, their actions are
hurting the Middle East peace process by making it
even harder to realize the vision of a two-State
solution- of a viable, territorially contiguous,
sovereign and independent Palestinian State with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel
in peace and security.

The separation wall continues to snake through
the West Bank. Its construction complements the
intricate system of roadblocks, checkpoints and other
barriers that hinder Palestinian movement and prevent
Palestinians from engaging in normal economic
activities. Illegal settlements continue to be built and
expanded in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. To
make way for these settlements, Palestinians are forced
to abandon their homes by various means including
so-called legal means. Palestinians are subject to heavy
fines by the Israeli authorities if they fail to comply,
which gives rise to reports of Palestinians being forced
to tear down their own homes with their own hands.

These illegal settlements also form the base from
which illegal settlers launch so much violence and
aggression upon Palestinians. The construction and
expansion of illegal settlements, which are in clear
contravention of Security Council resolutions and, in
particular, in violation of the recent understanding
reached, with United States mediation, at the Annapolis
Peace Conference in November 2007, are a major
cause of the failure of the Middle East peace process.
Israel must put a stop to these illegal settlements and
return this land to its rightful Palestinian owners.

The task for the Council is nothing less than
formidable. It is to rebuild the destroyed hope for
peace among Palestinians, Israelis and the inhabitants
of the wider Middle East, which would have
reverberations for the state of international peace and
security. It is a task that is even more difficult
considering the present situation in Israel and
Palestine. To prod the Middle East peace process
forward, the Security Council has no choice but to
force Israel to comply fully with the Council's
resolutions. My delegation also hopes that intra-
Palestinian talks will find a successful conclusion in
which we can see a common people come to unity.

