Mr. Zimonyi (Hungary): At the outset, on behalf
of the Government of Hungary, I join the unanimous
condemnation in the strongest terms by all previous
speakers today of the attack against the United Nations
building in Abuja. I extend our deepest sympathies to
the victims and their families and to the United
Nations.

Hungary thanks India, one of the top troop-
contributing countries (TCCs), for its initiative to
convene this open debate on the peacekeeping
operations of the United Nations.

Hungary fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier today on behalf of the European
Union.

The world has changed significantly since the
first Blue Helmets were deployed in the late 1940s. We
consider it an important and urgent task to continue the
review of United Nations peacekeeping in order to
adapt it to the challenges of the twenty-first century. In
this regard, Hungary supports all reform proposals that
will enable peacekeeping operations to respond
effectively and in a timely manner to violent conflicts
in order to protect civilian populations and to establish
the conditions necessary for long-lasting peace.

The question of capabilities and resources lies at
the heart of the peacekeeping reform debate.
Developing military and police capabilities is an
important tool to enable complex peacekeeping
operations to carry out their mandates effectively.
Regarding the improvement of capabilities, Hungary
attaches utmost importance to the training of
peacekeeping personnel. The Hungarian Defence
Forces Peace Support Training Centre, located in
Szolnok, Hungary, has a long history and unique
expertise in training peacekeepers from different parts
of the world. Our country's goal is to contribute to the
improvement of United Nations peacekeeping
capabilities by preparing Hungarian and international
peacekeeping personnel for their future assignments.

The present global economic crisis has sharpened
the focus on the financing of peacekeeping operations.
Against this background, many United Nations
Member States, including Hungary, put greater
emphasis on the need for enhanced efficiency in the
implementation of the United Nations peacekeeping
budget. As a troop-contributing country, we also
understand the added burden that many troop- and
police-contributing countries (PCCs) face in this
difficult economic climate. It is becoming more
difficult for every one of us to find the resources
needed to send further troops, offer additional technical
advice, and spend more money on peacekeeping
activities. Nevertheless, it is of the utmost importance
to provide the necessary resources to implement
effectively the complex mandates of today's
peacekeeping operations. Thus, new solutions need to
be found to meet those new challenges.

First of all, preventive diplomacy and conflict
prevention must play a bigger role in the activities of
the United Nations. Peacekeeping is part of the
political solution and not an alternative to it. We must
individualize our processes and have a well-defined
exit strategy for each peacekeeping mission in order to
avoid a prolongation of operations without clear
prospects.

Secondly, cooperation with regional organizations
must be improved in all regions of the world. There are
good examples and best practices we can build on and
which should be used more widely. In order to increase
efficiency, emphasis should be placed on developing
local know-how and capabilities. Africa, where the
largest part of United Nations forces is concentrated, is
a case in point.

Most important of all, we must preserve and
further improve the global peacekeeping partnership.
Troop- and police-contributing countries play an
essential part in this partnership and deliver first-hand
experience that is indispensable to the work of the
Security Council. We must further enhance this
cooperation by relying more on the participation of
TCCs and PCCs, as well as of host countries, in
particular in informal discussions with Council
members. We encourage the Council to further
strengthen this cooperation as part of the reform of its
working methods.

Hungary reiterates its strong support and highest
appreciation for the work of the peacekeeping missions
of the United Nations. We would hereby like to express
gratitude to the peacekeeping personnel who serve or
have served in United Nations missions, and convey
our deep respect for those who have lost their lives in
service of the cause of international peace and security.

