Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would first like to thank your delegation,
Mr. President, for scheduling today's important
meeting during your presidency. I would also like to
thank all the briefers for the informative and detailed
reports that they have just presented to us on the most
recent developments in Yemen.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea has been closely
following the sad events that continue to trouble the
people of Yemen. In the past few weeks a significant
delegation from the Security Council that included my
country had the opportunity to visit parts ofthis region,
where we met informally with some of the parties to
the conflict, who updated us on the current situation
and expressed their concern about the persistence of
the conflict.

Since the Stockholm Agreement was signed more
than 100 days ago, to date it has not been possible to
implement phase 1 of the redeployment of forces. We
welcome with satisfaction the news that both parties to
the conflict have agreed to implement the redeployment
of their forces in Al-Hudaydah in line with the plan
established by Lieutenant General Lollesgaard to
improve the situation, as provided for in phase 1 of the
Stockholm Agreement. We hope to see such acceptance
by both parties followed by the effective realization of
that redeployment.

We recognize the efforts of the parties to improve
the situation but we would like to ask them for a deeper
commitment without preconditions or any attempt to
delay the implementation of the Agreement so as to
put an end to the suffering of millions of Yemenis. We
are facing a blockade that is causing difficulties due
to the lack of humanitarian access. On the one hand,
there is a delay in implementing important elements
of the Stockholm Agreement, such as the exchange
of prisoners and the memorandum of understanding
on the port of Taiz, which would facilitate the entry
of humanitarian aid, and, on the other, the impasse
regarding the city of Al-Hudaydah, preventing access
to the Red Sea Mills, which contain enough grain to
feed 3.7 million people for a month.

We would also like to echo the statements of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, on the human rights situation
in Yemen. She emphasized that the grave human rights
situation deserves attention and called for the lifting of
restrictions on humanitarian supplies.

The security of both the Yemeni people and the
staff of humanitarian agencies providing assistance in
Yemen is also ofthe utmost concern to my delegation. In
that regard, we urge the parties to respect international
humanitarian law and human rights by protecting the
lives, health and dignity of the population in general,
as well as the assets for their development. Despite the
ongoing difficulties, we acknowledge and commend
the efforts made by the Government to pay salaries to
some civil servants and teachers.

The time that has passed since the beginning ofthis
conflict has shown us that the military option cannot
restore peace to the Yemenis. We would therefore call
on the parties to facilitate a lasting political solution to
ensure peace and stability throughout Yemen by means
of a frank and inclusive dialogue, with the mediation
and good offices of Mr. Griffiths, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, in a climate
of confidence-building, respecting international law
and the Security Council resolutions. To that end, we
cannot ignore the risk of instability expressed by the
leaders of the Southern Transitional Council if they do
not participate in the ongoing peace talks.

We were pleased that the Houthis and Mr. Mohamed
Ali al-Houthi agreed to take part in the negotiations
with the Government that took place in Stockholm.
We also particularly appeal to them to contribute to
the effective and comprehensive implementation of the
peace agreement that resulted from those negotiations.
Without that, the Yemeni people, in particular women,
children and the elderly, will continue to experience the
enormous suffering reflected by the alarming figures.
According to Save the Children, since the beginning of
the conflict, more than 85,000 children under the age of
five have died from extreme hunger or disease and more
than 8 million children do not have adequate access to
safe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene. In addition,
more than 24 million people, that is, 80 per cent of the
population, need assistance and 20 million suffer from
food insecurity, with approximately 10 million at risk
of starvation.

It is very sad to learn that there have been recent
clashes in Abs in Hajjah and in other areas, causing
the displacement of 100,000 people. As if all that were
not enough, the incidence of cholera cases has tripled
this year as compared to the first quarter of 2018 and
the value of the rial has greatly depreciated against the
dollar, which strongly affects the purchasing power of
the people. Do those devastating figures regarding the
level of suffering of the Yemenis not tell them that it
is time to definitively resolve the conflict, which the
journalist Cesar Chelala has described as a massacre,
not a war?

Finally, I would like to reiterate the sincere support
of Equatorial Guinea for the Yemeni people by calling
on the Council, the United Nations system and the
international community to continue to support the
mediation efforts of Mr. Martin Griffiths and all those
working on the ground, with the sole aim of saving the
victims and finding a peaceful and sustainable solution
to this conflict and the massacre of children, women
and elderly, in short, the civilian population in Yemen.

