Mr. Nsanze (Burundi) (interpretation from Spanish):
It is said that what you see is what you get. You,
Mr. President, deserve congratulations on your masterly
conduct of the work of this international body, which is
entrusted with international peace and security. Further, I
must say that you are carrying out extremely important
work for our world. Lastly, I must also say that you have
my best wishes for a mandate crowned with success.

(spoke in English)

To your predecessor, Ambassador Joseph Legwaila,
and his delegation, I take this opportunity to extend the
heartfelt gratitude of my Government and my delegation
for their work and for the outstanding role they have
played during this trying crisis in my country.

 

But, in addition to this, it is my duty to say that that
delegation, and last month's presidency, deserve Africa's
congratulations and its gratitude for the efforts to bring the
plight of the sister nation of Somalia back into the
mainstream of direct responsibility of the United Nations in
general and of the Security Council in particular.

(spoke in French)

I follow my colleague and brother from Rwanda in
addressing the Council. But first, on behalf of my country
and my delegation, it is my brotherly obligation to convey
our sympathy to the brotherly country of Egypt for the
attacks that have taken place there in the past week, and
even yesterday, including attacks against high-ranking
military officials. My country and my community are linked
with Cairo and Alexandria, as are our destinies.

As we await the meeting of the General Assembly on
the subject of Lebanon, I must say that we are deeply
saddened by events in that country. Wherever peace is
disturbed, we cannot remain indifferent.

In April 1994, Rwanda as a whole was drowning in
blood, the victim of a political and social system bent on
genocide. In the wake of the tragedy that afflicted that
country, its courageous saviours - those currently in
power - worked intensively to alleviate the suffering of
the Rwandan people. At present, they have undertaken an
all-out effort to help the nation rise from the ashes, to work
for its economic reconstruction, to safeguard its internal and
external security, and to ensure its territorial integrity and
its full sovereignty.

This new overall momentum could be seriously
compromised by the evil plots being hatched by the former
troops of the overthrown regime. The flow of arms to the
former Rwandan forces is proof positive of the aggression
being planned against a people that is still deeply
traumatized.

The violation of the arms embargo has had serious
consequences. The revelations disclosed in the interim
report of the Commission of Inquiry dated 17 January 1996
and in the letter addressed by the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council, and the information
provided to my own Government by many sources - all in
agreement - confirm that there are some, living in the past
and embracing fundamentalist atavism and genocide, who
are feverishly preparing to attack Rwanda.

Among the most prominent indicators of the certain
danger posed by the former forces of the Rwandan army
and the INTERAHAMWE militias is their unholy alliance
with bloodthirsty factions in Burundi. A large number of
former Rwandan soldiers have infiltrated Burundi,
entering into evil pacts with armed bands against our
people. Powerless to re-enact genocide in Rwanda or to
carry it out in Burundi, the two terrorist groups of
Rwanda and Burundi are preying not only fanatically but
vampirically on the most vulnerable sectors of society: the
elderly, women and children. Their vandalism has reached
such heights of brutality that they savagely cut down
human beings and cattle and burn and destroy fields. The
need to stem the flow of these gangsters towards Burundi
has forced the country, against its will, to close its
common borders with its esteemed sisterly neighbour, the
Republic of Zaire.

Certain Governments and foreign circles, pushing
cynicism to the limit, are demanding that our
Governments and our political class negotiate with those
responsible for such atrocities. Some Governments and
governmental bodies are actually making their assistance
contingent on this, even threatening to suspend or end
their cooperation with our countries. This represents a
major contradiction. European Nazis are still being hunted
and subjected to the most Draconian punishments more
than a half-century after they committed their heinous
acts. I would cite the case of Barbie, in France, and that
of another Frenchman in 1994. Currently in the United
Kingdom an old man, 85 years old, is in prison and being
interrogated about the murder of three Jews. It is
therefore strange that from the West, which supposedly
experienced firsthand and to the depths of its soul Hitler's
infamous crimes, voices are heard advocating dialogue
with the neo-Nazis in Rwanda and Burundi, who are bent
on carrying out genocide once again.

While Western peoples take pride in their
multisecular humanism, imbued with Christian morals and
religion, some of their leaders seem to enjoy starving the
people of Burundi and Rwanda, who have committed no
crimes and deserve no such punishment. France deserves
the special thanks of Burundi for the realistic position it
took, in contrast to the European Union's inclination to
deprive both Rwanda and Burundi of foreign aid at the
time when they need it most.

While international forums are expressing their
abhorrence of genocide, Governments and
intergovemmental organizations, on the other hand,
remain disturbingly silent over the vandals who are

 

devastating the population of Burundi. To date, only the
American Government has published an official and
vigorous condemnation of the abominations committed in
recent weeks by the champions of genocide. Our
Government and our people pay heartfelt tribute to the
United States for this statement, which was characterized by
a deep sense of responsibility.

While many States and international organizations are
in the habit of speedily condemning the brutality inflicted
by those who massacre peace-loving peoples, in this case
we hear only silence, perhaps even tinged with complicity,
regarding the vampires who are bent on exterrninating the
population.

The violation of the embargo on arms destined for the
attackers will soon culminate in an explosive and therefore
disastrous build-up. However, the charters of the United
Nations and of the Organization of African Unity,
international conventions on refugees and Security Council
resolutions 918 (1994), 997 (1995) and 1011 (1995) enjoin
all countries of asylum and all States and companies
providing weapons to abide strictly by the letter and the
spirit of the embargo. In addition to the principles and
norms of international law codified in multilateral treaties,
the commitments solemnly entered into before the world at
large by all the Heads of State of the Great Lakes region at
the Cairo and Tunis summits were intended to achieve a
main threefold objective: to disarm the refugees, to prevent
their military training in their host countries and, lastly, to
create mechanisms and take measures likely to prohibit
them from harming their countries of origin or even third
countries.

In this connection, we welcome the policy adopted
recently by His Excellency Benjamin Mkapa, the new
President of the United Republic of Tanzania, because it
stands in solidarity with Burundi and Rwanda and
represents a model of harmonious neighbourly relations,
which bodes well for the future.

Given political, historical, geographic and economic
imperatives, the States members of the Economic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries - Burundi,
Rwanda and Zaire - are obliged to show natural, active
and constant solidarity. The primary raison d 'etre of this
subregional organization is to prohibit acts of subversion in
any of the Member countries against any of the others.
Their tripartite security is a sine qua non condition for the
very survival of the Economic Community. It would be
superfluous to dwell at length on this overpowering reality.
The destinies of these three countries and of their peoples
are so closely interrelated that a cataclysm in one
inevitably has repercussions in the others. Likewise, the
participation or the direct or indirect involvement of one
of them through actions or omissions sooner or later has
a boomerang effect.

My delegation comes before this learned Council to
argue for the agreed obligations, legal principles and
political realism that the State of Burundi, under
successive Governments, has scrupulously observed in its
actions.

A few salient facts will suffice to support this
statement. When mercenaries entered Zaire under the
command of the bitterly remembered Schramme, Burundi
allied itself with the Government of Zaire and made
available to it the international airport of Bujumbura.
Burundi also protected its borders in order to prevent the
passage of the invaders and to deliver them to the army
of the brotherly country attacked.

A number of groups opposing the central
Government of Zaire - such as the troops of Gisenga,
Mulele and Soumaliot - have long operated in Zaire's
eastern region. Many members of these groups have
attempted to seek refuge in Burundi or to launch
incursions into Zaire from our territory; they have always
been systematically and completely stopped in both types
of endeavours. This constant policy of solidarity and
good-neighbourliness is sacred and immutable to Burundi.

Whenever the security or the sovereignty of Zaire
may be threatened in the future along our common
borders or from Burundi's soil by would-be
perpetrators - especially by those intent on genocide -
Burundi will automatically stand in solidarity with the
legal Government of Zaire to disarm and neutralize them.

In conclusion, I would like to say, first, that the fact
that the Great Lakes region is on the way to being
flooded with weapons is unacceptable. It is imperative for
the Security Council to decree binding and concrete
measures - particularly economic sanctions - against
countries and companies violating the embargo.

The security of Rwanda cannot be separated from
that of Burundi, in particular, or from that of the other
States in the Great Lakes region, in general. The
proliferation of weapons, war materiel and of armed
terrorist groups could be exacerbated and lead to a
twofold phenomenon of immeasurable consequences: the
overarming of the region and the inevitable corollary of
 

widespread insecurity and instability. It is imperative for the
Security Council to arrest the persistent causes of this
danger, which were foreseeable from more than one
vantage point.

Finally, given the fact that security is at the forefront
of the principal agreements into which the member States
of the Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries
have entered, it is highly desirable that the current
Chairman of that organization - made up of Burundi,
Rwanda and Zaire - convene a special summit dedicated
to urgently finding solutions in order to safeguard and
consolidate the tripartite peace. Even better, many meetings
should be held between the three Heads of State and the
members of their Governments - notably the Prime
Ministers, Ministers of Defence, Ministers for Foreign
Affairs and Ministers of the Interior - and should have a
generally reassuring impact, making them inevitably
successful in the long run.

Initiatives such as these would also contribute to
settling other situations, smoothing things over, clearing up
misunderstandings and allaying the suspicions, well founded
or not, between leaders - in short, they would break the
ice and rid the region of the dangers it faces.

