The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Argentina, Bangladesh, Belgium, Cameroon,
Canada, Colombia, the Comoros, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Germany, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Italy,
Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi,
Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria,
Norway, Pakistan, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea,
South Africa, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukraine, the United Arab
Emirates, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Baali (Algeria),
Mr. Petrella (Argentina), Mr. Chowdhury
(Bangladesh), Mr. Reyn (Belgium), Mr. Belinga
Eboutou (Cameroon), Mr. Fowler (Canada),
Mr. Ocaziones (Colombia), Mr. Djabir (Comoros),
Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba), Mr. Zackheos
(Cyprus), Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti), Mr. Elaraby (Egypt),
Mr. Mohammed (Ethiopia), Mr. Henze (Germany),
Mrs. Cornette (Guyana), Mr. Pal (India), Mr.
Wibisono (Indonesia), Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy),
Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait), Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon),
Mr. Ibrahim (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Rubadiri
(Malawi), Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia), Mr. Ould Deddach
(Mauritania), Mr. Zahid (Morocco), Mr. Ramaker
(Netherlands), Mr. Gambari (Nigeria), Mr. Kolby
(Norway), Mr. Kamal (Pakistan), Mr. Mabilangan
(Philippines), Mr. Park (Republic ofKorea), Mr. Jele
(South Africa), Mr. Hachani (Tunisia), Mr. Semakula
Kiwanuka (Uganda), Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine), Mr.
Samhan Al-Nuaimi (United Arab Emirates), Mr.
Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania) and Mr.
Mapuranga (Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 22 April 1998 from
Mr. Kofi Asomani, Director of the Liaison Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees at
United Nations Headquarters, which reads as follows:

"I would like to request that the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, Mrs. Sadako
Ogata, be allowed to address the Security Council,
in accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, during the Council's
consideration of the item entitled 'The situation in
Africa'."

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mrs. Sadako Ogata.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in the
Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council also
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mrs. Sylvie Junod, Head
of the Delegation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross to the United Nations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I have received a letter dated 20 April 1998 from the
Charge' d'affaires of the Permanent Observer Mission of
the Holy See to the United Nations, in which he requests
that the Secretary for Relations with States of the Holy
See be allowed to deliver a statement for the Holy See
during the Council's discussion of the item on its agenda.
In accordance with the understanding reached in the
Council's prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I will, at the appropriate time, invite the
Secretary for Relations with States of the Holy See to
address the Council.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Archbishop Jean-

Louis Tauran (Holy See) took the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

 


The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1998/318, which contains the report of the Secretary-
General submitted pursuant to Security Council presidential
statement S/PRST/ 1997/46 of 25 September 1997.

The first speaker is the representative of Gabon.


