Mr. Fall (spoke in French): Since the Secretariat's
previous briefing of the Security Council, given last 22
October during informal consultations, the basic situation
regarding the peace process in and around Burundi has not
changed. The process remains at a very critical stage. It
gives rise to little optimism, on the one hand, internally,
because of political tensions, insecurity and the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation, and on the
other hand, externally, because of the political vacuum
created by the death of the Facilitator, Mwalimu Julius
Nyerere.

With the Council's permission, I would like to focus
this briefing on these two facets: the internal situation and
the situation with regard to the Arusha process.

The internal situation remains disturbing both at the
political level and at the levels of security, economy and
humanitarian issues. At the political level Burundi is
facing a worrisome internal crisis, and the political
partnership is faced with serious difficulties that threaten
its very survival. The fragmentation within the Front pour
la democratie au Burundi (FRODEBU) certainly poses a
great threat to the partnership.

We are now observing a hardening of positions that
recalls in many ways the situation during the period
before the partnership. It seems there are now two
opposing camps that have different views about how to
pursue the Arusha process. The first of these camps is
asking in particular that the negotiations take place
outside of Tanzania and is requiring that priority be given
to ending the hostilities. The other camp is accusing the
Government of being at the root of the current hardening
of positions and of seeking to divide the political groups
so as to perpetuate the status quo. This second camp is
lobbying for the continuation of discussions at Arusha
under regional supervision.

The Government and the Parliament, initiators,
creators and actors in the national partnership for peace,
no longer seem to be on the same wave length and
apparently no longer subscribe to the guidelines
established by the agreement on the political platform of
the transitional regime.

This polarization of positions also risks affecting the
upcoming series of negotiations, which might become an
arena for confrontation without concessions between the
delegations, which would have the predictable result of
further delaying the signing of a final Arusha agreement.

On top of this internal political situation, marked by
a hardening of positions, the security situation remains
uncertain, volatile and above all disturbing. Just to give
one illustration, for about 10 days now various districts of
Bujumbura have been subject to half a dozen attacks that
have led to deaths, fires and looting. Such acts of
violence have also been occurring with regularity in the

 

provinces of Muramvya, Cibitoke, Kayanza, Ngozi and
Bubanza. Numerous attacks and ambushes have been
carried out since the beginning of the month in these
various regions. Recently, this generalized insecurity has
been heightened by another worrisome problem: the
departure of many Burundians for Tanzania, where they
will swell the ranks of refugees, already estimated at more
than 300,000 people.

An integral element of this security situation is the
policy of regroupement. This policy of regroupement
affects approximately 830,000 people today. The
Government maintains that it has no other option for
protecting civilians, isolating them from the rebellion and
securing the capital. It claims that the situation is improving
in protected areas, which it wishes to reduce while
returning peasants to their land.

In fact, conditions in the camps are deeply worrying.
Since mid-September, some 304,000 people have been
regrouped into 58 regroupement camps, where health care
and food are deplorable, when they are available at all.
Some 20 sites have been visited and 183,168 people have
received some humanitarian assistance. In fact, however, we
have very little information about the other camps, which
are inaccessible because of either their security situation or,
in the case of 13 such sites, their location. Again, as I have
said, we cannot speak today of only 304,000 people who
have been regrouped in the 58 regroupement camps to
which I have referred. The total number is estimated to be
830,000.

The disastrous situation of these 830,000 people
further deteriorated when humanitarian activities were
stopped by the implementation of phase IV following the
tragic incident at Muzyie, in which two of our colleagues
were murdered. In addition to the suspension of
humanitarian activities, projects financed by the United
Nations system have also been curtailed, aggravating a very
disturbing and precarious socio-economic situation. Last
week, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations drew the international community's attention to the
threat of famine in Burundi posed by drought and by
peasants' difficulties in reaching their fields.

The United Nations Children's Fund is deeply
concerned over the situation of women and children in
Burundi. Thirty health centres have been closed and
destroyed and the remaining 287 are hardly able to provide
the most basic services. Women's health indicators in
Burundi are among the lowest in the continent. Half of all
children are not vaccinated against the measles and more
than a third are not protected against polio, diphtheria or
tetanus. One child in five suffers malnutrition. In
Bujumbura alone, AIDS has orphaned over 45,000
children, and almost half of all children of primary-school
age do not attend.

The United Nations and the international community
must consider how to help the people, even in the course
of phase IV of the United Nations security system. But if
the international community in general, and the United
Nations in particular, are to provide such assistance, it is
absolutely essential that insecurity cease hindering the
free movement of humanitarian personnel and that all
parties to the conflict - and I emphasize all parties -
respect the neutrality and work of those who are risking
their lives to help the people of Burundi.

So much for the situation within Burundi. As to the
situation outside the country, as I mentioned earlier, the
death of Mwalimu Nyerere on 14 October created a
dangerous political vacuum. The Arusha peace process
has ground to a halt. Several initiatives have been
undertaken. President Benjamin Mkapa has sent mediation
emissaries to countries of the region, seeking support for
continued negotiations. Having obtained this support, the
mediation organized, immediately following Mr. Nyerere's
funeral, a series of consultations in Dar-es-Salaam from
25 to 30 October. The Government, UPRONA and the
National Assembly of Burundi did not attend, having
predicated their participation on the nomination of a new
Mediator.

According to information received in recent days, the
mediation foresees the resumption of the work of the four
committees in Arusha as of 15 November. This
resumption is predicated on the convening of the summit
planned by President Museveni, who currently chairs the
regional initiative for peace in Burundi. The proposed
dates for the summit vary, but that of 17 November is
most often heard. The meeting is to be held in Arusha.
The sole item on its agenda would be the naming of a
new Mediator for the peace negotiations. We have learned
today that the summit has been postponed because of the
inability of some participants to attend.

The Burundian Government, for its part, has
requested assistance from the Secretary-General and the
international community in seeking mediation. The
Government has taken some steps. It would wish to see
a South African Mediator, though some parties to the
conflict, FRODEBU and CNDD in particular, have
rejected that option.

 

One may already note, however, the broad consensus
that seems to be emerging among the Burundi parties and
the countries of the region that some mediation mechanism
must be established as soon as possible. What remains to be
decided is if this is to be a single Mediator or a college of
mediators. It would also seem that there is consensus that
negotiations ought to continue on the basis of what has
already been achieved through Arusha.

As the Secretariat announced at the last briefing, the
Secretary-General asked Mr. Prendergast to visit the region
early this month to seek the views of the main actors on the
steps to be taken to pursue the peace process and to
consider, along with the United Nations, what the
international community can do to move the peace process
forward. As members of the Council know, just before
visiting the region, Mr. Prendergast chaired a meeting here
in New York attended by all the special envoys of the
United Nations, the United States, other countries and the
Organization of African Unity involved in the issue of
Burundi. The work of this meeting indicated that the
situation within and outside Burundi was precarious and
that the United Nations must act urgently to ensure that the
peace process continue.

Mr. Prendergast is currently continuing his mission,
which he began in early November by going to Ethiopia,
where he met with the Secretary-General of the OAU and
governmental authorities. He then went to Kenya, Tanzania,
Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda and Zimbabwe, and he is
currently in South Africa. His mission should end on 16
November, after which he will submit his report to the
Secretary-General and will be available to the Security
Council to brief it on the outcome of his mission.
Therefore, today's meeting is very timely. I am glad that
the Security Council can, through its political and moral
influence, unequalled at the international level, have a
positive effect on the course of events.

