Mr. Daunivalu (Fiji): Let me begin by first
thanking the German presidency and you personally,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. It is
timely and my country is pleased to participate.

In making this statement, we align ourselves With
the statement delivered this morning by the President
of Nauru on behalf of the Pacific States, together with
Maldives, Seychelles and Timor-Leste.

We are all aware that climate change is a
phenomenon that has no respect for national
boundaries or sovereign States. All nations contribute
to the problem and all are affected. The adverse impact
of climate change is undisputed. It was our collective
recognition of that threat that led to the formation of
the various international instruments and bodies
currently dealing with climate change.

It is clear, however, that the scale of the threat
posed by climate change differs from country to
country. While some countries are content with
addressing climate change challenges as a sustainable
development issue or tackling only its causes and
related factors under the process of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC), for Fiji, Pacific small island developing
States (SIDS) and other low-lying countries, climate
change carries a real security threat.

Climate change poses the most serious threat to
the survival and livelihood of many small island and
low-lying coastal States. The preservation of our
nations' territorial integrity and our very existence as
sovereign States face far greater threats from the

 

adverse impacts of climate change than from human
conflict or other atrocities. The nature of those
fundamental security implications of climate change
should indicate to us that the issue requires the
attention of all principal organs of the United Nations.
We say this mindful of a potential domino effect that
would ignore the real threats posed by climate change
and their consequences for national, regional and
international peace and security. We therefore welcome
the convening of this open debate in the Council.

In asking the Council to deal with the issue of the
security implications of climate change, we do not
consider that there has been any encroachment on the
mandates of the relevant organs and bodies of the
United Nations that already deal with climate change.
What we are asking the Council to do is to fulfil its
responsibilities as conferred upon it by the Charter. All
Member States agreed under the Charter that in
carrying out its duties and responsibilities, the Security
Council acts on our behalf. We rely on the Council's
wisdom to represent the interests of all Members of the
United Nations and its organs in the fulfilment of its
mandate. We urge the Council to deliver on its part.

In fulfilling its responsibilities, we also ask the
Council to fully respect the mandates of the other
principal organs of the United Nations and other
relevant bodies, processes and instruments that already
address climate change. We reaffirm that the UNFCCC
is the primary forum for negotiating a global response
to climate change and that General Assembly
resolution 63/281 recognizes, among other things, the
respective responsibilities of the principal organs of the
United Nations, including the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
conferred upon the Security Council.

We recognize that climate change is
interconnected with issues of sustainable development,
food security, financing, mitigation and adaptation.
More than that, however, the security implications of
climate change threaten the very livelihood and
survival of our islands, countries and peoples. We
believe, therefore, that this phenomenon should be
given the necessary attention it deserves. The threat
posed by climate change is politically blind. Its
consequences can be far greater that any battle fought.
It is incumbent upon us as representatives of the planet
and humanity to be comprehensive and thorough in our
approach. The stakes are too serious for us to fail to
address this issue, or to take action only after a disaster

 

is already upon us. The price for inaction now will be
immeasurably high in the future, for human history
teaches us that severe security implications will
inevitably arise from the great changes that lie ahead.

In conclusion, if the time to make hay is when the
sun is shining, then we firmly believe that we have
reached the juncture where the Council must take up
the challenge faced by the countries most at risk from
climate change. We wish to emphasize that special
attention must be given to the obvious calamities
associated with sea-level rise. We call on the Council
to begin earnest preparations to deal with the security
implications of climate change. To that end, we
welcome and are heartened by the presidential
statement delivered a short while ago on the outcome
of this open debate (S/PRST/2011/15). It lays a solid
platform for further work by the Council on this
important issue.

