Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the United Kingdom for this very timely update
on the circumstances of the chemical-weapons
attack in Salisbury on 4 March. I also thank the
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mrs. Nakamitsu, for her very clear briefing.

The day after the hostile act of 4 March, France
expressed its full solidarity with the United Kingdom,
and I Wish to reiterate it here today. We unreservedly
shared the British analysis that, on the one hand,
it is highly probable that the Russian Federation is
responsible for the attack and, on the other hand, there
are no other plausible explanations for the attempted
assassination of Sergei Skripal and his daughter. We
have drawn the necessary conclusions.

I commend the United Kingdom's commitment to
transparency and the way in which it has conducted this
matter, in full accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Chemical Weapons Convention. I recall in this
regard that the Convention requires States to conduct
their own investigations of an event occurring on their
national territory and that the Technical Secretariat
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) is to play an independent and
impartial assistance role. These provisions have been
fully followed and respected in the matter before us
today. I also reiterate our full support for the Director-
General and the Technical Secretariat teams, whose
commitment and professionalism I commend.

The OPCW results, as they have been presented to
us, now speak for themselves. They confirm the British
conclusions. A high-quality chemical agent, Novichok,
considered to be militarily produced, was indeed used in
Salisbury against Sergei Skripal and his daughter. The
characteristics of this chemical agent, independently
identified by each of the OPCW laboratories, and in
particular its high level of purity, testify to a know-
how that only a State could master. Its manufacture and
handling require equipment and expertise that cannot
be improvised.

In the light of these elements, possible motives and
precedents on British territory, the United Kingdom
legitimately asked the Russian Federation to answer a
series of questions. These questions have all remained
unanswered for over a month now. We therefore call on
Russia once again, since it claims to want to cooperate,
to respond to the British questions without delay. Russia
must provide all necessary clarifications on the possible
development of such a chemical-weapons programme.

The increase in number of chemical attacks
appalls the conscience of the world, violates the
law and threatens our security. It is not only a major
affront to the international community and to the
Security Council; it also raises the risk of a terrible
regression for all of us. Indeed, let us make no mistake.
In Salisbury, Douma and elsewhere, the oldest and
strongest foundations of our collective security have
been deliberately violated, and thus put at risk, While
the forums charged with speaking out and enforcing the
law are systematically hampered. That is the heart of
the matter.

Let us make no mistake. Those who obstruct
our action, who violate and deceive with respect
to their commitments, who deliberately carry out
disinformation campaigns and distort the facts with a
view to dividing and disorienting public opinion are
responsible for a serious normalization of the use of
chemical weapons. Furthermore, they contribute to the
risk of undermining the non-proliferation regime at a
time when they should be its guarantors.

France, which suffered first-hand the devastating
effects of chemical weapons during the First World War,
will never allow their use to go unpunished, whether
in Syria, Europe or elsewhere. Any time a chemical
weapon is used, regardless of where and by whom, all
light must be shed on that use and those responsible
must be held accountable. However, that is not enough.
We must do everything we can to curb the serious
threat of the normalization of the use of chemical
weapons. That should be our shared priority. That is the
whole purpose of the partnership we launched in Paris,
which 28 States and organizations have chosen to join,
including four this past week alone. Faced with such a
threat to our collective security, there can be no room
for impunity. That is also the whole point of our action
on the Syrian dossier.

The repeated use of chemical weapons undermines
international law and challenges our ability to safeguard
the values, principles and rules that underpin the United
Nations and our work. Because the very foundation of
our security is threatened and because we must live
up to our commitments and responsibilities, there is
no other acceptable or possible option than to come
together to restore the essential taboo prohibiting the
use of chemical weapons. Let us walk that demanding
path together. The international community can rest
assured of France's commitment to that end, alongside
all its partners.

