Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Under-Secretaries-General,
Mr. Alain Le Roy and Ms. Susana Malcorra, for their
presentations. We also wish to thank General Agwai,
Force Commander of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

We welcome the United Kingdom initiative to
hold this debate, which gives us the opportunity to
continue our collective consideration within the
Organization, in various formats, on how to enhance
the effectiveness and fulfilment of the objectives
involved in peacekeeping operations, as well as on
efforts directed toward the future.

We welcome the document that serves as a basis
on which to shape a new horizon for peacekeeping
operations. We believe that particular attention should
be given to the proposal to establish a new partnership
agenda that would incorporate three elements: first,
strengthening the unity and cohesion of the actors
involved in the management, planning and
administration of peacekeeping operations; secondly,
giving greater credibility to operations; and thirdly,
strengthening their capacity so that they can continue
to be an instrument that would guarantee global peace
and security. We will continue to carefully study the
recommendations, which are based on strengthened
conversions of partnerships around the purpose, action
and future of United Nations peace operations.

During the debate last January under the French
presidency (see S/PV.6075), my delegation underscored
the need to identify the areas where we need greater
action, as well as the good practices that could be
implemented in future, given the growing complexity
of the international situations that face peace
operations today.

In that connection we reiterate five aspects that
we believe are crucial and that we wish to raise today.
These are, first, the centrality of the decision-making
process for the establishment of a peacekeeping
operation; secondly, specific political guidelines in the
mandates that help define the conditions that will
determine the success of a mission; thirdly, the
multidimensional character of the operations and the
nature of conflicts, in order to seek collective
approaches founded on different types of cooperation
based on greater coordination at the level of
programmes and strategies; fourthly, the importance of
protecting the civilian population as an essential
element in the effort to strengthen peace operations;
and lastly, the need to establish an effective planning
and coordination mechanism.

The complexity of peacekeeping operations
reflects the need to seek greater and more flexible
mechanisms for complementarity and coordination
among the different bodies and with other entities in
the area of peacekeeping. We need to intensify the
Council's interaction with the Secretariat during the
initial stage of designing the different mandates and
during the deployment of a mission, including the
military, police, rule of law and peacebuilding aspects
of an operation, among other things.

As we pointed out during the debate that took
place under the Turkish presidency of the Council in
June (see S/PV.6153), it is also important to keep the
contributing countries informed in the process of
planning and analyzing peacekeeping operations, as
that would broaden and enrich the vision of those
operations and enhance their viability by incorporating
those countries' knowledge, experience and good
practices. Likewise, we feel it is a priority to promote
the Council's strategic partnerships with regional
organizations and other organizations in the field.

Mexico has been stressing the importance of the
fact that in order to ensure the credibility and
legitimacy of the United Nations, it is necessary to
establish peace operations that enjoy the military,
financial and political resources that enable them to
comply with their mandates in the terms that we have
described. Likewise, it is also important to have
updated information on the development of the
activities set out in the mandates and on the assessment
and viability of the operation in the circumstances that
it confronts.

We feel that the briefing sessions that we have
had with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support since the start of
the year have been very valuable, as have the meetings
with the main troop-contributing countries in the
framework of the working group chaired by Japan.

Along these lines, we support the holding of
frequent interactive sessions with the different actors,
primarily at the expert level, during the analysis that is
carried out for every mandate prior to its renewal or
modification. That would not only contribute to
achieving a greater sensitivity to field implications but
would also help the Council to take decisions that are
more in line with the challenges and opportunities
prevailing in every situation.

Similarly, my delegation is convinced that a new
vision of peacekeeping operations must have a very
clear strategy in order to use the resources devoted to
such operations more effectively and more efficiently.
That is why we are grateful for the working document
on a field support strategy, which Under-Secretary-
General Susana Malcorra has shared with the Member
States and which the General Assembly will consider
in the near future.
At the same time, another of the main aspects
within the different mandates of the peacekeeping
operations is that of protecting civilians in armed
conflicts, particularly women and children, and
following up on its implementation. In that respect, we
underscore the need to be more clear with respect to
the elements that make up the mandates, the
responsibilities that stem from them and the
development of monitoring mechanisms for proper
implementation.

With regard to peacebuilding, as we said in the
debate on 22 July under the Ugandan presidency (see S/PV.6165), the initial stage immediately following the
cessation of hostilities is a vital time for laying the
bases for true peacebuilding.

The development of the political effort to
promote reconciliation is particularly important.
Confidence and national reconciliation are crucial
aspects for outlining a framework that would
incorporate the priorities that the local actors
themselves would establish and that would enjoy the
support of international teams. It would include a
comprehensive vision of the role of the United Nations
in political, humanitarian, security and development
aspects.

We underscore the need for peacekeeping efforts
to be accompanied by a political process aimed at
strengthening the State apparatus and local human
resources. Coherence and integration between
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding should
be borne in mind from the point at which the
Organization first approaches a conflict situation.
Likewise, we must design proper transition strategies,
including the responsible transfer of authority to
national institutions and the gradual withdrawal of a
peacekeeping operation after a stable climate has been
established.
Lastly, Mr. President, we congratulate you and
your delegation on preparing the draft presidential
statement and we fully support its adoption.

