Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, may I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency. I should like also to congratulate the

representative of Spain, Ambassador Yafiez-Barnuevo,
for the outstanding manner in which he presided over
the work of the Council during the very busy month of
September.

Once again the Security Council has had to
convene a special meeting because of a situation that
poses a threat to peace and security in the Middle East
and internationally. At issue are the actions taken by
the Israeli armed forces against the Palestinian people
in the area of the Jabaliya and Beit Hanoun refugee
camps in the Gaza Strip.

Let me reiterate first that my delegation
recognizes Israel's right to protect its people against
terrorist attacks and consequently to take the necessary
steps in that regard. However, it must always do so
within the framework of international law, particularly
international humanitarian law. At the same time, the
prolonged military occupation of the Palestinian
territories; the various measures taken by the Israeli
authorities, which severely limit the population's
freedom of movement; and the destruction of their
houses and their livelihoods, in addition to the frequent
use of excessive force by the occupying military
forces, have succeeded only in aggravating the
situation, intensifying the deep frustration of the
people of the occupied territories and exacerbating the
violence there.

The construction of the wall separating the Israeli
and Palestinian communities, which was deemed
illegal in the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice, is continuing in the occupied
territories. The wall cuts off the productive resources
of the Palestinian people, their best arable land and
their major water sources. That in turn is contributing
to the very harsh conditions facing the Palestinian
people: non-existent prospects for development or
economic progress, the lack of freedom, the absence of
opportunities for a better life, and the prolonged
political crisis affecting the Palestinian National
Authority constitute the principal factors underlying
the situation of Palestinian violence against Israel.

The international community continues to await
effective measures leading to the early reorganization
and restructuring of the Palestinian security forces, so
that they can effectively discharge their commitment to
halt the violence - a commitment they undertook
under the road map. In this particular case, the
Palestinian Authority must take effective measures to
stop the rocket attacks by Palestinians militants against
Israel, and, as the Secretary-General has stated, both
sides must comply with their obligation to protect the
civilian population.

The road map, endorsed last year by the Security
Council in resolution 1515 (2003), is still the only
peace plan agreed to by the parties. However, neither
of the parties has taken serious steps to implement it.

Against that political backdrop comes the
announcement by the Israeli Government of its plan to
unilaterally withdrawal from the Gaza Strip. My
delegation welcomed the decision to withdraw from the
occupied territories, but we are deeply concerned at the
potential consequences of such a unilateral action.
Withdrawal by the Israeli forces must be accompanied
by adequate measures that ensure stability and security
in the area and that the law of the jungle does not
prevail there.

At the same time, withdrawal from Gaza must
take place within the framework of the resolutions of
the Security Council and the road map; it cannot serve
as a substitute for those obligations.

Unilateral actions will not bring about a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East, nor will they help to
achieve the oft-reiterated objective of two States, Israel
and Palestine, living side by side, within secure and
recognized borders.

