Mr. Da Silva (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
participate in this meeting of the Security Council
and to address you in my capacity as the Permanent
Representative of my country.

The members of the Council will recall that in
April, at the Extraordinary Summit of the Economic
Community of West African States, (ECOWAS), held in
Lome, which focused on the situation in Guinea-Bissau,
Bissau-Guinean political actors adopted a road map to
end the crisis, which persisted despite the Agreement
signed in Conakry in October 2016. The road map
provided, among other things, for the organization of
parliamentary elections on 18 November 2018.

However, delays in mobilizing funds from our
partners and technical difficulties related to electoral
kits and their delivery to Bissau, compounded by the
rainy season, made it impossible to meet the deadline
initially planned for the electoral census, which could
only effectively begin on 19 September, one month
later. Given that observation and the difficulties facing
the process, the President of the Republic decided not to
issue a new decree to set the date of the parliamentary
elections in order to give the census a chance to register
a large majority of the citizen voters. It should be noted
here that, to date, more than 95 per cent of voters have
been registered.

The result achieved demonstrates the wisdom of
the President of the Republic's decision to not rush
the issuance of a new decree to fix the date of the
parliamentary elections. After extensive consultations
with all political actors, the President of the Republic
issued adecree yesterday, 20 December, setting 10 March
2019 as the date to hold the parliamentary elections.

The upcoming parliamentary elections are
extremely important, but it would be an exaggeration
to believe that simply holding free, fair and transparent
elections would automatically establish a resilient and
stable political order at the institutional level. To that
end, allow me to refer to the Conakry Agreement, which
calls for political reform that will give our national
democratic institutions greater resilience and hinder
the re-emergence of political instability. It should be
recalled that in a context of persistent instability, no
other reform will be successful - neither defence
and security sector reform, justice sector reform, nor
the economic reform necessary to operationalize the
Sustainable Development Goals.

I take this opportunity to thank all those present
for their patience and solidarity and to wish a merry
Christmas and a successful New Year to their
respective countries, as well as health and well-being
to their families.

