Mr. Khan (Indonesia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate.
This is a timely opportunity for all of us to stand
together to combat acts of piracy, which continue to
run rampant, affecting more Member States and posing
a huge threat to regional peace and stability and to
international navigation and shipping.

Indonesia aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

Allow me also to express my appreciation to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
for his report (S/2012/783) dated 22 October 2012
pursuant to resolution 2020 (2011) on the issue ofpiracy
off the coast of Somalia.

Throughout history, Indonesia, as an archipelagic
State, has faced challenges of maritime security,
including piracy and armed robbery at sea. We have
thus always condemned and deplored all acts of piracy
on the high seas.

In Southeast Asia, Indonesia and its neighbouring
States have long dealt with this issue in the Straits of
Malacca and Singapore. The region therefore worked on
various bilateral, trilateral and regional initiatives that
successfully helped the littoral States to significantly
lower the number of piracy and armed robbery incidents
in the region.

Indonesia remains of the view that the 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea should serve
as the primary legal framework applicable to combating
piracy and armed robbery at sea. With that in mind,
allow me to address the issue of piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea and in the waters off the coast of Somalia.

Over the past year, the Council has made the issue of
piracy in the Gulfoquinea a part ofits concern. This is
apparent from the latest two resolutions - 2018 (2011)
and 2039 (2012) - in which the Council highlighted
the need for international cooperation so as to tackle
the menace of piracy, including through the capacity-
building of States in the region.

Indonesia welcomes that initiative and underlines
the need for the international community to provide
the necessary assistance to the littoral countries in
advancing their monitoring and prevention capacity as
well as theirjudicial capacity.

We are keen to hear about the progress made in
overcoming this problem, in the context of the United
Nations role in the Gulf of Guinea, from the United
Nations Office in West Africa and the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, through the report
of the Secretary-General.

Turning to the issue of piracy and armed robbery
in the waters off the coast of Somalia, Indonesia shares
the serious concern about the rate of occurrence. Even
though the Secretary-General indicated in his report
that there had been a decline in the number of attacks
and hijackings this year, it is alarming that as many as
224 seafarers and 17 vessels were being held hostage as
at September 2012. Without question, the instability in
that country is a key contributor to the increase in the
number of such attacks and is one of the root causes that
should be addressed immediately.

We share the view that the continuing political
instability and the economic problems in Somalia are
the first issues that must be addressed. Indonesia has
noted that with the deepening of international efforts
to combat piracy off the Somali coast, the issue of the
prosecution and trial of pirates is becoming more and
more challenging. In that sense, Indonesia supports
resolution 2020 (2011), which provides the required
legal framework for assisting Somalia in fighting
piracy and armed robbery.

Furthermore, we need to protect the welfare of
seafarers being held hostage by the pirates. To that
extent, we welcome the discussions being held in the
working groups of the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia, as the main forum for discussing
the issue of piracy off the coast of Somalia, which
is reviewing the conventions and draft guidance
concerning seafarers. We also welcome the joint efforts
made by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and the United Nations Political Office for Somalia to
develop a programme of immediate assistance and care
for released hostages.

The economic losses resulting from piracy are
indeed very large; however, the loss of human life as a
result of such horrendous acts is incalculable. Realizing
this, Indonesia emphasizes the urgent need to prosecute
the culprits as well as those who illicitly finance, plan,
organize or unlawfully profit from pirate attacks. We
also see a need to criminalize piracy, as defined by the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, in
national law, as well as to continue close partnerships
and cooperation between State and non-State actors.

Finally, Indonesia would like to urge all members
of the international community not to lose sight of the
significance and seriousness of the challenge of piracy
and armed robbery at sea, because all nations and
peoples, and both the public and the private sectors, are
the losers wherever and whenever such acts take place.
We must unite our efforts and work together and with
great determination to ensure that we triumph over this
problem.

