I thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Mr. Faki Mahamat, for their comprehensive briefings. As we commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we reflect on the complex challenges facing the world, including the greatest crisis since the establishment of the United Nations in 1945. The coronavirus disease pandemic is a threat to international peace and security. It has brought the world to a general halt and deepened social and economic instability, threatening to exacerbate old and create new conflicts. It is jeopardizing hard-won development and peacebuilding gains, and is instilling fear. The aftermath of the pandemic has shined light on the obstacles to collective action in conflict situations through a series of global challenges such as climate change and famine, and has made more evident the structural flaws in the system of global governance. The costs of inaction have been alarming. The Council must serve as a fundamental guarantor of global stability. The crisis calls for stronger unity to bolster resolution 2532 (2020) with concrete actions while prioritizing global health. The holding of this debate is therefore very timely, and we thank the Niger and President Issoufou for their leadership. Responding to the pandemic and its consequences requires effective and inclusive multilateralism. A coordinated, comprehensive and people-centred response based on solidarity, with a special focus on the most vulnerable and marginalized, is therefore essential. Its absence would undermine efforts to mitigate the pandemic. In that regard, we congratulate the Secretary-General and the World Health Organization on their efforts to coordinate a global response, and pledge the support of the Dominican Republic. Achieving a stable balance between economic growth and social well-being requires collective and multi-level leadership. Governments, regional organizations, international institutions and civil society must act together in the spirit of cooperation, driven by a coherent and integrated approach. That includes South- South and triangular cooperation and working in the context of the humanitarian- development-peace nexus. The pandemic has revealed the structural inequalities within and among societies, as well as unequal access to basic services, such as education. Children, women, refugees, migrants, internally displaced persons and people affected by conflict are among the most vulnerable. In addition, gender-based violence, including domestic violence, is increasing. It is therefore essential to support vulnerable populations and to build resilience in communities. In that regard, intercommunal violence and other forms of insecurity deserve our urgent attention. Working directly with communities and local peacebuilders will enable a more rapid and peaceful resolution of this crisis in conflict-affected countries. However, there is no doubt that domestic policies alone are not the way forward. Despite a climate of political polarization and the challenging geopolitical dynamics, multilateral reform must prevail. In the quest for socioeconomic revitalization in the midst of the pandemic, we must address the humanitarian situation, strengthen the rule of law, ensure the full and meaningful participation of women and youth in decision-making processes, and invest in development. In addition, global governance is needed to achieve a secure cyberspace. The increase in cybercrime strengthens the links between terrorists and criminals. Cyberspace requires unprecedented international collaboration to prevent the expansion of recruitment and training activities. The Security Council must strengthen its relationship with other organs and entities of the United Nations system. It must be more agile, inclusive and representative, and it must restore people's trust - specifically the trust of those living in conflict situations. Global governance must be more sensitive to risk, and a change in international power relations is critical. Channels of accountability through existing Council mechanisms are urgently needed to ensure and monitor the implementation of the ceasefire, in line with resolution 2532 (2020). Implementation is not yet a reality in many situations, such as those in Syria, Yemen, Libya, Afghanistan and the Sahel. We must ensure not only that more resources are mobilized but also that debt is repaid, so that countries can emerge from the crisis. International financial institutions, the private sector and donor countries are key partners in providing rapid assistance to countries affected by conflict. We take this opportunity to call for support for the United Nations-coordinated humanitarian response plan in order to reduce the likelihood of the pandemic generating the dangerous consequences we fear so much, namely, increased instability and conflict in the years ahead. This is the time for unity, for embracing our common humanity and for building back better for the collective good. We are safe only if everyone is safe.
