Mrs. Junod (International Committee of the Red Cross) (spoke in French): First of all I would like to thank
you, Sir, along with the other members of the Council, for
making it possible for the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) to speak here regarding the protection of
civilian populations in armed conflicts. The ICRC warmly
welcomes the Council's initiative to undertake an open
debate, on the basis of concrete proposals, on a subject of
such fundamental importance. But we cannot fail to express
our disappointment over the fact that this essential debate
is taking place at the very time when we must deplore the
powerless of the international community to assure the
protection of civilians in various parts of the world. To
illustrate this point I will only cite two situations in which
our organization has been working for 25 odd years:
Angola and East Timor. We hope that in the latter case the
imminent deployment of an international force will help to
limit the terrible sufferings of a population that remains in
danger.

To avoid such situations, the ICRC would like
political and humanitarian actors in due course to join
forces and unite their efforts in accordance with their
respective responsibilities. It seems to us that in calling
upon the Security Council to give increased attention to
the prevention of conflicts by attacking the root causes of
crises and, to that end, establishing a more systematic and
specific framework for action, the recommendations of
the Secretary-General are on the right track.

In extreme cases, when all initiatives to ensure
respect for basic human rights and humanitarian law have
failed and when such principles have been rejected
outright, humanitarian action as such is disputed, and
States must find new remedies. Rapid action must be
decided upon and, if necessary, imposed. Such measures
should create new conditions enabling humanitarian
players to act. But they should not necessarily be included
in political decision-making on possible enforcement
action.

The ICRC is particularly pleased to note that, when
the Council decides to take action based on Chapter VII
of the Charter, it will no longer limit itself to political and
military considerations but will henceforth take account of
the humanitarian consequences of armed conflict for
civilians. This is an important step towards discharging
the collective responsibility that flows from common
article 1 of the Geneva Conventions, which requires
States parties not only to respect but to ensure respect for
the provisions of these Conventions. In this context, I
should like to point out that Article 89 of the first
Protocol Additional of 1977 requests States to act in cases
of serious violations of the Conventions and the Protocol,
both jointly and separately, in cooperation with the United
Nations and in accordance with the Charter.

The uncontrolled availability of arms is a threat to
civilians that the Council is now beginning to take into
account. In conformity with the mandate entrusted to it by
the most recent International Conference of the Red Cross
and Red Crescent, held in 1995, the ICRC undertook a
study of the availability of arms and the situation of
civilians in armed conflict, in which it provided an
account of its experience in the field and analysed the
consequences of the availability of weapons in terms of
human rights violations. It is therefore very pleased to
note that the Secretary-General agrees with the various
initiatives taken to deal with this difficult problem, and
has proposed several recommendations to States as part
of the measures to be taken to strengthen the physical
protection of civilians.

During the open debate in this Chamber on 12
February, the President of the ICRC, Mr. Cornelio
Sommamga, expressed his deep concern about the fact

 

that in a number of armed conflicts both States and non-
State actors do not respect even the minimum norms of
conduct of international humanitarian law.

That grim picture is brightened today by a note of
hope. Indeed, the results of the "People on War"
consultation, recently conducted throughout the world by
the ICRC for the fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions, show that the norms enshrined in
humanitarian law are still relevant. The basic principles of
that law have just been reaffirmed in a solemn appeal,
adopted on 12 August, in the presence of the Secretary-
General. The ICRC would like to reiterate its deep gratitude
to him for his unconditional support.
The ICRC is endeavouring to protect civilians in
armed conflict by intervening directly with all parties,
including non-state actors, whatever cause they say that
they are defending. In this respect, paragraph 51 of the
report of the Secretary-General rightly states:

"humanitarian actors must be able to maintain a
dialogue with relevant non-state actors without thereby
lending them any political legitimacy".

That is, indeed, the letter of the law. According to
common article 3 of the Geneva Conventions, offering the
services of an impartial humanitarian organization such as
the ICRC does not at all modify the legal status of the
entity to which the services are offered. Humanitarian
organizations should not, therefore, be criticized, as is
sometimes still the case, for maintaining necessary working
relations with armed opposition groups during an armed
conflict. Rather, they should be encouraged to maintain
dialogue with all of those who have some influence on the
fate of the victims they are trying to reach.

We join with the Secretary-General in recommending
that the Council call upon non-state actors to adhere to
these humanitarian norms. The ICRC would like to point
out that, if we deny the very existence of armed groups or
simply reduce them to the status of criminals or terrorists
to whom we should not even speak, that could provide
them with a pretext for them to flout their responsibilities
towards civilians, prisoners and the wounded.

Respect for humanitarian law, which is a sine qua non
for the physical protection of civilians, is of great concern
to the members of peacekeeping forces. The ICRC
therefore warmly welcomes the rules and principles in the
Secretary-General's bulletin of 6 August, which was drawn
up with the participation of his legal experts. It is
furthermore essential, as the report of the Secretary-
General indicates, that the personnel involved in regional
operations respect and observe humanitarian law.
Adequate training seems to be absolutely necessary if the
rules and principles are not to become a dead letter.

The ICRC has repeatedly expressed itself on
measures recommended for strengthening legal protection.
I will therefore keep my comments in this area brief. Yes,
our advisory services for international humanitarian
assistance are prepared to continue to help States to
adopt, on a national scale, specific measures for the
appropriate implementation of this law. The adoption of
national legislation for punishing war crimes is a priority,
especially since the future International Criminal Court
will be complementary to national criminal jurisdictions.
The propagation of humanitarian law remains a
priority on the agenda of our institution. Local networks
are increasingly being trained in this area, and play an
irreplaceable role in helping the ICRC to adapt its
message to its various audiences and take fully into
account different cultural contexts and traditional values.
I should like once again to state that in the framework of
its mandate to protect humanitarian law, the ICRC is in
the process of putting the final touches on a universal
study to determine the content of customary regulations.
That study, which will be issued next year, will define
more clearly the obligations of all parties to an armed
conflict, whether the conflict be international or internal.

In his opening statement, the President of the
General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session mentioned a
number of urgent challenges to be faced: war, displaced
persons, refugees, gender equality and the fate of
children, in particular children in armed conflict - this
last being a direct follow-up to the important resolution
recently adopted by the Security Council on that subject.
This opens the door to a new era of synergy that can
strengthen the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The international Red Cross and Red Crescent
movement must, by its very essence, be an important
mechanism of this mobilizing strategy. The protection of
civilians in armed conflict goes to the heart of the debate
to be held at the twenty-seventh International Conference
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent in Geneva at the
beginning of November, in which all States parties to the
Geneva Conventions, as well as the movement as a
whole, will participate. Its work should lead to the
adoption of a specific plan of action for the years 2000 to
2003.

 

