Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, and your entire
team for all the work done in November. The programme
was extremely tightly packed, which sometimes gave
the impression of running the New York marathon here
too in the Council, but at a pace not quite as fast as
the sprinters. You, Sir, conducted our debates with as
much rigour as enthusiasm. In that regard, your second
presidency reflects your outstanding two-year balance
sheet in the Council, for which we thank you.

While the media focused on Syria, the situation in
Gaza and Jerusalem and counter-terrorism - regarding
which Australia has been fully mobilized during its
tenure * let us not forget that crises in Africa are and
will remain a major topic for the Security Council,
where it is heavily invested politically and through
peacekeeping operations and where what the Council
does can make a difference. I shall therefore devote
most of statement to those issues.

The brainstorming meeting on the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) held by the Security Council
on 10 November, following the proposal made by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,was an
innovative and productive exercise. I would like to
thank the presidency and the Secretariat in particular
for successfully organizing that interactive informal
debate. The meeting enabled Council members to
address very directly all aspects, political and security-
related, relating to the tense situation in northern Mali.
Council members expressed a strong consensus, on the
one hand, to continue to put pressure on the Malian
parties to complete the Algiers peace negotiations
on their terms and in a spirit of compromise and, on
the other hand, to take all the necessary measures to
strengthen security for the Blue Helmets of MINUSMA,
with the support of Operation Barkhane, so that they can
fully carry out their very robust mandate to stabilize
northern Mali.

The proposals made by the Secretariat to the
Council for that meeting and the President's summary
are valuable in helping us to make progress. We expect
that the next report of the Secretary-General on Mali
in late December will report on the implementation
of the proposed measures. After the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), we can say
that the MINUSMA is now the second laboratory
on peacekeeping in a complex environment. As we
did this month for Mali, we need to be able to reflect
collectively in an innovative, more interactive and more
concrete fashion to allow peacekeeping operations to
cope with new situations on the ground. We believe that
the formula tested in Mali deserves to be taken up in
the future.

Turning to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
one year after the Mouvement du 23 Mars (M-23) was
defeated, which was a milestone for the country and
for the reputation of the United Nations on the ground,
many challenges remain. On the security front, while
the protection of civilians and the neutralization of
armed groups are the Council's priority, obstacles
remain: the voluntary disarmament of the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda is deadlocked,
the upsurge in violent attacks in the Beni region shows
that sustainable neutralization of the Allied Democratic
Forces is not yet a reality, and the demobilization and
reintegration of former M-23 combatants is delayed.
Moreover, the political situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is tense in the context of the
sensitive pre-electoral situation. The members of the
Council are concerned about the slow implementation of
the reforms agreed to by the Government in the context
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
Agreement for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region, signed in Addis Ababa, which remains
the basis for a lasting settlement ofthe crisis in the Great
Lakes region. In that fragile context, the expulsion of
the head of the United Nations Joint Human Rights
Office by the authorities of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is disturbing.

The strategic review expected in late December
will be an opportunity to make a first assessment of
resolutions 2098 (2013) and 2147 (2014) on how to
continue strengthening MONUSCO. We can never
overemphasize the importance of the protection
of civilians, which should be active and effective.
Neutralizing armed groups is necessary, but the return
to sustainable stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo cannot be achieved without the implementation
of the necessary reforms by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and without firm resolve on the part of
the signatories to the Framework Agreement to respect
their commitments. MONUSCO also has a crucial role
to play.

The review of those two major peacekeeping
operations naturally leads me to mention the review
of peacekeeping operations by the Secretary-General.
Last week the Security Council had discussions with
members of the High-Level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations, chaired by Mr. Ramos-Horta. It is
good to step back and to reflect on how to strengthen
and adapt a tool - peacekeeping operations and
political missions - that sometimes suffers from its
own success. In that regard, we thank Australia for its
initiative of introducing the first Council resolution
(resolution 2185 (2014)) on the role of police in
peacekeeping operations. That initiative will make a
useful contribution to the thinking on an increasingly
important and complex dimension of our operations.

We expect the review of peacekeeping operations
to lead to concrete proposals aimed at improving the
effectiveness of peacekeeping - for example, to better
fulfil what has become the core mission, that is, the
protection of civilians; to speed up the deployment
of missions; to ensure the cohesion of the various
military, police and civilian components; and to
reduce tensions on critical capacity resources, such as
helicopters, personnel and financing. We also hope that
the review will make it possible to move towards more
flexible peacekeeping operations that are adapted to
the local situation and deployed in sequence and that
can be adapted if necessary, including with a clearly
identified exit strategy. In the coming months France
will contribute to that debate, here and in Paris, where
our authorities are studying the subject and willing to
support the review process.

Finally, let me turn to a matter that my delegation
holds dear: the issue of human rights in the day-to-
day work of the Security Council. In that regard, we
welcome the presence of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Prince Zeid, at
the last meeting on Iraq (see S/PV.7314), and the
outstanding statement he delivered on that occasion.
We agree with his analysis on the need to combat the
deadly rhetoric of Daesh. We support his appeal to the
Iraqi authorities to acknowledge the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court. That initial interaction
between the Council and the new United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights was very fruitful, and
we hope it can be continued.

Soon the Council will take up the human rights
situation in North Korea, for the General Assembly
decided to refer to us the report of the United Nations
Commission of Inquiry on Human Rights in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, headed by
Justice Kirby. The crimes described in the report, as
the Commission of Inquiry states, are "unprecedented
in the world today". They may constitute crimes
against humanity. The Council must not shirk its
responsibilities, and must be ready to consider the
contents and conclusions of that report.

Let me conclude by thanking you, dear Gary, once
again, for your presidency. Chad will take up the torch
in December, as France did at a similar time last year.
We now know that the Council can work very hard
between Christmas and New Year's Day, which is not
necessarily the best model to follow. My country wishes
Chad every success.

