Mr. Amayo (Kenya): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important debate. My delegation also
welcomes the informative briefings by the Secretary-
General and the African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security.

Kenya recognizes the vital role played by
peacekeeping as a critical tool available to the Security

Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security. We remain firmly committed to peacekeeping
for a better world. Kenya would once again like to pay
tribute to the Blue Berets and Blue Helmets who have
paid the ultimate price for peace. In particular, we
pay a special tribute to the peacekeepers of Mali and
Tanzania who lost their lives last week serving in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our prayers are
with their loved ones.

Peace and indeed security are a vital component of
development and the well-being of people throughout
the world. Africa, too, faces some peace and security
challenges that continue to undermine development on
the continent. In an effort to address them, the African
Union-led peace operations face several difficulties,
including inadequately resourced peace missions
with regard to both personnel and equipment and the
inability to fund the post-conflict reconstruction and
peacebuilding that are necessary for a country emerging
from conflict. That is frequently compounded by a lack
of funds dedicated to such peace operations due to the
overreliance on donors.

Most of those challenges can be appropriately
addressed by deepening the strategic cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union (AU).
The Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security,
signed by the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of
the AU Commission, presents an excellent opportunity
to boost coordination between the two organizations
strategically and operationally. The regular interaction
between the two organizations, including through the
hosting ofjoint biannual meetings, has led to a better
understanding of the strategic environment surrounding
conflicts on the continent. The two institutions should
take advantage of the opportunity presented by the
partnership to ensure a greater degree of coherence
and coordination and constantly involve each other
in the planning and execution of peace and security
operations to synergize their efforts. That will help to
align the visions of the two bodies.

We appreciate the basic principles of peacekeeping
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and
the primacy ofpolitics as key to conflict prevention and
resolution. However, the circumstances surrounding
the peace and security environment have changed
over time. Let me, for instance, highlight a few, such
as the African Union Mission in Somalia, which faces
threats that continue to challenge the conventional
peacekeeping doctrine. Similar threats are facing the
Group of Five for the Sahel initiative in Mali, where
peacekeepers are a direct target. That calls for a rethink
of doctrine and concept of operations in such missions
so as to align them to the new realities on the ground.
Similarly, although authorized by the Security Council,
such missions suffer from a mismatch of resources
as a result of reliance on voluntary sources that are
rarely predictable. Accordingly, funding such peace
operations from the assessed contributions remains the
most viable option to ensure sustainability.

With regard to training, it is worth noting that no two
missions are identical in either context or environment.
Each mission presents unique challenges by virtue of
the threats it faces and its environment. It is for that
reason that equipment and predeployment training need
to be tailored to suit each mission's environment and
threats. Africa is host to the five largest peacekeeping
missions and contributes over half of the peacekeepers
in those missions. It is therefore important that training
be conducted in environments similar to those in
which they operate. Kenya has, for instance, offered
the internationally recognized International Peace
Support Training Centre to the United Nations for the
training of peacekeepers. The Centre offers excellent
training facilities and training areas with a capacity to
accommodate an infantry battalion. We look forward
to partnering with the United Nations and other
stakeholders to advance peacekeeping training.

