Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): At the outset, I would
like to express, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM), our appreciation to Brazil for
convening this debate, emphasizing the relationship
between successful sustainable development and the
preservation of peace as the cornerstone of security and
stability. We thank the Secretary-General, the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), and the Special
Representative of the World Bank for their
comprehensive briefings.

In a world of interconnected challenges and
opportunities, it is difficult to dismiss the conceptual
relation between security and development. Both are
concerned with people; both impact and influence one
another. The absence of security makes it difficult for
development to thrive, while the lack of broad-based
development may trigger instability and pose a
challenge in the long run to security and sustainable
peace. Yet on the practical level, the connection
between security and development remains elusive, and
its implications are hard to define and should be
thoroughly examined in the proper forums.

Even though we welcome today's debate as a
contribution to enhancing the understanding of the
interlinkages between security and development, it is
important to stress that this issue goes beyond the core
competencies of the Security Council. The Security
Council's primary responsibility, under the Charter of
the United Nations, is for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It has no authority
over United Nations development agencies, funds or
programmes. Issues pertaining to economic and social
development fall within the competence of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. As
Member States, we all must respect this distinction,
even as we encourage close coordination and
cooperation among the principal organs of the United
Nations, which is essential to enabling the United
Nations to successfully address the nexus between
peace and security, on the one hand, and development
on the other.

Although recent reports of the Secretary-General
to the Council show that new and emerging issues -
such as intra-State conflicts, organized crime, the
illegal exploitation of natural resources, rapid
urbanization and maritime security - have been
gaining greater weight as challenges to international
peace and security, particularly in Africa, the Non-
Aligned Movement believes that a comprehensive
approach to dealing with the root causes of conflicts
needs to be adopted, in close coordination among the
United Nations principal organs, the United Nations
system, international financial institutions, regional
organizations, national authorities and civil society, in
order to combine and make use of the expertise and
lessons learned by the relevant actors within their areas
of competence and in accordance with their mandates.

Enhancing stability and sustainable development
is key to the success of the international efforts to
promote peace and development worldwide. The fact
that many non-aligned countries, in particular in
Africa, are not on track to meet the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015 furthers the case for the
need to implement all commitments related to
supporting development, particularly in Africa,
including the full implementation of the political
declaration on "Africa's development needs: state of
implementation of various commitments, challenges
and the way forward" (resolution 63/1), adopted at the
high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
22 September 2008, as well as all other commitments
related to supporting developing countries' endeavours
to achieve sustainable development.

NAM. believes that United Nations peacekeeping
operations are at a crucial juncture as a result of the
increased demand for and the expansion and
complexity of their tasks and mandates, as well as the
Organization's increasing responsibilities beyond the
nature of its political role and its ability to implement
them. All these factors, along with the absence of
political settlement of many conflicts, increase the
burdens on the capacity of the Organization and troop-
and police-contributing countries.

The Non-Aligned Movement is of the view that
this situation requires the Organization to continue
building on what has been achieved towards
developing a common vision on how to proceed
regarding the development of concepts, and to
strengthen the partnership between the Member States
and the Secretariat in order for United Nations
peacekeeping operations to gain the political, financial
and logistical support needed, in accordance with a
vision that realizes the needs and available capacities
and in a manner that enhances the United Nations role
in maintaining international peace and security.

Accordingly, the Non-Aligned Movement re-
emphasizes its commitment to supporting all efforts
aimed at achieving the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations, and reiterates the following.

First, it is important to achieve consensus among
Member States on the development of peacekeeping
policies, and not to seek to implement ideas and
approaches that have not been approved by Member
States.

Secondly, all necessary support, financial and
human resources, and military and civilian capabilities
must be provided to peacekeeping missions so that they
can fulfil their tasks within a framework of full respect
for the host country, its laws and norms, and achieve
their common goals. In this context, it is necessary to
avoid changing the tasks of peacekeeping missions
without previous consultations with troop-contributing
countries or obtaining their consent for any change.

Thirdly, more attention must be paid to exit
strategies through increased efforts to settle disputes
peacefully as the main goal of the strategy, and with a
view to dealing effectively with the increased demands
of some States for the early exit of peacekeeping
missions, and to paving the way for peacebuilders and
development actors to support and consolidate the
newly established peace through socio-economic
development and efficient institution- and capacity-
building on the basis of full respect of national
ownership.

In addition, the Non-Aligned Movement is of the
view that post-conflict peacebuilding activities should
be conducted through intense and effective
consultations among the principal organs of the United
Nations, giving due emphasis on their respective areas
of competence.
The three-tiered nexus of peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development merits very careful
comprehensive consideration by the appropriate organs
of the United Nations in order to further sustain the
needed resources for all three processes, and with a
view to strengthening, within a framework of national
ownership, the national capacities of Governments in
post-conflict countries to rise to their duties and
responsibilities, thus empowering national
Governments with the prerequisites for assuming their
responsibilities in the security, defence, political, social
and economic sectors, and engage in a sustainable
development process supported by sufficient financial
resources, technical expertise and institutional skills. In
addition, the provision of adequate and timely
resources will be indispensable.

Furthermore, the PBC must examine integrated
peacebuilding strategies for post-conflict countries to
ensure that they gradually incorporate a comprehensive
sustainable development component that addresses
emerging socio-economic challenges from the early
stages of implementation by national authorities, in
cooperation with the Peacebuilding Commission and
the relevant United Nations, international and regional
actors.

Consequently, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council must give due
consideration to the overlap between the peacebuilding
process and the launch of a sustainable development
framework in post-conflict countries. Efforts to
establish the foundations for good governance, the rule
of law and the application of the principles of
democracy and justice will not realize their full
potential in communities plagued by poverty, disease,
hunger and a continued lack of basic living standards.

The PBC must be actively involved in the
formulation of early peacebuilding components within
peacekeeping operations on a case-by-case basis,
where the Commission should conduct an appropriate
evaluation of the needs and requirements for such a
component, in full coordination with the country
concerned. The PBC can enrich Security Council
debates on post-conflict situations by sharing its views
and expertise of relevance to peacebuilding and early
development processes. Furthermore, without prejudice
to the functions and powers of the Security Council,
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council must also play a leading role in the
formulation and implementation of peacebuilding and
development activities.

The Non-Aligned Movement will continue to
support all United Nations efforts in all fields,
including peace, security and development, and stands
ready to engage constructively in any further
discussions in the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council on that important issue.

