Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): The Council has unanimously adopted the
resolution implementing the peace plan set out in the
Basic Agreement of 12 November 1995, thus signifying
its unequivocal support for the operation to succeed the
United Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in
Croatia (UNCRO) from tomorrow. On this occasion I
should like to pay tribute to the personnel of the United
Nations who served in that United Nations operation.

The success of the operation which we have decided
upon today will be of great importance for the entire

 

region. The two operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Eastern Slavonia are interrelated and will influence each
other. The war in former Yugoslavia started in Vukovar.
Peace - the end of the conflict - must come to Sarajevo
and to Vukovar.

Our Council, however, has another reason for wanting
this new operation to succeed. The war in Croatia has given
rise to a succession of human tragedies, which in their turn
have brought both violence and hatred. The resolution
should break this cycle of war and vengeance.
It is, in any event, in this context that the French
delegation will fully support the action of the Transitional
Administrator, who is shortly to be appointed by the
Secretary-General, and whose name we know, and also the
civilian and military personnel of the United Nations who
will be placed under his overall authority.

In accordance with the terms of the Basic Agreement
and the report of the Secretary-General, on which the
resolution is largely based, the authority of the Transitional
Administrator should be total during the transition period in
order for him to be able to govern effectively. This does
not mean that this authority is unconditional. The tasks
assigned to the Administrator, acting on behalf of the
United Nations, are listed in the resolution - specifically
in paragraph 11, which spells out the civilian tasks which
will have to be carried out. Priorities for the Administrator
are clearly to restore normal living conditions to the region;
to return all refugees and displaced persons to their home
of origin; and to protect the rights of all the inhabitants of
the region, which will require the creation of an effective
and active police force under strict international control. In
this context, the military component of the force will have
a crucial role to play. This is why answers to questions
regarding the size of the force, its nature and when it can
start to operate are very important.

In the light of recent experience, the French delegation
expressed its agreement with the conclusions reached in the
report of the Secretary-General. We are gratified that these
conclusions are broadly reflected in the text.

The process of demilitarizing Eastern Slavonia will be
the first test of the Agreement's viability. It is therefore
very important to recall the conditions in which this will
take place, in order to avoid future misunderstandings or
unjust criticism. Our Council has decided today that nothing
can be done without the military component of the
operation being fully deployed in the territory and being
fully operational, which will obviously take some time. The
purpose of the United Nations force is not merely to be
part of the demilitarization process, but to make it
possible by creating through its presence an atmosphere
of security and stability.

Nevertheless, it will not be the duty of the military
component to itself carry out the demilitarization. This
process will continue to be the entire responsibility of the
parties involved, which will have to fulfil their
commitments in this area. That is why our Council plans
to review the situation at regular intervals, in order to
draw conclusions as to the parties' respect, or lack of
respect, for their commitments and the reasons they have
given to explain their attitudes.
The agreement of the parties and their willingness to
cooperate sincerely - these are the real conditions for the
operation's success. In accordance with the Basic
Agreement, our resolution has created a framework and
defined ways to help the parties reach a peaceful solution
to the conflict. But it is up to them to assume their
responsibilities.

It was in the same spirit, and in accordance with the
Council's consistent policy on this subject, that the French
delegation supported the adoption of the draft resolution
extending, following the recommendations of the
Secretary-General, the mandate of the United Nations
observers monitoring the demilitarization of the Prevlaka
peninsula.

