I thank Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Rajasingham for their briefings. I feel like we have been here, in this situation, before. We thank both briefers for their ongoing painstaking efforts in extremely difficult circumstances - Martin, for his resilience in trying constantly and consistently to shepherd the parties into talks, and Ramesh, for his long-term efforts and those of his team in what is one of the worst humanitarian situations in the world. So, it is with a very genuine sense that I thank them and their teams on behalf of the United Kingdom for what they are doing. As Yemenis reflect and offer each other Ramadan blessings, they are being hit by the plight of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Officially, there are 50 reported cases, whereas United Kingdom-funded modelling suggests the number of Yemenis suffering from COVID-19 is already in the thousands. The United Kingdom has provided over $940 million since the beginning of the pandemic to support the global response to COVID-19, and has also pledged $2 billion to GAVI, the Vaccine Alliance, in order to vaccinate 75 million children against deadly infectious diseases around the world. But I also want to encourage the Government and the Houthi authorities to continue engaging with the United Nations to ensure an effective national response. We call on the Houthi authorities to be transparent in reporting cases so that the World Health Organization can identify requirements, procure equipment and ensure that supplies reach those in need. Martin Griffiths's proposals for a political framework and a nationwide ceasefire are truly the only game in town. There is no military option. We have proven that over several years. Those delaying agreements and talks are simply prolonging the misery of the people of Yemen for no obvious strategic or tactical advantage. The United Kingdom therefore resolutely supports Martin Griffiths's efforts, and I welcome the close coordination of the Ambassadors to Yemen of the five permanent members of the Security Council to that end. I welcome Mr. Griffiths update that the Yemeni Government has responded to his most recent proposals. I urge also the Houthis to do the same. Martin says that they were engaged, but I think we need more than engagement. Yemenis cannot wait any longer and constructive engagement in a United Nations-led process is the only way to achieve the peace they deserve. I also want to echo the Special Envoy's comments on the importance of the inclusion of women in both the Yemeni Women's Technical Advisory Group and in talks. In the light of the COVID-19 outbreak, I again welcome the unilateral ceasefire and its subsequent extension, as announced by the Saudi-led coalition. It is important that fighting does not hamper efforts to tackle the outbreak. That move, which has not been reciprocated, demonstrates the serious intent of the coalition to bring an end to this dreadful conflict. During this particularly crucial time in the peace process, I note with concern the evidence documented in the 21 April letter submitted by the United States to the Security Council Committees established pursuant to resolutions 2231 (2015) and 2140 (2014). That letter outlines evidence collected during two interdictions of vessels containing significant amounts of weapons and arms of apparent Iranian origin. I welcome the sharing of such information and encourage others to do the same. Such arms shipments pose a grave impediment to the cause of peace in Yemen and they must stop. The tragic situation in Yemen has been complicated further, to say the least, following the poorly timed declaration of the Southern Transitional Council. I welcome the swiftly agreed Security Council press statement on 29 April (SC/14176) regarding that declaration, and highlight the ongoing risk of violent clashes in the south. All parties have confirmed their support for the Riyadh agreement, so I call on them to engage with the Saudi-led efforts by de-escalating and implementing their obligations under the agreement. We welcome Mr. Rajasingham's announcement and details on the holding of a virtual humanitarian pledging conference on 2 June. We strongly urge all donors to step up and provide significant and timely humanitarian funding. The United Kingdom has provided over $1 billion in funding since the conflict began, and this year we will also be making a substantial pledge. However, I note with concern that unprecedented access restrictions remain throughout Yemen. In the north, the Houthis must deliver on the minimum operating requirements that the international community has laid out clearly. Those include swiftly approving all sub-agreements, fully implementing the World Food Programme's retargeting and biometric pilot, and allowing humanitarian agencies to operate independently and freely. Donors will be able to give funding only if such restrictions are lifted and humanitarian organizations are able to deliver assistance effectively. We are also supportive of United Nations agency efforts to do everything they can to reduce risk and ensure aid is reaching those in need. We remain extremely concerned that the Central Bank of Yemen will soon run out of foreign currency reserves, thus triggering an economic collapse with humanitarian and political consequences. Significant external financial assistance to the Central Bank is urgently needed to keep imports coming in, as the risk is now even greater due to the unpredictable secondary effects of the COVID-19 outbreak. The Government of Yemen must urgently put forth a credible plan to reassure potential donors of the implementation of the Riyadh agreement, with the Central Bank of Yemen remaining operationally neutral as negotiations proceed. We have talked previously in the Council about the devastating impact that an oil leak from the FSO SAFER oil tanker would have on Yemen and the region. I once again urge the Houthis to either allow the removal of the oil or to allow a repair mission to proceed. Continued inaction on this issue is reckless, dangerous and threatens an environmental and humanitarian catastrophe. I also note that prior to Ramadan, the Houthis promised to release members of the persecuted Baha' faith. I call on the Houthis to release them and all who have been wrongly detained, including journalists - as indicated today by the Special Envoy. That is especially important in the context of COVID-19. Finally, let me finish where I began. I want to thank Mr. Griffiths again for his continued efforts. He was right to talk at the beginning of his remarks of bringing us hope over progress, just as he was right to say that the hope is realistic. I also call on all in Yemen to bring real hope to the Yemeni people.
