Mr. Ouch (Cambodia): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of the members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), namely Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.

May I, first of all, congratulate you,
Mr. President, for assuming the presidency of the
Council this month, and thank the Secretary-General
for his inspiring speech. I wish also to thank the
Chairman of the CTC, His Excellency Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, the Vice-Chairmen, the Committee
members and all experts involved, as well as the
United Nations Secretariat for their dedication and hard
work.

We appreciate the impressive progress made by
the CTC in its first year, whereby over 90 per cent of
Member States have reported to the CTC on the action
taken and planned, and a large percentage of them have
completed their follow-up reports. We are pleased to
inform you that all ASEAN member States have
already submitted their initial reports and, at this stage,
are further progressing towards fulfilling the next
requirements of the CTC. We also note from the CTC
Chairman's statement today that, for most States,
priority will have to be placed in the following two
areas: first, having legislation in place covering all
aspects of resolution 1373 (2001) and a process in hand
to ratify as soon as possible the 12 international
conventions and protocols relating to terrorism, and
secondly, having effective executive machinery for
preventing and suppressing the financing of terrorism.

We appreciate the efforts made by the CTC to
facilitate the provision of necessary technical
assistance to Member States. In this regard, we
welcome the establishment of the web site, which
makes available a comprehensive directory of counter-
terrorism information and sources of technical
assistance. We wish to reiterate that we would welcome
further assistance from the CTC to ASEAN member
States to strengthen their capacity in implementing
resolution 1373 (2001).

Allow me, Mr. President, to give a further update
on ASEAN's ongoing efforts to combat international
terrorism since the last meeting on the subject on 27
June 2002. The ASEAN Foreign Ministers, at their
meeting held from 29-30 July 2002 in Brunei
Darussalam, expressed their determination to enhance
counter-terrorism cooperation, and affirmed the major
role of the United Nations in combating terrorism at
the international level. The Ministers also expressed
their full support for the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001).

In addition, there have been a number of
agreements and specific action plans that ASEAN and
the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) have put in place
in order to tackle threats of terrorism in our region. For
example, at the recent ninth meeting of the ASEAN
Regional Forum, the participants agreed to implement
quickly and decisively measures that the United
Nations has identified as mandatory to combat the
financing of terrorism. The participants also agreed to
enhance their ability to share information, domestically
and internationally, as a vital component in the fight
against terrorism. The participants also welcomed the
establishment of inter-sessional meetings (ISMs) as
avenues to discuss concrete measures of how ARF
members can enhance their cooperation against
terrorism.

In August this year, ASEAN member States and
the United States signed an anti-terrorism declaration
as a framework for increased cooperation to prevent
and combat global terrorism, recognizing the principles
of sovereign equality, territorial integrity and non-
interference in domestic affairs of other States.

Countering terrorism remains high on the agenda
of ASEAN member States, both individually and
collectively. I would like to take this opportunity to
reassure you of ASEAN's continued commitment and
cooperation to prevent, counter and suppress all
terrorist acts in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, all relevant United Nations resolutions
and, in particular, Security Council resolution 1373
(2001), as well as the principles of international law.

