Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): I would like to
give a warm welcome to the High Commissioner. It is
an extremely important briefing at an extremely
important time. It is very good to see him come back to
the Security Council so quickly.

May I also echo his reference to International
Women's Day. As the first male member of the
Security Council speaking this afternoon, I think that I
can acknowledge on behalf of all my male colleagues
that if women were able to achieve - to be
strengthened to achieve ~ what they want to achieve
in areas of crisis and desperation and in the way that
they wanted, then the world would be a much safer and
more peaceful place. The Security Council needs to
continue to respond to the needs of women, as we have
said in our public statement today.

We very much welcome Mr. Lubbers' visit to the
region and the recent progress made by the High
Commissioner for Refugees and other agencies in
resuming food deliveries and other forms of care,
particularly in the Languette region, and in their
attempts to start a movement of refugees and internally
displaced persons out of that dangerous area in
particular. We very much welcome the renewed
commitment of the Government of Guinea to host
refugees from neighbouring countries and to provide
them with protection. It is an enormous responsibility
for the State of Guinea and for the Government of
Guinea to have such a high proportion of refugees on
its territory, and we pay tribute to what the Government
has done.
Of course, the Security Council has to ask for all
parties involved to end the violence. There are rebel
groups that should not be doing What they are doing in
and across the borders in this region of West Africa.
The Revolutionary United Front (RUF) has been taking
action it certainly should not have. There are rebel
groups targeting the security of Liberia, as well as of
Guinea and Sierra Leone. It is a real mess in that
region. But Governments also have to act responsibly,
and I hope that the Guinean delegation will not mind if
I also say that it is a responsibility of the Government
of Guinea to avoid the indiscriminate use of helicopter
gunships if they also affect refugee populations, as well
as the real targets of military activity. Some care and
responsibility are needed in that respect in the context
of the great responsibility that the Government of
Guinea has taken on.

We are all asking for increased access to refugees
and internally displaced persons and safe and secure
conditions for agencies. They have got to be able to
operate with maximum effectiveness, but we have to
look very carefully at what the High Commissioner has
asked us to do. The Ambassador of Jamaica was quite
right to point to the short term and the long term. I am
not sure it is going to be practicable for the appeal to
the RUF and to the Governments of the region and the
appeal to the United Nations to strengthen the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) to serve
Mr. Lubbers' immediate purposes. UNAMSIL is
needed to help end the rebellion, which is part of the
reason for the flow of refugees in a situation where
UNAMSIL is badly under strength. Which does it
make its priority, the short term or the long term? If it
is the short term, the long term becomes longer. If it is
the long term, as the High Commissioner is clearly
pointing out, the short term is not mended.

I think we need the Secretariat's advice on this. It
is very good that the Secretary-General is listening to
this debate because there is a real crisis of choice here
in what we are being asked to do in UNAMSIL's
mandate so far and in what the High Commissioner is
saying to us. I quite agree with Ambassador Durrant
that we need an emergency plan for the short term that
reflects the realities of what the United Nations as a
whole is actually able to do, and that emergency plan
must have as a priority the relocation of refugees in the
most dangerous areas to adequate camps away from the
border area.

I do not think that we collectively can hold out
the prospect of safe passage as though that passage
would be immediately safe because we want it to be
safe. It would take, in our estimation, at least three full
active battalions to create a route out of the "parrot's
beak" into a reasonable area - say, to Kenema in
Sierra Leone - one kilometre wide, to avoid
immediate harassment of refugees. UNAMSIL does not
have one battalion to move forward in its own area of
operations until it is reinforced later this month and
then later this year. So we have a real problem of
choice. We need to discuss this further with considered
advice, following the High Commissioner's briefing,
from the Secretariat and the Secretary-General to see
exactly what is reasonable between the short term and
the long term.

Of course, in addition - you would expect me to
say this, but I think we would all say this - we have
doubts about the RUF's good faith in responding to the
High Commissioner's appeal. We cannot rely on good
faith alone. There must be a deterrent and a motivation
for them to respond to the international community and
for those who back them to respond to the motivations
we have provided to make sure that they respond to the
international appeal and bring themselves back into a
setting of international standards that they themselves
follow, together with their backers.

Lastly, repatriation must also take into account
the capacity of the Governments of Sierra Leone,
Liberia and, indeed, Guinea itself to absorb large
numbers of refugees and to cope with the movements
of refugees and internally displaced persons. The
region must certainly be very much part of that. I am
very interested in the revised proposal from the High
Commissioner on what precisely the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) might
do if it cannot do the borders, which I think at the
moment it cannot do. We would be interested in a
response in due course from ECOWAS as to what
might be possible.

The United Kingdom remains extremely
interested in this whole question for the sake of the
refugees and as an investor in the security of the
region. We are offering further money. We have put in
an extra $12 million since December for refugees and
internally displaced persons, and we will continue to be
extremely supportive.

