Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): As has been noted, and as you, Sir,
indicated earlier in consultations, there will be an
opportunity to address a much wider range of Middle
East issues at the appropriate meetings later in the
month. So today I will confine my remarks to the issue
at immediate hand, which I think appears to be the
delivery of humanitarian aid to Gaza in a particular
circumstance.

We have the Libyan account, which we have
heard from the Ambassador of Libya today in the
Chamber, and we also have the Libyan letter. We have
also heard a slightly different - in fact, a rather
different - account of what actually happened at sea. I
have no information myself to share with the Council,
but I would simply note that I think it will be very
difficult for the Council to agree on any sort of
statement - press statement or otherwise - if we
cannot establish the facts of the case to agreed
satisfaction.

It is obviously important that there should be free
passage of humanitarian goods and relief supplies into
Gaza. Our position on this is very well known. We do
hope that Israel as the occupying Power abides by the
requirements of international law in ensuring that the
necessary humanitarian supplies do reach Gaza. But it
is also the case that very particular and exceptional
circumstances apply in the Middle East, to Israel, to
the situation around Gaza.

Because of those exceptional circumstances, it is
necessary, as a matter of practicality, that aid and
humanitarian deliveries are done in a certain way. That
includes using United Nations channels and third
countries, including members of the League of Arab

States, in order to ensure that aid can enter Gaza safely
and in coordination with all those who need to be
involved. That may be frustrating, and it may be
regrettable that circumstances dictate such
arrangements, but as a matter of practicality, to help
the people of Gaza, those channels are necessary and
they should be used. Not to use them does raise doubts
with regard to either the intention of people who do not
use them or the lack of information available to them. I
am sure that the latter point is something that is easily
rectified.

I would just like to say, if I may, that we have
answered the call to give aid to the people of Gaza.
This year we have given over $100 million, or will
have done so by the end of the year. We have given
over $800 million since 1993 and have pledged to
provide a further $400 million by 2011. We recognize
the importance of helping to relieve the humanitarian
situation in Gaza.

I also want to address the allegation of piracy. I
have here the definition of piracy as set out in the Law
of the Sea Convention, to which Ambassador Wolff
also referred. It is a technical definition that says that
piracy requires an act of violence or detention, or any
act of depredation, committed for private ends by the
crew or passengers of a private ship. As a matter of
technicality, as I understand it, it was an Israeli naval
vessel that was involved in the incident. By definition,
that cannot constitute an act of piracy. I would just like
that to be on the record in the Council.

We all hope that the situation concerning
humanitarian relief for Gaza can be regularized. We all
hope for an improvement in the situation on the ground
that will allow for that normalization. But it does need
to be borne in mind - and I want to make this very
clear today - that that improvement will also require
prior improvement in the situation of terrorist and other
attacks on Israel. At the heart of this is the security
situation in that part of the world. That critically and
quintessentially includes the security of Israel and the
right of Israel to self-defence.

