Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Like previous speakers, I welcome Mr. Bernardo de
Miranda, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola, as he
discusses with us the question of peace in Angola. His
presentation has brought the Council first-hand
information on the situation in that country. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General's Adviser for
Special Assignments in Africa for his presentation.

This past year we have noted that some changes
have occurred in the Angolan peace process. The
Angolan Government has adopted a series of measures
aimed at reconciliation in order to promote the peace
process. It has also put forward a four-point peace
agenda that points in the right direction for the political
settlement of the civil war in Angola.

The Angolan Government has reaffirmed that it
will strive to promote the peace process in its country
on the basis of the Lusaka Protocol. Furthermore, the
Angolan Government has actively conducted extensive
consultations with various parties and factions in
Angola in preparation for the general elections. We
have also noted the statement made by President dos
Santos at a ceremony celebrating the twenty-sixth
anniversary of Angola's independence, where he
expressed the hope that the Angolan Government
would strive to promote peace and would - in a spirit
of mutual respect, tolerance, dialogue and
effectiveness - explore ways and means to achieve
durable peace and national reconciliation. We express
our appreciation to him.

These measures and actions of the Angolan
Government have won the support of the Angolan
people and of the international community, including
the United Nations. However, because of the
disturbances currently being created by Savimbi and
the UNITA armed forces, there has been little progress
in the peace process. The Lusaka Protocol has yet to be
effectively implemented. The primary responsibility for
that rests with Savimbi and the UNITA armed forces.
Their acts of violence have not only impeded the peace
process in that country, but have also caused great loss
of life and destruction of property.

We resolutely condemn the recent violence
perpetrated by Savimbi and his armed forces. We
demand that they lay down their weapons, implement
the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol in earnest and
demonstrate their readiness to start negotiating with the
Angolan Government. In the current circumstances, we
support the continuation of sanctions against UNITA
and believe that they should be closely monitored. In
this connection, we express our appreciation to the
Southern African Development Community for the
measures it has taken to implement the resolutions of
the Security Council concerning UNITA.

In order to further support the peace process, we
urge the United Nations to give sufficient attention to
and support for the elections in Angola. We call on the
international community to provide assistance to the
Angolan Government. The Chinese delegation also
thanks Ambassador Gambari for his efforts to promote
the peace process in Angola. We look forward to his
briefing following his visit to Angola and hope that the
Secretary-General will make proposals to promote the
next phase of the peace process in Angola.

