Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Thank you for
organizing this joint briefing, Mr. President. We thank
Ambassador Vilovie, Chairman of the 1373
Committee, Ambassador Urbina, Chairman of the 1540
Committee, and you, Mr. President, in your capacity as
Chairman of the 1267 Committee, for your insightful
briefings.

Uganda welcomes the continued close
cooperation among the three committees. This
cooperation is necessary for improved performance in
developing common strategies and coordinating
activities. As we have heard, this cooperation has had a
stimulus effect by helping to focus on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1373
(2001), 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004).
We welcome the progress made by Member
States in their completion of the analysis and the
adoption of the preliminary implementation
assessments. That is indeed a significant achievement
on the part of the 1373 Committee, and we are
encouraged that the Committee will support 100 per
cent completion by all Member States. We applaud the
efforts of the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
for the work it has done in this regard.

We support the ongoing dialogue between
Member States, donors and beneficiaries on the
facilitation of technical assistance. This dialogue offers
an opportunity for Member States to candidly exchange
views with the Committee on the practical measures
necessary to implement resolution 1373 (2001). In fact,
the partial compliance or non-compliance by Member
States to fully implement Security Council resolutions
is often due to the lack of technical capacity to do so.

Terrorism, together with the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction among non-State actors,
remains one of the major threats and challenges to
international peace and security. In this regard, we
support the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the coordination of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force within the collective efforts
undertaken to combat terrorism. The continued
cooperation of the three subsidiary bodies with the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force is a step
in the right direction and should be encouraged.

We welcome the report by the Chairman of the
1540 Committee on behalf of the three subsidiary
bodies, which confirms that a comprehensive review,
as requested by the Council, is under way. I Wish to
reiterate Uganda's support for the comprehensive
review. It is necessary that the review assess the
evolution of risks and threats, identify practical
approaches for the implementation of the resolution as
well as the challenges on the ground that are impeding
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

The debates and thematic sessions referred to in
the briefings are invaluable. We thank the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the
Terrorism Prevention Branch of the UNODC for
organizing workshops here in New York and at the
regional and subregional levels. These workshops
provide a better understanding of Council resolutions,
which ultimately helps in their implementation.
We share the View that the consolidated list
remains an instrument useful to the United Nations in
its effort to combat terrorism. However, the credibility
of the consolidated list will be undermined if the
existing gaps are not addressed in a timely and
effective manner. Therefore, we are encouraged to hear
that the 1267 Committee is committed to improving its
procedures by introducing additional elements of
fairness and transparency, which will contribute to the
effectiveness of the Committee.

Finally, Uganda would like once again to thank
the Chairpersons of the three subsidiary bodies and the
associated monitoring groups and experts groups for
the good work that they have done.

We assure the Council of Uganda's continued
cooperation in working for a secure and peaceful
world.

