Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank all
the briefers.

We welcome the start of the redeployment of
Houthi troops from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa and call on all parties to fully implement
the agreement on withdrawal and resolve the remaining
points ofdisagreement. It is now essential that the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
be reinforced with more monitors and that the United
Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism be able
to set up in the port. We continue to call on all parties
to implement the Stockholm Agreement in its entirety.

We welcome the new discussions under the
auspices of the United Nations that were held earlier
this week between the official Government and the
Houthis on the redistribution of revenues from the
three ports of Al-Hudaydah, in line with the provisions
of the Stockholm Agreement. Although we are only
witnessing the beginning of the implementation of the
Al-Hudaydah agreement, Belgium believes that the
Special Envoy should continue to prepare the next steps
in the political process. The Al-Hudaydah agreement is
particularly important for the humanitarian situation,
but the core of the conflict requires a sustainable and
inclusive political solution.

Violence in the rest of the country continues and
aggravates the lack of trust between the parties. In
addition, such violence adversely affects access to
humanitarian assistance. We therefore call on all parties
to exercise restraint.

Efforts to improve the ongoing catastrophic
humanitarian situation remain essential, as we heard
this morning from Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Fore. I would
like to congratulate the humanitarian agencies for
the outstanding work they are carrying out despite
the difficulties.

It is essential that all parties facilitate access for
humanitarian assistance and respect international
humanitarian law. UNICEF Executive Director Fore's
briefing shows that children are the primary victims
of the conflict. As Chair of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, we
eagerly await the report on Yemen and will facilitate
the negotiation of the conclusions on the basis of the
report. We call on Special Envoy Griffiths to ensure
that measures to protect children are at the heart of any
peace process.

Similarly, we would like to urge all parties to
the armed conflict to respect their obligations and
commitments under international human rights law and
to provide the Group of Eminent Experts on Yemen,
established by the Human Rights Council, with their
full cooperation and all the necessary access to enable
an effective and independent investigation.

