Ms. Soderberg (United States): Welcome to the
Secretary-General; it is good to have you here with us
today.

I want to first express a warm sense of thanks and
welcome to the Special Representative, Sergio Vieira
de Mello, first and foremost for being here today, but
also for his tireless leadership of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
His work, together, of course, with that of the East
Timorese, has firmly established the path toward full
independence for East Timor.

I also want to welcome a distinguished, I guess I
can say, "citizen" of East Timor. Jose Ramos-Horta is
here with us today.

During this month of your presidency, we have
had a number of Council discussions about both East
and West Timor. We have expressed horror at the
killing of staff of Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). We expressed
our strong condemnation of the killing of the United
Nations peacekeepers and identified concrete measures
to address the underlying factors that led to those
killings. We have heard briefings from the Government
of Indonesia, and we have decided to send a Security
Council mission to discuss the implementation of
Council resolution 1319 (2000).

For one year we have been expressing concern
about the plight of the East Timorese refugees, and we
have been demanding that the militia be disarmed and
disbanded. It is equally important, as Special
Representative Vieira de Mello suggested in his
briefing and as a range of my Government's officials
have stressed, that those militia leaders who have
committed criminal acts be investigated and put in
jail - not allowed to attend ceremonies, but arrested
immediately so that they can stop being a threat.

There has to be a credible and comprehensive
move against the militia leaders in all of the refugee
camps. This is not a question of persuasion; it is a
question of justice. The United States notes the steps
being taken by the Government of Indonesia that we
have been briefed on, but we remain deeply concerned
that the root causes of the violence remain
unaddressed. Persuasive means are not working. We
are all concerned by reports that some of the weapons
turned over during the persuasive stage of the
Government's campaign against the militias are already
back in militia hands.
We are equally concerned by the less-than-helpful
comments from some Indonesian officials, referring
today to the historic ties between the Indonesian
Armed Forces (TNI) and the militia and saying that
coercive measures would not be taken. We are further
concerned that the police and TNI sweep of the nine
refugee camps yesterday and today reportedly yielded
something less than 20 weapons. Removing weapons
from the camps is vital, but ultimately the key will be
the disbanding of the militias and the arrest of its
leaders. Only such steps will lead to the goal that we
all seek: the cessation of violence - the violence
against Indonesian citizens as well as the violence
against aid workers and particularly our colleagues
within the United Nations system.

It is important to understand that there will be no
security in West Timor until the militias are part of the
past. It is our message to the Indonesian Government
that it is in their interest to take these steps, and we
want to help them achieve those goals.

The United States adamantly supports Madam
Ogata's policy that the UNHCR should not return to
West Timor until the security situation is clearly stable.
The Government of Indonesia has spoken about a
comprehensive refugee plan to be undertaken in
coordination with the international community. While
the United States stands ready to contribute, security
guarantees are essential and are an urgent precursor to
implementing such a programme. It is important to
stress that Indonesia is responsible for the care and
security of those refugees in the interim, and it is time
to hear the details of the refugee return plan.

We welcome Foreign Minister Shihab's plan to
return to the Security Council and to New York on 11
and 12 October to brief us on the progress towards
implementing Security Council resolution 1319 (2000).
We are glad that during that visit Mr. Shihab will set a
date for the Security Council mission to visit
Indonesia, as we also intend to visit East Timor. I
emphasize again that this mission is intended to
support the Government's effort to implement our
resolutions.

Currently, there is an important donor meeting of
the Consultative Group on Indonesia, scheduled for
just a week after Foreign Minister Shihab's visit. The
United States and the international community's
attitude towards the timing and substance of that
meeting will certainly be influenced by the actions of
the Government of Indonesia in the next couple of
weeks.

Sergio Vieira de Mello's briefing reminds us of
the importance of the other half of this story: the
situation in East Timor. We need to pay attention to the
work of UNTAET and ensure that we are supporting it
in all of its important tasks. We particularly welcome
the news that the transitional cabinet, made up of
United Nations and East Timorese officials, is working
effectively. This is not only of vital importance for East
Timor; it is also a remarkable model for future United
Nations cooperation.

The United States supports UNTAET's aggressive
sweeps against militias who have re-entered East Timor
combined with continued efforts at national
reconciliation. We agree that a complete renunciation
of violence is a critical element of reconciliation
efforts. The formula of success is straightforward: zero
tolerance for violence combined with a high level of
openness towards legitimate differences in political
views and transparent accountability in a credible
court, national or international, for serious crimes.

It is unconscionable that no one - not one
person - has been arrested and held for the deaths of
the five United Nations workers, three of our
colleagues from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and two of our
peacekeeper colleagues. We owe it to their families to
ensure that justice is achieved.

Lastly, it is clear that stability is an essential
factor as East Timor and the United Nations move to
meet the benchmarks that Mr. Vieira de Mello
described in our last briefing, on time and in peace.

I would like to conclude by reiterating the strong
support of the United States - and I think of the whole
Council - for Mr. Vieira de Mello and his colleagues
in their work, and through Mr. Vieira de Mello the
wide range of United Nations staff and East Timorese
who are working towards that target. He is making the
United Nations and all of its systems very proud, and I
thank him.

