Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I would like to
congratulate all of the new members of the Security
Council, and Sweden in particular as President of the
Council in the very first month of its mandate and for
organizing today's timely open debate on such an ever-
pressing and current issue.

My statement is fully aligned with that delivered
earlier today by the observer of the European Union.

Today we heard Mr. Antonio Guterres address
the Council for the first time as Secretary-General.
Portugal shares his aspiration for a surge in diplomacy
for peace and supports his vision and priorities. As
the Secretary-General has often emphasized, global
problems require global solutions, and the United
Nations is at the centre of a tremendous multilateral
effort needed to effectively address global terrorism,
climate change, dire humanitarian crises and parallel
movements of migrants and refugees.

The primacy of politics, mediation and prevention
across all stages of conflicts, stronger partnerships,
nationally driven conflict prevention and resolution,
improved United Nations missions on the ground and
enhanced effectiveness, efficiency and accountability
throughout the United Nations system are all goals to
which we remain bound. We all know that human rights
violations are often a warning sign. Human rights and
the protection of civilians, and women and children in
armed conflict, must remind us of our endeavours in

sustaining peace. Sharpening the focus on prevention
also means a sharper focus on inclusiveness, involving
all the relevant actors, communities and stakeholders,
including women, youth, religious leaders and
minority groups.

Preventing the lapse and relapse into conflict must
include both the political and economic empowerment
of women. Peacebuilding and sustaining peace can
emerge only from within societies, which means
national ownership. That often requires assistance in
building national capacities, strengthening domestic
institutions and supporting good governance. The
response to multidimensional and cross-border demands
also requires complementary partnerships of all kinds.
The absence of development puts peace and security
at risk, and the opposite is also true. That is why the
primacy of politics and sustainable development must
be continually mutually reinforcing. In that regard, the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development must be an integral and essential
dimension of sustaining peace. Incorporating a culture
of prevention and sustaining peace system-wide
requires the efforts of all United Nations bodies and
entities across the three pillars and demands close and
proactive institutional cooperation. The United Nations
family will be able to act in a transversal manner in
addressing conflict prevention only if it maximizes
the best synergies among its organs, including in the
framework of Article 99 of the Charter.

Portugal also looks forward to deepened and more
effective cooperation with regional organizations and
with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which
can help to bring a peacebuilding perspective to the
deliberations of the principal organs of the United
Nations. The PBC is also well positioned to offer the
Security Council additional advice and insight.

Strengthening coherence across the United Nations
system and moving from silos to synergies is crucial
to placing prevention at the very heart of the United
Nations. Accordingly, we greatly welcome the decisions
quickly taken by the Secretary-General to increase the
Organization's efficiency and effectiveness. We are
living in a time marred by the largest number of crises
that have both security and humanitarian dimensions,
unprecedented levels of displacement and human
suffering, and it seems natural to demand that the
United Nations do more and better, even if with less.

How can the Security Council support conflict
prevention more effectively? In our View, the Council
already has at its disposal a set of instruments that could
be better used for the purpose, including discussions
with the Secretary-General, horizon-scanning, early
warning informal briefings by the Department of
Political Affairs, Arria Formula meetings involving a
diverse range of actors and stakeholders, interactive
dialogues with regional partners and other United
Nations organs, and regular discussions with troop-
and police-contributing countries. Timely and clear
statements, open debates, country field trips and
demarches by the Council are other tools that could
and should continue to be fully used in support of
preventive diplomacy.

Continued reform of the Council's working
methods, including greater transparency and burden-
sharing among all members, will, in our opinion, also
contribute to enhancing the Council's ability to focus
on conflict and crisis prevention. Effective institutional
cooperation, broad consultation and inclusiveness
could also further contribute to improving the
design of mission mandates. In addition, sustaining
peace will require a more coherent, comprehensive,
flexible and tailor-made approach to peacebuilding
and peacekeeping.

The Security Council has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. However, such responsibility is not exclusive
to the Council; all States must commit to and engage
equally in that responsibility. Clearly, well-designed
mandates, long-term commitments, robust and better-
equipped field operations, more professional and
well-trained peacekeepers and United Nations staff,
greater accountability and transparency must all be
pursued, but they will remain elusive if Member States
collectively do not wholeheartedly embrace a culture of
prevention and engage with the United Nations for an
effectively delivery on the ground.

