Mr. Vujic (Serbia): Regional stability and
the development of all-round cooperation with its
neighbours continue to be foreign policy priorities ofthe
Republic of Serbia. In this regard, my country perceives
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a key bilateral partner in
the pursuit of the policy of reconciliation and regional
cooperation in the Balkans. The Republic of Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina are parts of the same process
of enlargement of and accession to the European Union
(EU), and we welcome and applaud each and every step
forward made by our neighbour in that direction, for we
consider that the strengthening of regional cooperation
in the Western Balkans and South-East Europe in all its
aspects is a beeline to membership of the Union. The
potentials for such cooperation are multiple and many,
all the more so as the policy agendas and visions of
the future of the two countries are interchangeable, and
sometimes even identical.

The Dayton Peace Agreement, which ended the
tragic conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina some 20 years
ago, has been the cornerstone of regional peace and
stability. The Republic of Serbia signed the Agreement
and is one of its guarantors. Abidance by the letter and
spirit of the Agreement is as important today as it has
been all these years. After all, it is only by honouring
the Agreement and scrupulously implementing its
provisions that we can achieve genuine reconciliation,
peace and stability, and, by extension, a better life for
the people in both Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the
Republic of Serbia.

Respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States is among the most important principles
of international law and is a standard feature of
international relations. In a region that had the ill-
fortune of being riven by war, ethnic strife and political
upheaval in its not-so-distant past, such principles and
the future are of particular importance. A next-door
neighbour and partner of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the Republic of Serbia has therefore been staunchly
committed to respecting the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, scrupulously
strengthened and promoted close cooperation and
worked consistently on establishing the bonds of
friendship and building mutual confidence, which
will not only benefit the relations between the two
countries, but will also bring us closer to the family of
European nations: integration and membership of the
European Union.

But not every voyage is always unobstructed plain
sailing. In recent months, political winds lifted the ship
of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina and messages
that we believe belong in the past were sent. Relations
among Bosnia and Herzegovina constituent peoples
and its entities were unnecessarily disrupted and the
constructive approach that we had all come to expect
was not visible. Yet, just as it always has in the past,
the Republic of Serbia made every effort to stabilize
the situation, calm political passions and overcome
differences by agreement, with one all-important
goal in mind - that of maintaining peace, bringing
progress and ensuring a better future for the people of
the Republic of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. It
did so by scrupulously respecting the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of its neighbour and, lest it should
slip the Council's attention, the effort was recognized
far and wide.

Ever since the signing of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, it has been proved time and again that the
best way to address and resolve outstanding internal
issues and the subjects of disagreements among the
constituent peoples and the entities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is though dialogue and agreement. In
my country's opinion, one such issue is the marking
of the Republic of Srpska Day. We therefore support
active dialogue as the best way to find acceptable
and applicable solutions - a dialogue that implies
the readiness of all sides to mutually respect and
understand one another. That is in the best interests of
the people ofBosnia and Herzegovina, and the only way
for the country's integration into larger organizations,
including the European Union.

As an EU candidate country, the Republic of
Serbia has begun the EU membership negotiation
process and undertaken relevant reforms. It considers
them as policy priorities, yet, all the same, it supports
its neighbours in their own activities, in the belief that
they will bring about integration in those countries,
as well as in the entire region of the Western Balkans,
in the European Union. To that end, the Republic of
Serbia welcomes the decision of the European Union
of 20 September to accept the application of Bosnia
and Herzegovina for membership of the European
Union, as well as the agreements reached inside the
country providing for coordination mechanisms within
the process of European integration. We are ready to
intensify our cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina
in a field in which formal conditions exist, including a
relevant memorandum of understanding and an action
plan. Let me point out that ongoing cooperation has
evolved within the framework of regional programmes
financed by the Instrument of Pre-Accession funds.

The Western Balkans has embarked irreversibly
on the road to reconciliation, stability and integration,
and European integration in particular. Yet what
we need now, perhaps more than ever before, is to
build mutual confidence among the three constituent
peoples ofBosnia and Herzegovina and its two entities.
The country is home to a large number of Serbs, and
it is our earnest expectation and hope that they will
cooperate with their compatriot Bosniacs and Croats
ever more closely and intensely. Proceeding from
the Dayton Agreement, Serbia maintains, develops
and deepens transparent relations with the Republic
of Srpska, while all along striving to establish and
expand cooperation with the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina as well. In that context, building
confidence and promoting understanding among the
peoples and entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina are
of paramount importance for their work together and
the taking ofjoint decisions aimed at bringing about a
better life for all of the citizens of that country.

The Republic of Serbia has always worked avidly
on establishing better communications and promoting
political dialogue with Bosnia and Herzegovina,

considering them the basic instruments for the creation
of positive relations between the two countries. To
that end, many State or Government officials from the
Republic of Serbia visited Bosnia and Herzegovina or
played host to their respective counterparts.

On 29 May, the President ofthe Republic of Serbia
attended the summit of the Brdo-Brijuni process in
Sarajevo and the SummithO Business Leaders in
Southeast Europe the day before. During the visit,
the President of the Republic of Serbia reiterated the
importance that the Republic of Serbia attaches to
the promotion of regional cooperation and relations,
particularly with Bosnia and Herzegovina, while the
two sides expressed readiness to prepare an official
visit of the Serbian President to Sarajevo.

On 20 September, speaking in New York alongside
the Mayor of Srebrenica to the panel on reconciliation
in the Western Balkans 20 years after the Dayton
Agreement, organized by the Clinton Foundation, the
Serbian Prime Minister said that we needed each other
and that we had to live together, not beside each other.
The Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia added
that he would otherwise be concerned about the future
of the Western Balkans.

On 25 July, the Speaker of the Parliament of the
Republic of Serbia visited Bosnia and Herzegovina,
while the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Ivica
Dacic', led a Serbian delegation to a ministerial meeting
of the Central European Initiative in Banja Luka on
16 June. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia
and Herzegovina also visited Belgrade on 26 July.

Traditionally, Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
one of the Republic of Serbia's most important foreign
trade partners. Both countries are very interested in
building and rebuilding infrastructure and a bridge
over the Drina River between Ljubovija in Serbia, and
Bratunac in Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the process
of construction, while the work on energy-generating
projects on that river is ongoing. Cooperation between
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina in the field of
joint ventures is also being intensified. A meeting
of the Trilateral Trade Committee of the Republic of
Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Turkey and an
accompanying business forum were held in Ankara on
25 October, and a joint trade and tourist office of the
Republic of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina was
opened in Istanbul on 26 October.

Bringing people together and linking regions
and their economics is the most important task that
the Republic of Serbia has undertaken to promote
in the Western Balkans. I trust and believe that
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the Republic of
Serbia's other neighbours, are agreed that we need
to continue to work on delivering results. We made a
commitment to improve regional cooperation and to
take measures to realize numerous projects, especially
in the fields of infrastructure, transport and energy.
Alongside the commitment of my country to peace,
reconciliation, stability and cooperation, they will
help us strengthen the bonds of friendship and good-
neighbourliness and facilitate our journey to regional
and transregional integration.

