Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Ethiopia is a friend to both
Israelis and Palestinians - we are not bashful about
that, and we display it quite openly. Our position on the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict has always been consistent,
and, we believe principled. As much as we support
the right of Israel to exist in peace and security, we
also support the inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and to exist as a free
and independent State. That is consistent not only
with the relevant United Nations resolutions, but also
with the decisions of our continental organization, the
African Union.

With regard to the recent developments surrounding
the issue of Jerusalem, we had an opportunity to express
our position on the matter during the emergency
meeting of the Security Council held on 8 December
(see S/PV.8128). We believe this is a final status issue
that must be resolved through direct negotiations
between the two parties, on the basis of the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions,
while taking into account the legitimate concerns of
both the Palestinian and the Israeli sides.

The draft resolution (S/2017/1060) put forward
by the delegation of Egypt today reaffirms that long-
standing principle on the part of the United Nations,
which is why we supported it. It was a well-balanced
draft resolution. Although the draft resolution could not
be adopted, there is no denying the fact that the latest
developments have once again brought the Israeli-
Palestine dispute back to the foreground, thereby
underscoring the urgency of reinvigorating the peace
process without any further delay. In that regard, it is
of the utmost urgency to work towards easing tensions
and restoring calm as a matter ofurgency. It is also vital
that the parties tone down the rhetoric and refrain from
taking actions that could further aggravate the already
tense situation.

Above all, however, removing the long-standing
obstacles that have hindered progress so far is
imperative in order to create the necessary conditions
for the resumption of direct negotiations between the
two parties. We believe that should be done on the
basis of the two-State formula, which still remains the
only viable option for peace. That is why we supported
the call for the intensification and acceleration of
international and regional efforts aimed at achieving
a comprehensive, lasting and just solution. Despite the
lack of unity today, it is incumbent upon the Council
to discharge its responsibilities and support such
efforts for the sake of peace between the Israelis and
the Palestinians - and peace in the broader Middle
East region.

