Mr. Annadif (spoke in French): One month ago, on
23 and 24 April, my friend Mr. Kay and I joined the
Council in New York on the occasion of the interactive
dialogue on Somalia. Today, the Council is meeting
to discuss the situation involving our main partner,
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM). Once again the Council has invited us to
participate in the discussion. Allow me to convey, on
behalf of the African Union and the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), sincere thanks for
that privilege and especially for the Council's ongoing
support through the adoption of numerous resolutions,
in particular resolution 2124 (2013) of 12 November
2013.

Concerning UNSOM. and all the United Nations
entities in Somalia in general, it is a pleasure to be
able to tell the Council that our collaboration and that
of all the partners with the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) has been exemplary, as the
Special Representative just said, despite the fact that
the challenges of the situation in Somalia are numerous
and sometimes complex.

Regarding AMISOM, as I informed the Council
on 23 April in New York, the first phase of military
operations was completed on 30 March. The various
logistical problems that existed at the start were dealt
with thanks to our partnership with the United Nations
Support Office for AMISOM. As the Ambassador
just mentioned, simultaneously with those operations
work was also being done in Mogadishu by the Joint
Operations Centre between AMISOM. and the Somalian
Government, and we can say that security in Mogadishu
has improved significantly, despite the persistence of
some suicide attacks, targeted assassinations and the
planting of improvised explosive devices.
In regard to military operations, I should inform
the Council that on 29 and 30 May a meeting to assess
the first phase will be held in Addis Ababa, aimed at
extracting useful lessons and highlighting challenges
to be tackled. Meanwhile, AMISOM. will continue
to keep up the pressure militarily while raising the
people's awareness and organizing them so that they
can defend themselves. Secondly, it will continue to
deploy police in the liberated cities in order to ensure
better security. Thirdly, it will continue to secure the
major supply routes to the liberated cities. Fourthly, as
Mr. Kayjust said, AMISOM. will continue training the
Somali military to enable them to secure rural areas.
Fifthly, the Mission will continue to implement quick-
impact projects,. Lastly, as Mr. Kay also said, the issue
of helicopters remains a crucial expectation for which
we appeal to all partners, particularly the African
Union, to find a solution.

Concerning the Somalian Federal Government, I
firmly agree with the analysis given by the Ambassador
just now, but at AMISOM. we continue to encourage and
assist the Government in appointing local officials to
administer the liberated cities in consultation with the
communities concerned. Secondly, AMISOM. welcomes
the various Visits the Government has organized to the
liberated areas, including that of the Prime Minister
and many of his ministers. But one challenge for the
Somalian Government that still remains is the failure
to pay the Somali military forces' salaries.

The dialogue between the Federal Government and
the various States on the periphery is indeed making
progress. The Addis Ababa agreement has made
progress in Juba, and according to our information, the
process is going well in Baidoa. As for me, yesterday
I was in Garoowe, in Puntland, and AMISOM. is also
pleased with the good relations that are developing
between Mogadishu and Garoowe.

Finally, I wish to inform the Council that the
humanitarian situation is still worrying. Financing for
the special fund for supporting the Somali national
forces remains a concern. To that I should add that the
various partners are requested to stick to the plan for
providing the resources the Somali Government needs
to enable it to carry out its principal task.

In conclusion, I can say that the situation in Somalia
is developing well. There are challenges, but there is
hope, too.

