The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.

At the outset, like others, I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her briefing. We
reiterate our position in support of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and its leadership
in efforts aimed at increasing the protection civilians
and contributing to restoring peace and stability
in South Sudan. I will focus my statement on three
aspects, namely, the humanitarian situation, UNMISS
and the Regional Protection Force (RPF) and the
political process.

As the fighting continues, the humanitarian
situation remains tragic. The people of South Sudan are
paying the highest price for four years ofan inconclusive
man-made conflict. Every day, displacement and
hunger are condemning young people in South Sudan
to seeing their hopes wane and disappear. Instead of
being allowed to study or work to improve their country,
forward-looking men and women of South Sudan are
doomed to die or escape the country, which was not the
promise the newborn South Sudan made to them just
six years ago. It is completely the opposite.

We continue to receive multiple reports of attacks
on humanitarian workers in violation of the Status of
Forces Agreement between South Sudan and UNMISS.
We have also learned that President Kiir has ordered
to remove all obstructions to humanitarian access.
We urge all parties, especially the Government, to be
consistent with this order and fulfil their international
commitments as well.

UNMISS must be allowed to enforce its presence
where civilians need it most, namely, Unity state,
Upper Nile, Bahr el-Ghazal, and Equatoria, In this
regard, the full deployment of the Regional Protection
Force (RPF) cannot be postponed indefinitely. Despite
some recent progress, one year after its establishment,
the RPF has yet to be allowed to fully operate in Juba.

With regard to the political process, we have fully
supported the efforts made by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) to revitalize the
peace agreement. Indeed, the crisis in South Sudan
needs to be seen within the context of the region. Only
with regional guidance can it be genuinely solved.

The outcome of the IGAD preliminary consultations
is a promising starting point for the upcoming high-
level forum. The exercise has so far been inconclusive
as to whether all stakeholders have agreed to participate
in the forum. We commend the regional actors for
their efforts. We also encourage the South Sudanese
stakeholders to invest in the IGAD process in the most
serious manner.

We appreciate the Transitional Government of
National Unity of South Sudan's recent endorsement
of the bill to incorporate the draft Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan into the 2011 Transitional Constitution. We hope
that the Transitional National Legislative Assembly
will responsibly approve the bill by mid-December,
as expected. The Peace and Security Council of the
African Union made clear the potential further course
ofaction, should the IGAD exercise fail or be postponed
owing to the unwillingness to find peaceful solutions
to a situation that gravely affects regional stability. As
one of the Chairs of the IGAD Partners Forum, Italy
will continue to do its part for the success of the high-
level forum and help restore peace in the country.

I resume my functions as President ofthe Council.

I note that all Council members have spoken in the
Chamber, so, with the consent ofthe members, I intend
to adjourn the meeting without proceeding to informal
consultations. There being no objection, the meeting
is adjourned.

The meeting ruse a712.30p.m.
