Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation is pleased to
see you, Sir, in the chair, presiding over this meeting of
the Council. I would like to take this opportunity to
commend the United Kingdom delegation for organizing
this meeting in a very novel format.

I may have taken the advice of the United Kingdom
delegation too well to heart, in that as I have not prepared
any notes. I am supposed to be direct, but I may be
running the risk of not being very articulate on some
matters. I merely jotted down some points after listening
to you, Mr. President, the Secretary-General and those of
my colleagues who have spoken before me. Then I

 

realized that this is an open meeting after all, and what one
says is in a sense official. I will try, nevertheless, on the
basis of my notes to contribute to the discussion.

I agree entirely with what I have heard so far in this
meeting. Many of the points have been made before, but
there are some new angles, which we appreciate very much.
What is needed is more follow-up by us, by the Secretariat
and by the Organization of African Unity (OAU).

What I will do is to raise some questions, even though
some may already have been raised by my colleagues who
preceded me.

My first question is whether there is a sufficient or
adequate flow or exchange of information between the two
organizations. We have discussed this before, but I raise it
again because from time to time some Council members
have the notion that we, the Council, do not know exactly
what Africa wants of us. There is this miscommunication.

Is the Council doing too much or too little? Are we
hanging back from intervening in African affairs or are we
being too intrusive? This has been asked, and the problem
that arises is one of selectivity sometimes perceived by
some members of the Council, particularly the African
members, some Asian members and others. We may feel
that, perhaps because of this miscommunication, there is
this perceived lack of interest - genuine interest - in
African affairs and that the Council is being selective. It
intervenes in some areas, but not in others. Is it because
Africa is too big, because there are too many problems in
Africa - of course, funding is a problem, too - or is it
because the issues have been there for so long and are
unresolved?

These are some of the issues that have been raised and
I think they contribute to this misperception between the
Council and the OAU. I would appreciate it if some of the
questions that I and other friends have raised here could be
responded to by my African colleagues in particular,
because what they say here has an important bearing.

As far as my delegation is concerned, we have no
misunderstanding of this. We think that Africa has sent out
a clear message, although some other members have felt
that the message has not been too clear as to whether the
United Nations is invited in or not invited to the full extent.
We feel that the message has been very clear, but that what
is lacking on the part of the Organization is follow-up and
deep involvement.

Then, of course, there is the question of Somalia and
the perception that, having had its fingers burnt some
years ago, there is a shyness, a reticence, on the part of
the Council to rush back into helping resolve the problem.
From the perspective of Asia, we think that the time has
come for the Council to re-engage in Somalia and other
places in Africa, and that one can only learn from the
lessons of the past. Mistakes have been made, perhaps -
we learn from the mistakes. I think the United Nations
Secretariat has ample documentation on lessons learned
from past mistakes.

As far as Malaysia is concerned, I do not think that
Africa would believe the involvement of the Security
Council to be intrusive or an encroachment into what is
essentially African turf. I raise this question nevertheless
because sometimes, when we talk informally, these issues
have been raised by some of my colleagues. I should
particularly like to belabour the point about selectivity
and double standards. There is a clear such perception by
African countries - and I am sure they would vouch for
that - and certainly from the perspective of Asia there
is such an impression, or perhaps misimpression. I
therefore think it is important for the Council to disabuse
them of this notion that selectivity and double standards
are in fact involved.

I think you, Sir, and others have mentioned the
question of greater interaction between the two
organizations. There have been high-level contacts, of
course, between the Secretaries-General. They meet on a
regular basis; they talk to each other. We have, for
instance, proposed many a time that the Secretary-General
of the OAU come to address our Council. I am sure
Mr. Annan has addressed the OAU, but I think it would
be useful for us to get Mr. Salim to come and participate
in these meetings of the Council to in fact clarify some of
the points that I and others have raised in the process of
our debates here and also in other informal discussions
that we have had.

I think it is important to have an understanding of
the complementarity of functions between the two
organizations. I should like, for instance, to ask the
question: When we farm out certain aspects of either
peacekeeping, peacemaking or the prevention of conflicts
to the OAU, is it a division of labour or is it perceived as
a dereliction of our duties and an abdication of
responsibility? I think these are the questions that could
be discussed here and in future meetings.

 

I have a couple of other questions, but my time is
running out. All I should like to do here is to welcome the
Secretary-General's appointment of our former colleague
and former Permanent Representative of Nigeria,
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, as his Adviser for Special
Assignments in Africa. We believe that, given his long
experience here, including his stint in the Council, he will
contribute tremendously to this greater interaction and
cooperation between the Organization and the OAU. I think
it was a commendable selection by the Secretary-General
and we welcome it.

