Mrs. Natividad (Philippines): Allow me to extend
the Philippines' appreciation to China, which hold the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February, for convening this open debate on a topic that
is most relevant and at the very core of the existence of
the United Nations.

Eight months from today, the United Nations will
mark the seventieth year of its establishment. It was
born out of our collective desire for peace, our mutual
interest to end the scourge of war and our shared goal
to achieve prosperity through peace. With the number
of countries facing crises at a record high and current
conflicts causing the loss of thousands of innocent
lives, the destruction of property and the displacement
of families and putting extraordinary strain on
global resources, it is almost impossible to imagine a
world where no global body exists fully devoted and
committed to maintaining international peace and
security. As former United States President Dwight D.
Eisenhower said in 1961,

"With all its defects, with all the failures that
we can check up against it, the United Nations still
represents man's best-organized hope to substitute
the conference table for the battlefield."

Yet, the United Nations can only be as effective and
useful as its Member States make it. It is therefore
incumbent upon each of us to keep the letter and spirit
of the Charter of the United Nations alive amid new and
persistent challenges.

The Philippines aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement, and by the Permanent
Representative of Austria on behalf of the Group
of Friends on the Rule of Law. The Philippines has
consistently called for the rule of law, as embedded
in the Charter, to be at the forefront of our collective
resolve to achieve peace.

The Philippines believes that the promotion of
global peace primarily starts at home. The international
community has witnessed our unwavering commitment
and tireless efforts to bring about and build peace in the
southern Philippines. We started a long journey towards
achieving lasting peace in that part of the country and,
despite recent setbacks, the Philippine Government,
as well as all the relevant stakeholders in the peace
process, remains steadfastly committed to the goal
of one day seeing a peaceful and prosperous Muslim
Mindanao come to fruition. To step back and reverse all
the progress made is not an option. We are grateful to
the international community and to the United Nations,
which have given their strong support throughout the
whole process, for their continued confidence.

While we settle outstanding issues concerning
the Mindanao peace process, we are facing an equally
challenging task of resolving tensions in our regional
seas. The Philippines has resorted to the rule of law in
trying to resolve those tensions, and believes that the
core instrument for resolving maritime disputes is the
1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS). We have kept the international community
apprised of our position on, and developments in,
the peaceful settlement of disputes in the West
Philippine Sea and the South China Sea, an issue that
is undoubtedly and unquestionably of global concern.
The Philippines has resorted to arbitration to clarify
maritime entitlements and settle maritime disputes
peacefully through UNCLOS. Arbitration is fully
entrenched in Chapter VI, Article 33, of the Charter
of the United Nations, on the pacific settlement of
disputes.

We have called for, and reiterate our call, for a stop
to all reclamation activities in the disputed areas and
the acceleration of talks on a legally binding code of
conduct in the South China Sea. Massive reclamation
is a direct threat to the Philippines and other claimant
States. It should be considered a great concern for all
States, as it threatens the security and overall peace
and stability in the region. Moreover, the massive
reclamation, which is causing widespread destruction of
the region's biodiversity, will also irreparably damage
the entire ecological balance in the West Philippine
Sea and the South China Sea. Such irreversible damage
will have long-term effects on all the peoples across
geopolitical boundaries who have depended on the
sea for their livelihoods for generations. It is equally
incumbent upon us to ensure the safety ofthose peoples,
who have been peacefully, sustainably and legitimately
pursuing their livelihoods in those areas. Those whose
actions endanger the lives of those peoples and those
who do not heed the call for restraint are not being true
to the cause ofpeace.

It is unfortunate that some of us here have forgotten
the horrors of wars, have undertaken actions that
undermine peace and security in our regions and have
rendered meaningless the commitments made in San
Francisco in 1945 to

"practice tolerance and live together in peace
as good neighbours and to unite our strength to
maintain international peace and security".

Amid all the threats to peace that confront us today, the
international community can count on the Philippines
to uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. The United Nations and its Charter
have been, and will continue to be, crucial bastions
for the voices of all countries to be heard on the global
stage.

