Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I am pleased to take the
floor on behalfofthe members ofthe Group ofFriends on
the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict, namely,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, the
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, the United Kingdom,
Uruguay and my own country, Switzerland.

The Group of Friends thanks the Polish presidency
of the Security Council for organizing today's
open debate. We also thank today's briefers for
their statements.

It is of paramount importance that the protection of
civilians be discussed by the Council on a regular basis
to advance full respect for, and the implementation
of, the norms related to the protection of civilians, as
enshrined in international humanitarian law, human
rights law, international refugee law and international
criminal law. The protection of civilians is a key
aspect of the maintenance of peace and security, and
we call on the Council to systematically uphold and
include core protection-of-civilian standards in its
deliberations and decisions consistently and throughout
the Council's agenda.

Doing so is more necessary today than ever. The
latest report (S/2018/462) of the Secretary-General on
the protection of civilians clearly indicates widespread
violations of international humanitarian law and
worrying trends in a number of areas. Indiscriminate
attacks on civilians and civilian objects, including
medical facilities and schools, occur with appalling
frequency in many contemporary conflicts. In some
cases, the wounded and sick, as well as medical
personnel, are intentionally attacked. Detainees are
treated inhumanely, impartial humanitarian actors
continue to face widespread and persistent humanitarian
access constraints and millions of civilians are forced
from their homes into a perilous fate where they face
heightened protection and assistance needs, countless
others are missing, with insufficient attention provided
by States to clarify their fate and inform next of kin of
their whereabouts.

There is a continuing trend of the urbanization of
conflicts, with an acute impact on civilians and civilian
objects, due to the indiscriminate use of weapons in
densely populated areas. Children are often the ones
to suffer the most devastating effects from conflicts,
and that is why unlawful attacks directed against
schools must be condemned in the strongest terms,
while taking note in that regard of the Safe Schools
Declaration. The starvation of the civilian population
and its besiegement are increasingly being used as
methods of warfare. On this last issue, we welcome the
ongoing discussions in the context of the Assembly of
States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court regarding a proposal to amend the
current legal accountability framework.

Recognizing the heavy civilian toll of today's
conflicts should not be to the detriment of highlighting
progress and identifying avenues for action. Let us learn
from the benefits of compliance with the norms and
principles of humankind and from positive examples.
Let us be ambitious with regard to protection. It is
within that context that the Group of Friends would like
to stress the following five priorities.

First, enhancing respect for international humanitarian
law is absolutely crucial. We are all called upon to
ensure respect for international humanitarian law
through the Geneva Conventions relating to the
protection of victims of international armed conflicts.
Armed conflicts are regulated by specific rules, which
include those governing the conduct of hostilities,
providing for humanitarian access and protecting
the wounded and sick, including the provision of
medical care to the enemy. In view of widespread
violations, we call on the Council and Member States
to uphold their responsibilities in that regard, notably
by supporting the Geneva-based intergovernmental
process on strengthening respect for international
humanitarian law.

Secondly, accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law is of paramount
importance to demonstrate to actual or potential
perpetrators that violations do not go unpunished and,
equally important, to deliver justice to victims. We
welcome national-level investigations and prosecutions.
In line with the principle of complementarity, when
such national systems are unable or unwilling to act,
accountability should be ensured through existing
international investigative and judicial mechanisms.
We call on all States to ratify the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and fully cooperate with
the Court.

Thirdly, the implementation of resolution 2286
(2016), on the protection of health care in armed
conflict, must remain a priority. In that regard, we
welcome recent initiatives by Member States and
organizations dedicated to mobilizing political
leadership, encouraging the exchange of good practice
and fostering implementation at all levels, in particular
the establishment in Geneva of an informal group of
support to the resolution.

Fourthly, United Nations peacekeeping operations
and special political missions play a vital role in
supporting the transition from conflict to peace in
some of the most fragile regions in the world, and we
would like to thank all of those who contribute to such
endeavours, especially troop- and police-contributing
countries. The destabilizing effects of such conflicts,
particularly the violence and displacement that they
produce, often leave civilian populations vulnerable
to human rights violations and abuses. Peacekeeping
missions contribute to reducing that threat, and
protection-of-civilians activities, including those
carried out by the civilian component of missions, are
rightly at the heart of their objectives, taking note of the
Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians.

The protection of civilians is a core obligation ofthe
United Nations, but expectations and capability must
converge. We therefore encourage more focused debates
in all bodies responsible for peacekeeping operations,
and we welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General
to mobilize all partners and stakeholders in support of
more effective United Nations peacekeeping, including
through his Action for Peacekeeping initiative.

Fifthly, and finally, there is a need to dedicate
greater attention to the protection of civilians in counter-
terrorism contexts. Counter-terrorism measures taken
by States must always comply with international
humanitarian law, human rights law and international
refugee law. We call on States to ensure that counter-
terrorism legislation and measures do not impede
humanitarian and medical activities or engagement
with all relevant actors, as foreseen by international
humanitarian law. We also call on the Council and other
relevant parties to consistently uphold those principles
and consider ways of strengthening protection in
counter-terrorism contexts.

Today's armed conflicts are, first and foremost,
protection crises. Prevention must remain a priority.
We must follow those avenues for action and build on
the initiatives and practical measures highlighted in
the Secretary-General's report. More must be done to
promote the development of national policy frameworks
on the protection of civilians, engage with non-State
armed groups to enhance the protection of civilians,
facilitate exchanges on good practice and ensure
compliance with the relevant provisions of international
law and accountability for their violation. The Group of
Friends is committed to doing its part and contributing
to global-level advocacy to enhance the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts.

