Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): My delegation would like
to thank you, Sir, for organizing this open meeting to
address the situation in Burundi. Not only has this
situation destabilized the whole country, but its impact
has gone beyond its borders. It is in this context that we
extend our appreciation to Assistant Secretary-General
Ibrahima Fall for the informative briefing provided to us.

The Great Lakes region is besieged by many
problems that require the collective will, efforts and
support of the international community. We are deeply
concerned at the increasing violence and instability in
Burundi. We are also concerned at the plight of the
refugees who are fleeing continuing fighting between the
rebels and Government forces.

It is disheartening to know that innocent civilians are
the main victims of this conflict. They are forced to flee
their homes in search of safety or have been forced into
regroupement camps where humanitarian conditions are
appalling and where there is no adequate shelter or water
supply. Worse still, some of these camps are inaccessible
to humanitarian organizations.

We pay tribute to the late Mwalimu Julius Nyerere
for the leadership he provided and the tireless efforts he
made in bringing the parties to the negotiating table. We
cannot fail to recognize the role played by the United
Republic of Tanzania in the Burundi peace process.

 

Indeed, Tanzania has extended its hospitality to many
Burundian refugees, just as it did to many Namibians
during the days when we were fighting for the
independence of our country. Today, Tanzania, a least
developed country, continues to play host to about 300,000
refugees from Burundi. Tanzania continues to bear this
burden despite meagre resources. We hope that it will
continue to play a positive role in the negotiations.
We encourage the parties in Burundi to continue in
earnest with the negotiations in a bid to find a peaceful
solution to the country's civil strife. We call upon those
who have not been participating to join the process so that
peace can be found for all the people of Burundi. In the
same vein, it is important that the fighting stop, so that all
efforts are concentrated on a negotiated settlement. We very
much regret that it might not be possible for such a
settlement to be reached by the end of the year, but we are
hopeful that this will take place early during the new
millennium. We encourage the parties to resolve the
question of a successor to former President Nyerere, so as
to fill the vacuum caused by his untimely death, allow the
process to move forward and bring an end to the suffering
of the people of Burundi.

Let me emphasize that only inclusion of all the people
of Burundi - irrespective of ethnicity - in the political,
economic and social development process of the country
can bring peace to Burundi. It is up to the people of
Burundi to muster the courage and will to foster mutual
accommodation and acceptance. The international
community can only assist.

We call on the donor community to continue to
support the Arusha negotiations and to provide resources
and assistance for addressing the humanitarian needs of the
population in need of such assistance.

Namibia condemns the killing of two expatriate United
Nations workers in the Rutana province on 12 October this
year, deaths that led to the suspension of United Nations
humanitarian activities. We hope that these activities will
resume as soon as security conditions permit. Furthermore,
it is important that investigations into the killings are
carried out and that the perpetrators are brought to justice.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for having
sent the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs to
Burundi and other countries in and outside the region to
consult with their leaders on the situation in the country and
the United Nations role in helping with the peace process.
We look forward to the outcome of his visit.

