Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.

The delegation of the United States welcomes
Special Envoy Griffiths to the Council. He has taken on
one ofthe world's most difficult diplomatic assignments
and we thank him for it. The United States fully supports
his efforts to find a political solution to the conflict in
Yemen. We especially appreciate that he has quickly
reached out to all of the Yemeni parties involved.
We hope that all parties will engage with the United
Nations without preconditions going forward.

The situation in Yemen is an issue on which it
should be easy for all members of the Security Council
to agree. Yemen is not Syria. We agree that there
needs to be peace in Yemen and that the war has taken
a horrifying toll on the Yemeni people. Government
services, such as schools, hospitals and clean water,
barely exist anymore.

Such chaos is the perfect environment for terrorist
groups, such as Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, to find a safe haven and to plan
attacks that could threaten us all. Finding peace is
urgent. However, pushing for peace also requires that
we do not reward bad behaviour. Iran, and the Houthis
in particular, need a much better understanding of
our seriousness when it comes to their destabilizing
activity. Just because we seek peace does not mean that
we look the other way when they take steps to make the
war even worse.

In order to achieve enduring peace in Yemen, Iran
must end its interference and its violations of the arms
embargo that the Security Council imposed. Last week,
the Houthis launched yet another round of ballistic
missiles at Saudi Arabia. At the end of March, debris
from a Houthi missile attack against the capital of Saudi
Arabia killed a civilian. We warned earlier that it was
only a matter of time before the Houthi attacks caused
civilian casualties in Saudi Arabia. That prediction has
now come true.

With each day that passes, the risk of greater
regional conflict increases. Yet the Security Council has
not acted to hold the Houthis and Iran accountable for
weapons that violate the arms embargo and resolution
2216 (2015). We all went to Washington, DC, to see the
missiles first hand and that the missiles found in Saudi
Arabia had originated in Iran. The independent and
impartial Panel of Experts on Yemen then corroborated
what we showed the Council and affirmed Iran's
non-compliance with resolution 2216 (2015).

The evidence exists and it is strong. The Houthis
did not work out on their own how to build and to fire
ballistic missiles more than 1,000 kilometres to hit the
Saudi capital. Iran is supporting them. Action by the
Security Council to stop the flow of arms to the Houthis
would be a step forward in helping to resolve the war.
The Houthis must realize that if they continue to use
banned weapons of war, the international community
will be united in condemning them. The United States
supports the ability of our Saudi partners to defend
their borders against those threats. In the Council, we
will continue to push for real accountability.

The Houthis show no sign of stopping their missile
launches towards Saudi Arabia. It is imperative that the
Security Council come together to make clear that such
provocations are unacceptable. We hope that all parties,
especially the Houthis, see the arrival of Mr. Griffiths
as an opportunity to start down a new path. The time is
long past for all parties to show flexibility and restraint
in the service of a real negotiated settlement. I suspect
that if we could hear from ordinary Yemenis, they
would send the same message.

The United Nations has emphasized the dire
humanitarian stakes. The bottom line is that 18 million
Yemenis do not know where their next meal will come
from. Something has to change. That is why the United
States emphasizes once again that all parties must
do more to expand access for commercial goods and
humanitarian aid to reach the Yemeni people. We are
doing our part. We funded four mobile cranes for the
port of Al-Hudaydah, which we expect to increase the
flow of goods through the port. The United States also
supports the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism for Yemen as a tool that helps address the
threat of weapons smuggling, while also helping ships
with legitimate cargo to reach Yemen. It is vital that
the port of Hudaydah remain open to commercial and
humanitarian traffic, and we appreciate the steps that
the parties have taken to keep the port functioning.
Beyond reaching the port, aid workers should be able to
move freely throughout the country in order to deliver
the humanitarian assistance to those in need.

The United States has also joined donors in taking
steps to respond to the humanitarian crisis. We have
announced nearly $87 million in humanitarian aid to
Yemen this fiscal year. We applaud Saudi Arabia and
the United Arab Emirates in particular for putting
forward almost $1 billion towards the United Nations
humanitarian response.

As long as the war continues, the parties must be
careful how they plan and carry out attacks so as to
reduce human suffering on the ground. We have called
on all parties to take appropriate measures to mitigate
the risk of civilian casualties and damage to civilian
infrastructure. The United States is working to provide
support to the Saudi-led coalition, while minimizing
the number of civilian casualties. The Houthis must
halt their indiscriminate shelling and ensure that
humanitarian aid is delivered without any diversion or
delays. The war in Yemen is at a critical turning point.
We have a new Envoy, who is ready to promote peace.

The Security Council can take steps to address the
provocations by the Houthis from ballistic missiles, to
promote humanitarian access and to support a return to
talks. Those are the goals that we all ought to share. As
the Security Council, we should therefore not hesitate to
take action to achieve them. That means not being afraid
to identify the Houthis and their Iranian patrons by
name in future resolutions. That means actually leaning
on the parties to negotiate in good faith in the United
Nations process. That means responding generously to
the United Nations humanitarian appeals and standing
by our demands for unfettered humanitarian access. If
we do those things, we can lay the groundwork for an
enduring political settlement.

