Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I am grateful to Under-
Secretary-General Prendergast for his detailed briefing,
covering very clearly the challenges facing the
international community in Afghanistan, including
political, security and humanitarian assistance.

My delegation associates itself fully with the
statement to be made shortly by the Permanent
Representative of Spain on behalf of the European
Union.

It is less than six months since Afghan
representatives achieved the Bonn Agreement. Given
the extraordinary challenges at that point, the Afghan
Interim Authority, under the chairmanship of Hamid
Karzai, has begun well the very difficult work of
coordinating reconstruction, establishing political
institutions and giving voice to many silenced Afghans.

However, there are serious obstacles and tasks
ahead, and there are those who may well continue to
seek to destabilize the Agreement and the institutions it
has established. We must continue to ensure that those
who seek to disrupt the building of durable peace in
Afghanistan do not succeed. For this, the interim
Government must be able to extend its reach
throughout Afghanistan, enhancing its legitimacy and
asserting the need for a viable central authority.

There is positive progress on the emergency loya
jirga process to date. The loya jirga must take place in
a secure atmosphere, without interruption. All actors
must provide maximum assistance to the Interim
Authority and to the United Nations to ensure its
success. There are continued reports from some sectors
that there have been instances of pre-selection and
intimidation. We are very concerned at a possible
political motivation behind the death of a recently
selected delegate in Ghor province.

On a more positive note, while the small number
of female delegates selected at the district level
indicates that progress thus far towards ensuring the
full participation of women in Afghan society will be
slow, we are pleased that at least one woman has
already been selected, through the regional process, to
participate in the final stage of the emergency loya
jirga. Although this may be a single first step forward
at this point in this area, it is an important signal of the
desire for change and progress in Afghanistan, and we
hope that more women will be selected in the coming
days.

The success of the emergency loya jirga, and the
selection of a transitional Government, will mark an
extremely important stage in the implementation of the
Bonn Agreement, and in Afghanistan's transition to a
more representative form of Government. The success
of this process would have a profound impact on the
reconstruction effort already under way in Afghanistan.
It is essential that donors make every effort to disburse
the very generous pledges made at the Tokyo
reconstruction Conference so that the dividend of peace
can clearly be verified by the Afghan people.

Ireland fully supports the draft resolution due to
be adopted today, which will extend the mandate,
without change, of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) for a further six months. ISAF
had an immediate and positive impact in Kabul even
before it had reached its full strength. ISAF's presence
has restored much of Kabul's bustle and energy, and
the stability of Kabul and its surrounds have facilitated
the commencement of the reconstruction effort. The
security situation in other parts of the country remains
considerably more fragile, and, as Under-Secretary-
General Prendergast and others have pointed out, ways
must be found to ensure that the benefits of stability
are not restricted to Kabul and its immediate environs.

We are grateful to the United Kingdom for acting
as lead nation in ISAF over the past six months, and for
the tremendous effort of all ISAF participants, in
ensuring successful deployment and immediate
effectiveness on the ground. We warmly welcome the
decision of Turkey to take over the lead-nation role for
a period of six months.

The extension of the ISAF mandate signals
clearly the international community's continued
engagement in Afghanistan. However, while providing
a secure environment for the reconstruction of
Afghanistan is essential, we must not lose sight of the
fact that Afghanistan is still experiencing a severe
humanitarian crisis. Before reconstruction can go
forward, basic humanitarian needs must be met.

We have reports that a number of key United
Nations agencies, as well as other organizations, are on
the brink of severe funding shortfalls. We cannot now
allow funding shortfalls to place the heroic
achievements of the World Food Programme (WFP)
and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, among others, in jeopardy. The World Food
Programme made extraordinary efforts last autumn and
winter to ensure that famine did not strike in
Afghanistan. Now, the WFP is faced with the
possibility of a break in its food supplies just before
this year's harvest. We urge Member States to disburse
their contributions to these key humanitarian agencies
as soon as possible, so that the achievements to date in
the humanitarian field are not reversed.

Under-Secretary-General Prendergast's report of
refugee-return levels is very heartening. However, we
must bear in mind that that this positive process creates
its own challenges, including in the area of the
humanitarian needs of large numbers of these happily
home-bound Afghan people.

More widely, the effective functioning of the
Afghan Interim Authority and its successor institutions
depends for the foreseeable future on sustained
external support. It is in the interests of the
international community to ensure the stability and
effectiveness of Afghanistan's institutions so that there
is no risk of a return to the vacuum that proved to be so
destructive in the past.

We welcome the news that work is proceeding on
the creation of a Human Rights Commission. We
believe it is essential that this Commission, as well as
the Judicial Commission, be established as rapidly as
possible. We look forward to the outcome of the human
rights workshop to be held over the coming days.

Human rights must continue to be placed at the
forefront of United Nations efforts in Afghanistan.
While there have been strongly positive developments
with regard to the rights of women and girls, very
serious problems remain. We are especially concerned
at reports of abuses against ethnic Pashtuns, which
have continued over a number of months and have
provoked further population flows. It is essential that
ethnic Pashtuns be able to participate fully in the
emergency loya jirga.

Ireland is also greatly concerned by reports of
serious human rights abuses in Shibergan prison. The
conditions in the prison are clearly unacceptable, and it
is essential that those detained there be treated
humanely and be provided with adequate medical care,
pending the rapid resolution of their status.

None of us underestimates the great challenges
that lie ahead as we move towards the reconstruction of
Afghanistan and the establishment, next month, of the
Transitional Government. We have made great strides
in just six months, but we must sustain our
commitment so that our combined commitment and
determination will overcome any reversals that may lie
ahead.

