Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We, too, wish to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Iraq, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his
briefing on the report before us, as well as Ambassador
Khalilzad of the United States for his briefing on the
activities of the Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I).

While we welcome the decrease in the level of
violence in Iraq, my delegation remains concerned that
the security situation there remains precarious. The
Secretary-General reports that there are approximately
90 security incidents a day, which is unacceptable. In
fact, the Secretary-General also cautions that

"mass casualty attacks on civilians, such as the
triple car bombing in Amarah on 12 December
and the series of attacks at the end of December,
are a sobering reminder that those using terrorism
in pursuit of their political aims have no regard
for human rights or human life" (S/2008/I9, para. 68).

We wish to reiterate that any resolution to the
conflict in Iraq has to include an all-inclusive political
process and national reconciliation, as well as
constructive dialogue with all neighbouring States. The
adoption of the Justice and Accountability Law is
welcome as a step towards reconciling different
parties. It is our hope that the Iraqi parties will
continue to find ways to further reconcile. The role of
regional actors cannot be overemphasized, and my
delegation supports efforts aimed at addressing the
violence, internally displaced persons and refugees. We
view positively the series of discussions between Iraq
and all of its neighbours, working in partnership to
ensure stability, security and economic reconstruction
in the region. Regional cooperation is necessary to
ensuring stability not only for Iraq, but for the entire
region as well.

My delegation recently supported the adoption of
resolution 1790 (2007), renewing the mandate of MNF-
I, because the Iraqi Government is of the View that its
continued presence will be necessary for security. We
note the Iraqi Government's expectation that this could
be the final mandate renewal of the MNF-I. Resolution
1790 (2007) also extends the mandate of the
International Advisory and Monitoring Board. South
Africa welcomes that decision, but remains concerned
that repeated findings of serious irregularities with
regard to the disbursement of funds from the
Development Fund for Iraq and the oversight of all oil
sales and contracts have not been acted upon. The
decision to hold a long-overdue meeting of the
Security Council to discuss the findings of the
independent auditors attached to the International
Advisory and Monitoring Board is therefore welcome.

The current mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq in terms of resolution 1770
(2007) is testimony to the international community's
determination to assist the Iraq people to move beyond
the current crisis. My delegation strongly supports an
expanded United Nations role in Iraq, in line with our
commitment to multilateralism and conflict resolution.
The United Nations has a particularly important role to
play with regard to national reconciliation in Iraq. As
the Secretary-General has previously indicated, not
only does the United Nations enjoy good relations with
all parties across the political spectrum in Iraq, but it
also has the advantage of relying on past best practices
gained from operating in other global conflicts.
However, it should be stressed that, with regard to a
more direct role of the United Nations, as resolution
1770 (2007) itself implies, the expanded role foreseen
in the resolution can be realized only as circumstances
permit. The safety of United Nations personnel has to
be an overriding consideration.

We once again reiterate that, notwithstanding the
events that led to the current situation, the Security
Council has a responsibility to ensure that the powers
granted to the Multinational Force are exercised in a

manner consistent with the decisions of the Council,
that Iraq's natural resources and funds in the
Development Fund for Iraq are used for the benefit of
the Iraqi people, and that international law and human
rights are upheld and respected by all parties.

