Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate your
country, Mr. President, on its non-permanent seat on
the Security Council, as well as to congratulate you
on presiding over the work of the Council this month.
I would also like to welcome Ms. Retno Marsudi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, and to
congratulate the State of Palestine on chairing the
Group of 77 and China.

The Israeli occupation forces once again yesterday
committed a series of acts of aggression targeting the
Syrian Arab Republic, using guided missiles that were
fired over Lebanese territory, as just mentioned in
detail by my colleague the representative of Lebanon.
Israel also launched missiles from the occupied
Palestinian territory and Lake Tiberias in the occupied
Syrian Golan to conduct its aggression. Those actions
are in gross violation of international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, as well as the 1974 Disengagement of
Forces Agreement.

Such acts of aggression would not have been
committed if the Security Council had not failed, for
decades, to impose the implementation of its relevant
resolutions regarding the Arab-Israeli conflict, and if
there was not unlimited support for that rogue entity
from certain permanent members of the Security
Council. Such behaviour has encouraged Israel to
continue to repeatedly commit crimes, violations
and State terrorism without even the most nominal
accountability, as demonstrated by the repeated Israeli
aggression committed against my country and Israel's
multifaceted support for terrorist organizations. Such
actions have not been condemned and there have been no
calls by the Security Council to ensure accountability,
owing to the positions of the United States, Britain and
France, which are partners and supporters of Israel and
its aggression.

The policies of those three countries and their
position in the United Nations run counter to the
responsibility that they are supposed to shoulder in
maintaining international peace and security, in line
with international law and the provisions of the Charter.
Those three countries continue to bear false witness
and prevent the Security Council from shouldering its
responsibilities. However, that will not stop us from
exercising our legitimate right to self-defence and
working to regaining the occupied Syrian Golan by all
possible means.

Regaining the occupied Syrian Golan is the
steadfast right of the Syrian Arab Republic and is not
subject to negotiation, waiver or statutory limitation.
The full withdrawal of the Israeli occupying forces and
a return to the border of 4 June 1967 is a commitment
that should be fulfilled. That is an unwavering request
based on the principles of international law and the
resolutions of international legitimacy, including the
Security Council's own resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 497 (1981). Today we heard the Israeli
representative talking about Israel's fevered attempts to
change and alter that fact. He covered every topic except
the Palestinian question and the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Such fevered Israeli attempts to alter the situation,
including its aggressive statements and criminal acts,
are doomed to failure. They will never undermine in
any way the legal or sovereign rights of my country.

Some have invested in the terrorist war that is being
waged against my country and have taken advantage
of the circumstances of certain States in the region to
overshadow Arab rights and stifle calls to implement
resolutions of international legitimacy that call for
the end of the Israeli occupation of the occupied Arab
territories. Some have even tried to gain from the
occupation and promote suspicious deals to invalidate
the Palestinian question and the inalienable rights of
the people and countries of the region. They have tried
to ignite artificial and surreal conflicts among the
countries of the region to divert attention from the real
cause of the situation in the Middle East, namely, the
lack of stability, prosperity and welfare resulting from
the continued Israeli occupation, the Israeli settlements
and Israeli attempts to stifle the Palestinian question.
In recent times we have witnessed dangerous and
systematic practices by means of which the Israeli
occupying forces have attempted to consolidate their
control and impose their will on the occupied Syrian
Golan. For example, Israel convened a meeting of
its Government in the occupied Syrian Golan and
attempted to organize illegitimate local elections there.
It also signed deals and issued permits to plunder the
natural resources of the Golan, including, most recently,
to plunder the property of Syrian people and displace
them to make space for a project to generate wind
energy on about 6,000 acres in the vicinity of the cities
of Majdal Shams, Ein Qiniyye, Bakata and Mas'adah.

Israel has continued its settlement activities, crimes
and daily repressive practices against Syrian citizens
who are living under the yolk of occupation, while
also arbitrarily incarcerating them in Israeli prisons,
as is the case with freedom fighters Sedqi Suleiman
Al-Maqet - known as Syria's Mandela - and Amal
Abu Saleh The occupation has also subjected some to
house arrest. Israeli officials have also repeatedly issued
aggressive statements reaffirming the indifference
of the occupying Power to international law, the
resolutions of the Council and its determination to
continue its occupation.

Unfortunately, all of those facts and their rejection
by our people in the Golan did not grab the attention
of the Special Coordinator, Mr. Mladenov, and were
therefore not included in his monthly briefings to the
Council. Instead, Mr. Mladenov intentionally failed
to call things by their true names. He talked to the
Council about the Alfa and Bravo, sides as if everyone
knows what that means. He should have issued a clear
condemnation of the almost daily Israeli aggression
against the territories of the Syrian Arab Republic,
including the continued aggression against Damascus
International Civil Airport. Such gross disregard
represents a moral and political breach of his mandate,
in a manner contrary to the applicable principles and
rules of the United Nations, and therefore delegitimizes
his work.

Is it not high time for the Council to take the
necessary measures to stop the repeated Israeli attacks
against my country's territories? Or should we attract
the attention of the warmongers of the Council by
exercising our legitimate right to self-defence and
responding to the Israeli aggression against Damascus
International Civil Airport by launching a similar
attack on Tel Aviv Airport?

We are pragmatic. We recognize the different
political stances of Council members. However, we
urge members to focus on our common denominators,
namely, international law, the Charter of the United
Nations and Council resolutions. We therefore stress
the need for the countries that support Israel and its
policies and positions to review such policies, bear in
mind those common denominators and work to restore
legitimate rights to the owners of those rights, in
accordance with resolutions of international legitimacy
and internationally agreed terms of reference.
Otherwise, this international Organization will fail for
the same reasons as the League of Nations did.

Let us all remember that many of the crises suffered
by our countries were due to a violation of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations through the
creation of illegal coalitions, such as those targeting
Iraq, Libya, Yemen, Syria and others, and due to the call
for meetings that transcend the Security Council, such
as the Warsaw meeting and the Middle East Strategic
Alliance, known by intelligence experts as the NATO
of the Middle East. Those are coalitions that transcend
the Security Council. They raise the following
questions. From where do such coalitions and meetings
derive their legitimacy? Are international relations
governed by international law and the Charter of the
United Nations, upon which our founding fathers made
every effort to agree? Are they governed by the will and
destructive agendas of some countries? Are we wrong
to warn the Organization that its fate might be similar
to that of the League of Nations if we do not all take a
stand against the policies of those States? The absence
of United Nations sponsorship for the Warsaw meeting
proves that such an approach will not contribute to
drafting a common strategy on the Middle East, as was
stated by the very organizers of the meeting, who said
that it aimed to forge agreement on a common strategy
to address the situation in the Middle East.

My country stresses its steadfast and principled
position in support ofthe right ofthe Palestinian people
to self-determination and to establish an independent
State covering all their territories, with Jerusalem as
its capital, while guaranteeing the right of refugees to
return in accordance with resolution 194 (III) of 1948.
We reaffirm that any measures aimed at jeopardizing
those rights are invalid and rejected, because they serve
only to escalate tension and threaten peace and security
in the region and the world.

In conclusion, I say to those who are trying to
re-map the area according to their whims that our people
have stood against the unprecedented international
terrorist war imposed upon us. They will continue to
stand against such miserable plans and will ensure
that they fail, just as they have defeated other plans in
past decades.

