Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes you, Madam, and expresses its
satisfaction at seeing you preside over the Council's
work. And we associate ourselves with the thanks
addressed to you for organizing this open Security
Council meeting on children and armed conflict.
Today's debate demonstrates the Security Council's
concern about the situation of children in countries in
conflict, particularly the situation of child soldiers torn
from their communities by warlords who use drugs and
psychological and physical violence to turn them into
fierce soldiers serving causes of which they know
nothing.

To stay within the five minutes given to members
for their statements, I shall confine myself to just some
of our concerns. The full text of my statement will be
made available to delegations.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2003/1053) of 10 November 2003 addressed to the
Security Council and the General Assembly pursuant to
resolution 1460 (2003). The report fully analyses the
question of children in armed conflict. The assessment
of the progress made in protection is particularly
important as a sign of the international community's
awareness of the serious nature of the problem and of
the need to redouble its efforts to eradicate the violence
perpetrated against children. It is clear from this
exhaustive report that the mechanisms for protecting
children in conflicts have been strengthened in recent
years by new elements at the international, regional
and local levels. In that respect, we stress the
obligation on belligerents to scrupulously abide by the
Geneva Conventions on international humanitarian law
and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.

It is good that pursuant to its resolutions in this
area, the Security Council now has a list of groups and
other entities that recruit children and use them in
conflicts. It is now up to the Security Council to take
bold deterrent measures to put an end to the impunity
enjoyed by those guilty of crimes against children.
Here, resolutions 1379 (2001) and 1460 (2003) provide
a good starting point. If the Security Council
announced stricter measures, it would add credibility to
efforts in the area of prevention and would make them
more effective.

As did the Secretary-General, my delegation
underlines the initiatives taken by the Economic
Community of West African States, in particular the
adoption in 2000 of the Accra Declaration and Plan of
Action on War-Affected Children and the measures
subsequently taken in the context of the
implementation of those documents. Nevertheless, the
problem remains crucial in the subregion of West
Africa, which requires active mobilization by the
international community to end the recruitment of child
soldiers, which, unfortunately, continues.

My delegation believes that in order to be
effective the campaign against the abuses and crimes of
war of which conflict-affected children are victims,
must be waged taking into consideration all factors that
incite those abuses. In that respect, my delegation
views as very well founded the identification of the
link between violations of the rights of children and the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
landmines and unexploded ordinance. It is obvious that
the progress that could be made in combating the
proliferation of such weapons could have a real impact
on war-affected children. It is therefore a matter of
urgency that the differences of view preventing the
international community from effectively waging a
campaign against those scourges be overcome. The
ease with which non-State armed groups acquire
weapons is completely incomprehensible and calls for
action by the Security Council, which has the
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security.

Another phenomenon that has emerged alongside
the violation of the rights of children is the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, an area in which
children are being used in horrendous conditions - as
is well known - and are subjected to a multitude of
abuses. The resources illicitly procured in this manner
fuel and indefinitely prolong conflicts. The Security
Council needs the means to put an end to those
practices and to enable the people of the countries
concerned to exploit their own natural resources
peacefully in order to promote their economic and
social development under the political regime of their
choice. My delegation supports all the efforts that that
have and could be made in this area. We hope that the
relevant bodies of the United Nations system will act
immediately on the ground. We are grateful to the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) for the
important work it has done to assist children
everywhere there is a need. We also welcome the
interest non-governmental organizations have shown in
protecting children in conflicts.

It is also important for peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Security Council to be planned in a
way that provides a framework for the recovery of war-
affected children. From that point of view, responding
to the needs of those children should be an essential
component of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. Such an approach would
benefit affected children and the international
community as a whole, because it would make it
possible to facilitate the return of children to normal
civilian life and to replace the culture of violence
inculcated in their minds with a culture of peace.

In conclusion, my delegation believes it is
important that today's discussion lead to concrete
measures on the part of the Security Council to
implement the Secretary-General's recommendations
and the relevant proposals made during this open
meeting. In that respect, my delegation is prepared to
contribute in the coming days to the formulation and
adoption of the draft resolution initiated by the French
delegation.

