Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
at the outset to thank you, Sir, and the delegation of
Mexico for convening this very important meeting. As
has already been said, it falls within the best traditions
of regional approaches and visions in Latin America
since the foundation of the United Nations. This
meeting is taking place at a time of particular
significance for the United Nations and the
international system. It is clear that we need to reflect,
in great depth and with great care, on the features that
we wish the international system to assume in coming
decades.

I also thank my friend the Secretary-General and
former President Gaviria for his briefing to us, which
comprehensively addressed the inter-American security
agenda. He lucidly covered the current threats to our
security, which have been intensified by globalization.
Local issues have become globalized and now involve
international networks of individuals and groups that
are beyond the control of local authorities. The
principal wars we are now fighting include the
struggles against terrorism, which is brutally promoted
by networks that are rapidly becoming international,
and against illegal drug trafficking and consumption,
which destroy both the producer and the consuming
societies. Arms trafficking fuels all these activities.
There are many links between these phenomena, which
feed off one another. Our struggle against them will be
extremely complex.

The role of regional organizations and their work,
in cooperation with the United Nations, are crucial.
Regional and subregional intergovernmental security
mechanisms are extremely important and relevant in
this context. The fruitful work of regional
organizations, such as those represented here, should
be promoted through a dynamic and energetic
relationship with the Security Council in the
framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter. Obviously,
there are clear benefits to close synergy between these
organizations and this Council. The United Nations is a
place where we enjoy legitimacy and can overcome our
fears and apprehensions and undermine the alliances
that militate against cooperation, thus contributing to
the maintenance of international peace and security.

In our region, as Mr. Gaviria has noted, there is a
growing awareness that the fight against these scourges
cannot be separated from the struggle for development.
For example, moral condemnation of terrorism should
not make us forget the basic issue of the roots of that
phenomenon, which are not necessarily the same in all
regions. The foundations of poverty, marginalization,
growing destitution, corruption among political classes
and the loss of value of institutions are all factors that
decisively contribute on our continent to the
development of the plagues of terrorism and drug
trafficking.

As the Secretary General of the Organization of
American States (OAS) has said, the threat in our
region is not a military one. Clearly, then, the solutions
are also not military. It is therefore an important
development that the Organization of American States
has developed democratic covenants and made
intensive efforts to defend democracy and strengthen
institutions in order to protect human rights and foster
legal cooperation in the Americas so that we will be
able to address issues pertaining to good governance
and the fight against corruption. However, I would
once again like to say that it is in the areas of
addressing inequality and providing education, health
care and human dignity that we are still lacking.
Sooner or later, that shortcoming will have a very
decisive effect upon all the issues pertaining to peace
and security in our continent.

I believe that the OAS has recently carried out a
tremendous amount of work in the area of conflict
prevention. We very much look forward to the
upcoming conference to be held in Mexico at which we
will have an opportunity to review the continent-wide
security mechanisms that have served us thus far in
order to make the reforms necessary to be able to
tackle the new challenges confronting our region and
the world. Latin America, the OAS and the inter-
American system are fully aware of their global
responsibilities. We must meet those responsibilities in
our region and in our part of the world by addressing
matters of a global nature. However, we must do so in
the context of our particular characteristics.

Before I conclude, I would like to ask the
Secretary General of the OAU whether he could at
some point tell us about how he views the need to
enhance the synergy between the Security Council and
the OAS. I would also like to ask him to go into further
detail with regard to the basic goals and principles he
expects will be addressed at the special hemispheric
security conference scheduled to take place in Mexico
in May.

