Mr. Liden (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

Acts of piracy are illegal and can never be
tolerated. The ongoing naval operations off the coast of
Somalia have increased maritime security and secured
the delivery of international assistance. The Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia has
facilitated policy cooperation and coordination. In this
framework, we have also managed to establish an
efficient coordination mechanism - the Shared
Awareness and Deconfliction group - among the
multinational, regional and national naval forces
operating in the area. All actors should support existing
coordination efforts.

More can be done besides engaging in
coordinated efforts to protect vessels. We need to
improve our dialogue on maritime issues with the local
Somali communities. Other illegal activities besides
piracy should be acknowledged and discussed.
Collaboration should be encouraged between Somalia
and other countries in the region with more experience
in licensing of fishing and unlicensed fishing. Previous
United Nations studies on Somalia regarding illegal
fishing and illegal dumping should be updated.

We should continue to explore legal options for
suspected pirates who are apprehended. Efficient and
credible trials of suspected pirates are essential to
sustaining the progress made through the ongoing
operations. Kenya has made a very significant
contribution through the transfer agreement with the
European Union regarding prosecution. Kenya has so
far agreed to detain and prosecute 75 suspected pirates
whom the European Union has apprehended. The
European Union appreciates that a similar arrangement
was concluded recently with Seychelles. We support
the decision of the Contact Group to establish a trust
fund in order to support the detention, prosecution and
imprisonment of pirates. Besides the pirates, we must
also take measures to target the criminal networks, not
only in Somalia but also beyond, that finance and
organize piracy.

The European Union continues to contribute
successfully to maritime security in the area through
the naval Operation Atalanta. We have decided to
extend the mandate until the end of 2010 subject to the
decision by the Security Council to extend the
authorization in resolution 1846 (2008). Since
December 2008, Atalanta has provided vital protection
to 50 World Food Programme vessels delivering
roughly 300,000 tons of food to the direct benefit of
1.6 million Somalis. It has also provided protection to
vessels carrying shipments to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and to other vulnerable
vessels. Atalanta has also had a leading role in the
coordination of the different operations in the area.

Piracy off the coast of Somalia can be eradicated
only if the situation on the mainland is stabilized. We
have to address the root causes. Somalia remains a
country in conflict and insecurity is widespread there.
Governance is fragmented. The Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) is constantly under attack from
insurgent groups and has not been able to protect its
citizens or uphold law and order.

The European Union supports the efforts of the
Transitional Federal Government and the ongoing
Djibouti process. The political process has to be
accompanied by a comprehensive and coordinated
approach to achieving a lasting settlement. This
includes covering political, security, development and
humanitarian aspects of the crisis. Clearly articulated
political commitments and priorities on behalf of the
Transitional Federal Government are key to efficient
support. In this regard, we welcome the first steps
taken by the TFG to establish accountable financing
systems.

In July, the European Union decided to step up its
engagement in promoting peace and development in
Somalia. For us, it is essential to support the TFG in its
efforts to increase security and stability in its territory.
Besides ongoing support to AMISOM, the European
Union is therefore considering a possible mission to
contribute to the training of the security forces of the
Transitional Federal Government. We continue to be an
active member of the International Contact Group on
Somalia and to deliver substantial humanitarian and
development aid.

Acts of piracy can have an impact on human life,
the environment and the safety of navigation and of
crew members. In Somalia, piracy can also affect the
delivery of humanitarian aid to 3.8 million people in
need of relief. It is a threat to international commerce,
and ultimately to peace and security in the region. The
regional dimension has been emphasized lately by the
expanding activities of the pirates. It is in the interests
of Somalia, the region and the international community
to address the menace of piracy off the coast of
Somalia. Together, we can do that.

