Mr. Daeic' (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I thank Secretary-
General Guterres and his Special Representative and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, for the
report (S/2018/407) on the work of UNMIK and their
committed engagement to the implementation of the
mandate conferred upon the Mission by the Security
Council under resolution 1244 (1999).

I will be open and straightforward in my statement.
For some time now, while some members ofthe Security
Council have called for decreasing the frequency of
reporting periods and meetings on this topic, others
have proposed a closed format for the meetings. Other
radical ideas that have been put forward have included
that the Mission be terminated and transformed into a
political one. We understand some of those arguments.
The Security Council agenda is congested, and the
crises in Syria and Yemen are incomparable to the
situation in Kosovo and Metohija. Yet I call on Council
members to listen to my arguments and consider them
as well.

The situation in Kosovo and Metohija has
changed since 1999, but it is far from ideal. Clearly,
based on all prior reports, Kosovo is neither the
young democracy or the multi-ethnic society facing
occasional challenges that some purport it to be. The
reports raise very important questions, as does the
situation on the ground. Has genuine reconciliation
among communities occurred in Kosovo and Metohija?
Have the perpetrators of all crimes been punished?
Are the basic human rights of minority communities
respected in Kosovo and Metohija? Have internally
displaced persons been allowed to return? Regrettably,
the answer to all of those questions is "no".

I will discuss the report before us and the events
that took place during the reporting period in due
time. Prior to that, however, I will point out several
important facts that should be borne in mind by all
of those calling for the termination of the Mission or
decreasing the frequency of our meetings.

UNMIK has been present on the ground for
19 years and has done much to change the situation
in Kosovo and Metohija. A great job has been done,
but it has not been completed. A long road has been
traversed since 1999. Much time was needed to bring
the representatives of Belgrade and Pristina to sit at the
same table and begin negotiations.

The first agreements were not easy to achieve, but
they were achieved nonetheless. Although we have
faced substantial problems in the implementation of
the agreements by Pristina from the very beginning,
we continue to believe that the only way to find a long-
term sustainable solution is through dialogue, and that it
must be resumed. I therefore believe that it is a duty and
an obligation of the Security Council to help find such
a solution and normalize the situation in Kosovo and
Metohija, which is - we must not forget - important
for the stability of the entire region as well. Much effort
has been made to stabilize the situation throughout the
past years, and, only if we continue to address all open
questions peacefully, can we expect to normalize the
situation in the province.

We therefore must not allow all our efforts made
thus far to be placed in jeopardy through hasty or
unnecessary actions. That is why I call on members
to look at the broader picture and support our efforts
to arrive at a lasting solution together. Calls for
downsizing UNMIK, reducing its budget, changing
its mandate and reducing the frequency of Security
Council meetings on the subject fall far short of
contributing to the creation of a climate conducive to
the achievement of those goals. They only add to the
existing rifts both among the members of the Security
Council and between Belgrade and Pristina. At this
moment we do not need a back-and-forth on whether
the Security Council should devote three hours every
three months - 12 hours per year - to this topic. What
we need is to implement all agreements without adding
conditions and to find solutions to all unresolved issues
exclusively through dialogue.

Let me say now a few words about the current report
of the Secretary-General and the events that took place
during the reporting period. Those events provide telling
evidence that the situation in Kosovo and Metohija
continues to be unstable and that an international
presence is still very much needed. Members will recall
our shock at the previous meeting (see S/PV.8176) at the
brutal murder of Oliver Ivanovie, the leader of the Civic
Initiative "Freedom, Democracy, Justice" and one of
the most prominent Serbian politicians in Kosovo and
Metohija. The Pristina representatives vowed to leave
no stone unturned until the perpetrators were brought
to justice. The perpetrators have not been brought to
justice. Furthermore, next to nothing is known about
the investigation except that no progress has been
made and that, due to the complexity of the case,
the investigation has been taken over by the Special
Prosecution Office of Kosovo.

Serbians in Kosovo and Metohija were shattered
and deeply concerned by the news of the events that
took place in northern Mitrovica on 26 March, when
the talks under the internal dialogue on Kosovo were
interrupted by a barbaric act committed by members
of the Kosovo special police units. Armed to the
teeth, they conducted a brutal raid on the building,
using naked force against unarmed civilians. The
dangerous, irresponsible and unacceptable behaviour
of the representatives of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government was thrown into sharp relief.
The Director of the Office for Kosovo and Metohija
of the Government of Serbia, Marko Durie, other
Serbian Government officials, as well as Ministers of
the provisional Government of Kosovo and Metohija
from the Serbian community, deputies in the provincial
Parliament and other citizens, 36 in all, were injured
in the raid. One Serb, a Minister of the provincial
Government, was detained in hospital for treatment.

Mr. Duric', the main negotiator on the Serbian side,
was apprehended illegally during the technical dialogue
with Pristina. He was harassed, beaten, handcuffed and
eventually dragged through the streets of Pristina in
an orchestrated display of mob hatred. That was an
unseemly act of humiliation unrecorded in the history
of diplomacy. I hope everyone saw the footage of
how Pristina treats the main negotiator of the Serbian
side. How can Mr. Duric' be expected to sit again at
the negotiating table in the wake of such treatment?
Pristina sought to justify that behaviour by alleging
that the visit of Mr. Duric' had not been approved. That
is absolutely false. Notification of the visit, in line with
the agreement on the arrangement of official visits
made under the auspices of the European Union (EU),
was sent in time. In fact, the notification was sent long
before the deadline provided for by the agreement. EU
representatives are informed in detail about this. It is
difficult to understand that act as anything other than
provocation by Pristina.

The event dealt a serious blow to the dialogue and
undermines the peace and security not only of the Serbs
of Kosovo and Metohija but also of the entire region.
The event provides eloquent proof of the instability
of the situation in the province and of the speed with
which peace and security fall prey to irresponsible and
one-sided acts. We were shocked by what happened
in Kosovo and Metohija on that day, just as we were
disheartened by the absence of a proper response from
the European Union, the facilitator of the dialogue. In
particular, the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo is supposed to oversee the rule of law,
including the conduct of Kosovo police. The Kosovo
Force (KFOR) also turned a blind eye to the actions
of the Kosovo special police units, notwithstanding
prior agreements, according to which it should have
prevented the members of the special police units from
coming to the northern part of the province, which has
a majority Serbian population and which is where the
sad incident occurred.
I would like to recall that I signed the Brussels
Agreement along with Hashim Thaci and Catherine
Ashton. Before the Agreement was signed, we were at
NATO headquarters in Brussels where then-Secretary-
General Rasmussen took responsibility from KFOR to
prevent the entry of any armed forces into a territory
with a majority Serb population without approval. Why
then did this incident happen? Threats and the use of
force must not be tolerated under any circumstances;
they must be clearly and unequivocally condemned by
all the relevant international actors without reserve.
I would also like to recall that Marko Durie came to
Kosovo to talk about the political solution ofthe Kosovo
problem. He did not come to spark an uprising or to do
anything that was contrary to the Brussels dialogue.
Has anyone ever witnessed a diplomatic representative
of any State receiving the kind of treatment observed
in Pristina? This is the Head of the negotiating team
who, several days ago, sat at the table with the other
side, the way Council members are sitting here now.
I invite Council members to imagine how they would
feel if they were paraded in handcuffs through the
streets ofa town and then expected to talk about peace.
It is clear what the intention was. We support the call
in the report of the Secretary-General for a thorough
investigation, with corrective action in case of failures
to uphold human rights.

There should be great concern over Pristina's
aspiration to change and expand the mandate of the so-
called Kosovo Security Force. At a recent meeting in
Skopje, I had an opportunity to hear Boyko Borissov,
the Prime Minister of Bulgaria, who holds the current
EU presidency, ask Hashim Thaci if the incident had
to occur in that way. Serbia responded with restraint.
The aspiration to transform the Kosovo Security Force
into an army should be a cause of great concern. That
would not only be a flagrant violation of resolution
1244 (1999) and the Kumanovo Military Technical
Agreement, it would also be a major step towards
destabilizing the security situation in the province
and the entire region. I would like to recall that the
resolution does not provide for the establishment of
a Kosovar armed force; it does, however, provide for
KFOR as the only legal military force in Kosovo and
Metohija responsible for all aspects of security in the
province. Safeguarding KFOR's status neutrality and
its undiminished presence is of paramount importance
for the realization of its mandate.

Let me point out that the EU and NATO have not
supported Pristina's intentions to establish an army
of Kosovo, and I expect that they will continue to
uphold their position consistently. I would like to draw
the Council's attention to the fact that a number of
countries, EU and NATO members, have accepted the
accreditation of so-called Kosovo military attaches,
in violation of resolution 1244 (1999). The resolution
says that Pristina may not have an army or a ministry
of defence or, for that matter, military attaches. Under
what provisions of the Vienna Convention has this been
allowed to happen? How can military attaches exist
in an entity recognized as a State that does not have
an army?

I would like to recall once again that Serbia
is firmly committed to solving all issues through
dialogue, and that we have demonstrated considerable
political maturity and responsibility in the past year.
Five years ago I personally signed the First Agreement
of Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations
between Belgrade and Pristina, the so-called Brussels
Agreement. As I have already said, the Agreement was
not at all easy to achieve and the obligations assumed
under it were not easy to implement. Yet we implemented
the majority of them, including the most sensitive
political ones, such as the integration of the police
and judiciary. Pristina also assumed its obligations by
signing the Agreement, the most important of which is
the establishment of the community of Serb-majority
municipalities, mentioned in as many as six provisions
of the Agreement.

I emphasize that that is the key part of the
Agreement and the obligation that, despite repeated
calls by the international community, Pristina has not
implemented all these years. As a consequence, instead
of analysing the achievements of the community
over the past five years, we continue to talk about its
establishment even today. The establishment of the
community is of crucial and enormous importance
for Serbia and Kosovo and Metohija Serbs, since it
is designed to protect their vital interests, guarantee
the preservation of their identity and improve their
everyday life in Kosovo. Its establishment is not and
must not be a gesture of goodwill, but a right achieved
and guaranteed by all the signatories to the Brussels
Agreement, including the European Union. It is not
possible to implement agreements selectively and alter
them unilaterally. The community must be established
in accordance with the Brussels Agreement, its
principles and implementation plan.

Statements that may be heard from Pristina's
representatives, such as the most recent one to the
effect that the establishment of the community of Serb-
majority municipalities is contingent upon the granting
of a seat at the United Nations, confirms that Pristina
has no real intention to fulfil its obligations under the
Brussels Agreement and that it is grossly violating
it instead. It is with regret that I note that the Head
of European Union Office in Kosovo has violated its
mandate by expressing her support for the Pristina
platform, in wanton disregard of the Agreement on
which the European Union put its seal. We have
reason to believe that, five years later, Pristina is
being disingenuous by embarking upon that process,
notwithstanding making assertions that measures
will be taken with regard to the community. We are
afraid that that may very well be yet another political
stratagem aimed at reducing international pressure,
rather than genuine readiness to finally comply with
the obligations that Pristina has assumed. It is therefore
necessary that the Security Council calls in unison
today for the establishment of the community of Serb
majority municipalities without delay. Repeated calls to
both parties to fulfil the obligations they have assumed
are inappropriate since one side has already done so
and the other has not.

To ensure compliance with and facilitate the
implementation of the Brussels Agreement, maintain
stability and establish the rule of law in Kosovo and
Metohija, an international presence is essential. In
that regard, the current EULEX competencies must
be maintained. Nonetheless, potential changes must
carried out under the watchful eye of the Security
Council. It must be borne in mind that such changes
would affect the work of other missions and that they
too must change if they are to continue to function
unencumbered. However, the transfer of EULEX
competencies to the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government in Pristina would bring about a loss of
the status neutrality of the Mission and underscore the
phony statehood of Kosovo.

It would be remiss of me today not to mention
the 200,000 Serbs and non-Albanians who have been
expelled and the great number churches, monasteries
and cultural and historical monuments that have
been burned or destroyed. The report reveals that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees recorded three voluntary returns in the
three-month reporting period. Council members heard
that right - three internally displaced persons in
three months out of the more than 200,000 expelled.
Does the Council believe that that number is enough
and that the international community should give up
and stop creating conditions in Kosovo and Metohija
to make it possible for internally displaced persons to
return and realize their rights? That is the minimum
we owe to all those who could not return to their homes
in Kosovo and Metohija. Is the fact that only 1.9 per
cent of internally displaced persons have achieved
sustainable returns not a strong enough argument in
favour of the continuation of UNMIK activities and of
its strengthening?

The recent arbitrary arrests at the Jarinje crossing
provide ample evidence of the violence the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government resort to and Pristina's
lack of willingness to promote genuine democracy,
the rule of law and respect for basic human rights
and fundamental freedoms. Most often, secret lists,
compiled mainly on the basis of false reports and
fabricated evidence, are used to make those arrests.
They are aimed at creating insecurity and fear among
the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija, affect their freedom
of movement and discourage the return of internally
displaced persons. The number of returnees can hardly
be expected to increase unless systemic solutions are
introduced to address the problems that plague them
every day, which make for a long and woeful list
indeed. In addition to arbitrary arrests, they include
institutional discrimination, intimidation, failure to
sanction national and religious hatred and ethnically
motivated violence, personal and property insecurity
and an absence of the rule of law.

I reiterate that the crimes committed in Kosovo
and Metohija must not go unpunished. The process
of confronting the truth is the first step towards
reconciliation, but it is necessary that all those who
committed crimes be made to account for them. For its
part, Serbia has made significant steps in that direction.
Conversely, the perpetrators of crimes against Serbs
and non-Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija have not
been punished, even 19 years later. Positions occupied
by some individuals in the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government cannot and must not obstruct
the pursuit of justice. It is a matter of grave concern
for us that no indictment has yet been brought in the
Specialist Chambers for crimes committed by the
Kosovo Liberation Army and that the beginning of the
work ofthe Chambers continues to be postponed. In his
reflections on his time as Specialist Prosecutor, David
Schwendiman summed up that concern well.

"Haste is no friend of justice, but neither is
unreasonable delay. The further things get from
when crimes were committed, the less credible
efforts to address them are going to seem and the
weaker the perception of their efforts as legitimate
is going to be".

In upholding its laws, in full alignment with
international law, Serbia will not desist from
prosecuting persons for whom there is evidence that
they have committed the criminal offence of war
crimes against the civilian population in Kosovo and
Metohija. The recent decision of INTERPOL to reissue
notices for a number of individuals charged with the
commission of crimes in Kosovo and Metohija is very
important in that regard.

Serbia protects its national and State interests
while fully respecting the tenets of international law,
including, primarily, the principles of sovereignty and
territorial integrity. It will continue to use all diplomatic
means against Pristina's secessionist attempts, which
set a dangerous precedent already embraced, as we
have seen, by separatist movements in other parts of
the world. I am convinced that if perchance found in
Serbia's situation, none of the members of the Council
would act differently. All of Serbia's endeavours
reflect efforts to protect its sovereignty and territorial
integrity and, ipso facto, the authority of international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and the legally
binding resolution 1244 (1999), which guarantees its
territorial integrity and sovereignty and underlines the
unacceptability of unilateralism as a way of resolving
international relations issues. I would also like to
mention that for some time now we have been borne
witness to Pristina's attempts to join international
organizations - the most recent have been its
applications to UNESCO, INTERPOL and the World
Customs Organization. Such attempts run counter to the
basic principles of international law and unnecessarily
politicize the work of those organizations.

In conclusion, I would like to thank all countries
that have not recognized the unilateral declaration of
independence ofKosovo for their consistent support and
principled respect of the Charter of the United Nations
and resolution 1244 (1999), as well as those that have
withdrawn recognition or are considering it. I would
like to inform the Council that Suriname and Burundi
have revoked their recognition of Kosovo. I would also
like to advise the members of the Security Council
who protest the withdrawals that their protests are not
contributing to the quest for an efficient and effective
solution to the problem. Unconditional support for one
side is not a way to achieve compromise. We treat all
Members of this Organization as friends and partners.
Reciprocal treatment, including greater understanding
of our position and arguments, would be welcome and
is expected.

We were on the same side during both World Wars.
On 28 July we will mark 100 years since the Serbian
flag was first flown on the White House and all public
buildings in the United States on the order of then
President Woodrow Wilson to honour the enormous
suffering of the Serbian people in the First World War.
French President Macron is expected to visit Serbia
this year. Along with President Vueic', he will unveil
the renovated Monument of Gratitude to France, which
was built to honour the historic alliance in the First
World War. A summit of the European Union and the
Western Balkans on the European future of our region
will be held in London in July. Serbia wants to find
common interests with Western countries. I hope that
everyone knows that there can be no lasting peace and
stability in the Balkans or in Europe without respect for
the interests of Serbia and the Serbian people, as it is
the largest State and largest nation in that region.

Serbia's policy is one of peace and economic links
and prosperity. I therefore call on all of members once
again to focus on seeking a compromise and sustainable
solution to this decades-long problem, so that the entire
Western Balkans may become a region of lasting peace,
stability, security and mutual trust.

