Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I thank
you, Madam President, for having organized today's
meeting. I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his
comprehensive briefing. I also thank Ambassador
Antonio de Aguiar Patriota and Administrator Helen
Clark, who provided value-added insights from the
Peacebuilding Commission and the United Nations
Development Programme, respectively.

The issue of post-conflict peacebuilding is
multifaceted and covers a wide range of interconnected
values that the United Nations has pursued. If it were
not for the effective condition of the entire United
Nations system and beyond, the task of peacebuilding
in the immediate aftermath of conflict would remain
difficult. We hope that today's discussion can be
another step forward towards the solidification of our
shared strategy for peacebuilding in which the role of
women is sufficiently taken into consideration.

As today's briefers stressed, the success of
peacebuilding depends on the implementation of key
priorities, such as inclusivity, institution-building,
sustainable support and mutual accountability, with
a horizontal focus on gender mainstreaming. Today I
would like to address the challenges we face and ways
to overcome those impediments to achieve progress in
peacebuilding.

First, we have seen that it is often difficult to
incorporate inclusivity into local political culture.
Winner-take-all politics and the alienation of minorities
undermine hard-won yet still fragile stability and even
lead to relapses into conflict. Empirical evidence shows
that if a Government fails to address social grievances,
the international community loses confidence and
becomes reluctant to translate their development
partnership into action, which is crucial to take on
the root causes of conflicts. Social cohesion through
reconciliation should be the basis for early stabilization
as well as for long-term prosperity. In that context,
we would like to underline that women can play an
important role in ensuring social cohesion and political
legitimacy.

Secondly, delays in institution-building threaten
the credibility of newly established authorities in post-
conflict situations, as illustrated by the case of the
Central African Republic. Providing basic services is
critical to achieve stability and to discourage people
from taking the law into their own hands.

We believe that scarce resources can be better
utilized through effective coordination among the
relevant organizations operating in the same areas.
Similar tasks performed by each organization need
to be streamlined and rearranged according to
their respective comparative advantages under the
"delivering as one" perspective. The role of the United
Nations Development Programme can be strengthened
in terms of the division of labour in relation to political
and peacekeeping missions. The coordination efforts
between the United Nations and the World Bank for the
security and development of the Great Lakes region and
the Sahel are commendable examples.

Thirdly, interactive cooperation between the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the Security
Council has yet to reach its full potential. In order to
create synergy, both bodies should be interdependent,
not just out of principle but based on mutual needs.
Both sides need to make more efforts. The PBC and
its country-specific configurations should be able
to provide value-added consultations to the Security
Council, while the latter could be more engaged and
provide enhanced feedback.

For a response tailored to meet each country's
unique historical and social challenges, the Council
needs to take better advantage of country-specific
configurations. In particular, we hope that the PBC
configuration for the Central African Republic, under the
new leadership of Morocco, will strengthen cooperation with
the United Nations field-based mission, beginning with the
preparation process, taking into consideration the possible
dispatch of Blue Helmets.

Fourthly, the Secretary-General's seven-point
action plan on gender-responsive peacebuilding should
be strenuously maintained. Women are too often
victimized in conflict areas, and their role is still
regarded as secondary, not only in peacebuilding but in
the general process of development. The role of women
could be maximized if and when Governments and the
international community continue to systematically
empower women. We long for the day when women
will no longer need quotas to fulfil their full potential,
as witnessed in many countries across the globe.

Lastly, we would like to briefly mention the
Republic of Korea's participation in efforts aimed at
the peacebuilding process. In addition to the financial
contribution to the Peacebuilding Fund and the United
Nations Civilian Capacities Initiative, the Republic
of Korea will continue to explore ways to provide
value-added contributions under our shared vision.

