Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to commend the delegation of Japan for holding
this important open debate and for submitting a concept
note (S/2017/1016) on the topic. We are also grateful to
the Secretary-General for his statement.

The concept note raises a fundamental question as
to how the Security Council can better address today's
complex contemporary threats to international peace
and security in a holistic and comprehensive manner.
As the Secretary-General points out in his most recent
annual report on the work of the Organization:

"The United Nations was established to prevent
war and human suffering by binding us together
through a common rule-based international order.
Today that order is laden with contradictory trends,
and a clear assessment must be made ifwe are going
to address these challenges effectively."(A/72/I, para. 2)

The objective of ensuring a peaceful, just and
prosperous world is hardly achievable if the universally
recognized fundamental values, norms and principles
are overtly disregarded or misinterpreted, conditioned
and implemented with reservations in order to
whitewash aggressions and other illegal actions. At a
time of increased brutality of armed conflicts, with the
highest level of forced displacement, growing terrorist
and separatist threats, attempts to inculcate enmity and
hatred and instigate wars, more concerted actions and
synergy are required at all levels to end the conflicts
of today and direct greater attention to preventing the
conflicts of tomorrow.
Azerbaijan fully supports the Secretary-General's
determination to genuinely contribute to preventing
wars and sustaining peace and his efforts to conduct
the reform process. We welcome the adoption by the
General Assembly earlier today of resolution 72/199, on
restructuring of the United Nations peace and security
architecture, as an important step forward in further
strengthening the role, capacity, effectiveness and
efficiency of the Organization.

First and foremost, all States must strictly comply
with their international obligations, particularly those
relating to respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States and inviolability of their international
borders. Those fundamental principles are constituents
of the common rule-based international order; they
are universally binding and apply to all situations
and conflicts, whatever their distinct root causes and
nature. Peace and good-neighbourly relations, based
on full respect for the aforementioned principles, are
necessary prerequisites for economic cooperation. In the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Heads
of State and Government and High Representatives
stated, in particular, that there could be no sustainable
development without peace and no peace without
sustainable development.

Special attention should be given to the
implementation of resolutions adopted by the principal
organs of the United Nations, in particular those

relating to the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution. Needless to say, the lack of
proper attention of the Security Council to the apparent
disregard ofits resolutions containing binding demands
cannot constitute an accepted practice of the Council's
working methods. It is intolerable that armed aggression
against sovereign States, the resulting military
occupation of their territories and deliberate actions
aimed at changing their demographic composition
and cultural character of the seized areas along racial,
ethnic or religious lines continue, notwithstanding the
Security Council resolutions.

It is obvious that no peace settlement can be
reached that is inconsistent with international law. It is
important that conflict prevention efforts and conflict
settlement frameworks and mechanisms not be used as
a tool for entrenching the situations achieved as a result
of the unlawful use of force, war crimes, crimes against
humanity, acts of genocide and ethnic cleansing. The
fact that illegal situations continue because of political
circumstances does not mean that they are thereby
rendered legal or can go on forever.
Serious breaches should give rise to special
consequences, which include, inter alia, duties of States
to cooperate in order to bring to an end a serious breach
by lawful means, not to recognize as lawful a situation
created by such a breach, nor render aid or assistance
in maintaining that situation. Furthermore, apart from
preventive diplomacy efforts and the expeditious
peaceful settlement of disputes and conflicts, the most
effective deterrent is, undoubtedly, ensuring a speedy
end to impunity.

Azerbaijan's consistent position with regard to the
topic under consideration is well known and derives
from its practical experience of facing continued armed
aggression, foreign military occupation and ethnic
cleansing and from its keen interest in contributing
to the achievement of sustainable peace in our region
and worldwide.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that, in
order to better address today's complex contemporary
threats to international peace and security and ensure
the effectiveness of commonly agreed strategies to that
end, we should, first and foremost, uphold fundamental
principles and adhere to the uniform application of
international law.

