Mr. Hallergard: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank the Venezuelan presidency of
the Security Council for organizing this timely open
debate on the review of the peacebuilding architecture
and for providing the Council and the United Nations
as a whole with this opportunity to reflect on ways to
improve and strengthen the performance and impact
of the peacebuilding architecture. Allow me also to
thank Ambassador Kamau, Ambassador Skoog and
Ambassador Rosenthal for their valuable briefings.

The European Union reiterates the great importance
it attaches to an ambitious outcome of the review and
will continue to be actively engaged in the process.
We fully subscribe to the conclusions of the report
(see S/2015/490) of the Advisory Group of Experts on
the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture that a
change in mindset is needed. Peacebuilding is no longer
to be seen as a post-conflict activity, as the challenge
of sustaining peace covers the complete cycle of our
engagement. Given the recurrent nature of violent
conflict, sustaining peace equals conflict prevention in
many cases.

Once again, we would like to underscore the
utmost importance of linking the peacebuilding review
to the Secretary-General's review of peace operations,
the review of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, and the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1), including the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda on financing for sustainable
development. Linking the recommendations of those
crucial reviews and processes should help to ensure
maximum coherence in United Nations actions. In that
regard, we welcome the high-level thematic debate to be
held by the President of the General Assembly in May,
as well as the invitation on the part of the Economic
and Social Council to pursue its cooperation with the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which should take
into account the follow-up and review processes for
the 2030 Agenda, including the role of the High-level
Political Forum on Sustainable Development.

Peacebuilding was conceived in order to address the
gap between security and development in fragile post-
conflict countries. A basic premise is that peacebuilding
should be carried out at the country level and always
adjusted to the specific country context. To be truly
effective in its response in fragile States, the United
Nations system needs to work in a more integrated,
flexible and coordinated fashion, at both the country
and the Headquarters levels, and give more weight to
prevention and early-warning tools. There are already
good examples of strengthened cooperation between
United Nations entities in the field of peacebuilding
and conflict prevention, in particular through the
joint United Nations Development Programme/
Department of Political Affairs programme on building
national capacities for conflict prevention. Lessons
and experiences from that programme could offer an
opportunity for useful reflection on a more integrated
and flexible United Nations approach to peacebuilding.

Peacebuilding is an inherently political process that
should be carried out on the basis of a long-term vision
and a holistic approach. It should address the structural
causes of conflict as well as the contemporary risks
of recurrence, provide for inclusive and participatory
political processes, build strong and effective
institutions capable of addressing the root causes of
conflict and be responsive to people's needs. It should
promote inclusive national ownership on the part of the
Government, the opposition and civil society, using a
bottom-up approach.
Special attention should be paid to vulnerable
or excluded groups, including ethnic or religious
minorities, political opposition groups, youth and other
segments of society that are at particular risk. The
role of women in peace consolidation should be given
particular attention, in terms of both participation
and representation, taking into account the principles
outlined in the 2030 Agenda and resolution 1325 (2000).
That is important, both in its own right and because
we know that by doing so we increase the chances of
sustaining peace. The human rights dimension should,
in general, be integrated into peacebuilding, both as
an overall objective and as an important early-warning
tool.

In addition, the analytical capacities of the
Peacebuilding Commission should be strengthened in
order to better monitor ongoing activities and assess
the impact of the international efforts on the ground.
The cooperation of the PBC with the authorities of
the host State is important with the aim of promoting
national ownership of the peacebuilding efforts and the
transfer of responsibilities from United Nations actors
to national authorities.

The PBC's greatest comparative advantage is its
convening power: the ability to call to task a large
number of Member States, regional and subregional
organizations and help reconcile their approaches.
But its ability to deliver this political added value is
hampered by a number of factors. Some country-
specific configurations of the PBC have taken a more
flexible and politically attuned approach, and lessons
should be learned from these experiences. Different,
especially lighter, modes of engagement for the PBC
should be envisaged.

With regard to securing more predictable financing
for peacebuilding, the EU believes it is important to
address the silo approach of the donor community. The
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) has achieved significant
results, but the PBF is a small-scale strategic fund that
has to be followed and complemented by longer-term
commitments from other financing sources, which may
be bilateral or multilateral, including multilateral and
regional development banks. For its part, the EU has
already engaged in joint funding for peacebuilding
projects via our Instrument contributing to Stability
and Peace, and further opportunities for joint funding
should be explored.

The EU is keen to work in increasing partnership
with the United Nations, including on the ground. The
EU and the United Nations are as development actors
collaborating closely in the field and are also engaged
in a dialogue on conflict prevention that should be
built on to further identify comparative advantages
and opportunities for partnership. This includes raising
the importance of prevention and early warning on
the political agenda, including through international
networks such as the International Dialogue on
Peacebuilding and State-building.

In addition, the EU and the United Nations have
built a strong and continuously evolving partnership
in crisis management. EU Common Security and
Defence Policy (CSDP) missions, such as the European
Union military mission to contribute to the training
of the Malian Armed Forces, the European Union
Capacity Building Mission in Mali and the European
Union CSDP Military Advisory Mission in the Central
African Republic, focusing on security-sector reform
and capacity-building, contribute to peacebuilding
processes in a complementary way to United Nations
peace operations.

More generally, in the context of its comprehensive
approach to external conflict and crises, which aims
to enhance the coherence, effectiveness and impact of
the EU's policy and action, the European Union seeks
to develop close coordination with the relevant United
Nations entities on the ground. This is in particular
the case already for peacebuilding or State-building
projects such as support for accountability mechanisms,
the criminal justice chain and community policing. A
shared conflict analysis is a good starting point for
such cooperation.

Close strategic and operational partnerships
between the United Nations and international, regional
and subregional organizations and international
financial institutions are also required in order to address
the challenge of sustaining peace. The EU believes that
this should be part of an ongoing dialogue between the
United and those organizations and go beyond holding
annual dialogues or high-level working meetings.

We look forward to the review producing bold,
concrete and focused outcomes to improve the
architecture so as to ensure effective, well-coordinated
and complementary peacebuilding efforts throughout
the United Nations system.

