Mr. Makharoblishvili (Georgia): I promise that I
will be brief in my comments. Georgia welcomes this
open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I take this opportunity to commend the
efforts of the delegation of the Republic of Korea in
convening this important meeting. Furthermore, we
warmly welcome Mr. Kim Sung-hwan, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Republic of Korea,
and other ministers, as well as Ms. Navanethem Pillay
and the representative of the International Committee
of the Red Cross. Their attendance and statements
have undoubtedly contributed to our constructive and
comprehensive deliberations today.

Georgia fully associates itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union.
Nevertheless, I would like to add some comments in
my national capacity.

More than 10 years have passed since the Security
Council convened its initial open debate on the issue
(see S/PV.3977), yet armed conflict still affects
millions of people, depriving them of the necessities
of substistence and their basic human rights. Such
developments urgently call for an increased effort
from the United Nations community to protect affected
populations at international, regional and national
levels.

Unfortunately my country has not been spared
the effects of armed conflict. Throughout the years,
despite serious concerns raised by relevant United
Nations agencies, hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons and refugees remain deprived of
the internationally recognized right to return to their
homes - a right which has been reaffirmed numerous
times by the community of nations. Despite the efforts
of the Government of Georgia to ease the burden of the
displaced where they currently reside, the failure of all
actors to recognize the inherent right to return is an
open challenge to the international rights framework. It
requires our close attention and timely resolution.

The good efforts of the co-chairs of the international
discussions in Geneva, including the representative of
the Secretary-General, Ambassador Antti Turunen,
and other facilitators from the United Nations family to
remedy the situation have been repeatedly frustrated.
They require the continued moral, political and practical
support of this body.

Yet another vital issue is the international
community's ability to assess the human rights
situation in areas where official authorities are unable
to exercise their sovereign rights and that are under the
effective military and or civilian control of other actors.
In such situations, international human rights and
humanitarian law are based on mutual complementarity
and prescribe a minimum threshold level of protection
of the civilian population. To comply with human rights
and humanitarian law requirements, a concerned party
shall provide such protection and guarantee the effective
legal remedy in every individual case of infringement.

Safe and unhindered access for humanitarian
actors to people in need of protection and assistance
is another important element. It is imperative that
populations residing in conflict-affected areas be
provided with unhindered humanitarian aid and that
relevant international actors be allowed to carry out
their activities.

One of the purposes of today's debate is to further
engage the international community in addressing
all relevant challenges. Here, I would underline that
Georgia fully supports and encourages the continued
efforts of the international community in transforming
the protection of civilians into a reality for all those
who are caught up in conflict.

