Mr. Niyonzima (Burundi) (spoke in French): I
should like, on behalf of the Government of Burundi
and on my own behalf, to convey the warm thanks of
His Excellency Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, President of
the Republic, and the entire Burundian people to the
Security Council and the international community for
the broad range of support that we have enjoyed in our
struggle to put our country back on the track of peace
and stability.

Not long ago, Belgium had been without a
Government for over a year. Despite the absence of
governmental authority, peace and security prevailed
and the Belgians continued to go about their business as
if nothing had happened. In Burundi, like in many poor
countries, a 24-hour power vacuum may be enough
to spawn criminal acts ranging from simple acts of
vengence to inter-community confrontation.

If peace and security prevailed in Belgium in the
absence ofa Government, it is not because Belgians are
naturally more inclined to come together in fellowship.
Burundians are equally so inclined. That is an inherent
part of human nature. The explanation is simply that
the Belgians are free from worries of subsistence; they
have enough to eat, to keep themselves warm and to
dress themselves. They have access to health care. They
have access to drinking water. Burundi does not have
the minimum necessary to sustain life; it lives below
the poverty line.

The example of Belgium is sufficient to show that
the quality of governance is not a factor in ensuring
peace and security. Without the bare minimum for
subsistence, everything we do and everything we say is
irrelevant. The French say that a hungry stomach has no
ears. Let us discuss the good governance that is so dear
to Burundi's many partners, because it is not an empty
word in Burundi and is central to all Government
action.

Since the beginning of the implementation of
the peacebuilding programme in Burundi in 2007,
significant progress has been registered in almost all
socioeconomic and political areas, including peace and
security, the disarmament of the civilian population, the
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants,
the repatriation and resettlement of refugees, good
political and economic governance, the strengthening
of the rule of law and justice, the promotion of human
rights, national reconciliation and the fight against
impunity. Significant progress has been made in
particular within the new defence and security forces,
whose efficiency and professionalism have been placed
at the service of other countries in difficulty, such as
Somalia, Cote d'Ivoire, Haiti, Darfur, and soon Mali.

In the political field, significant progress has been
seen in the consolidation of democracy and the resolution
ofpolitical disputes through dialogue. It is in this context
that, with the assistance of the United Nations Office in
Burundi, workshops were recently held for Burundian
political actors, including those who were previously
in exile, aimed at strengthening institutional capacity.
These meetings gave participants the opportunity to
engage in consensual and constructive debate on the
arrangements for establishing the electoral code and a
road map that will lead to the very smooth holding of
elections in 2015.

The press law and the work of the Commission des
terres et autres bien endured negative media coverage,
but the Government is determined to continue its
efforts to promote justice, equality and peace. The
achievements of the Government are many and well
known to the international community, which has
heaped continual praise on the Government and cited
Burundi as an example of successful peacebuilding.

In recognition of our efforts, the international
community has pledged financial support to Burundi
totaling $2.6 billion in funding for the strategic
framework for the fight against poverty. Unfortunately,
this support has been slow in coming, and extreme
poverty has begun to create tensions in Burundi. With
only 46 per cent of pledged support yet to be delivered,
our partners have responded not with checks but by
signing disbursement agreements with the Government.

In Burundi, poverty has become so dire that life
has lost the meaning embodied in certain values, such
as work and participation in the building of society.
Living has become synonymous with not dying, and
each passing day becomes a victory over hunger and
death. The spring is too tightly wound.

The Government has made great efforts, but it
is exhausted and drained of the creativity and the
inspiration for making pronouncements that unite and
stabilize. Yesterday it was the doctors and medical
personnel who were on strike; today it is the teachers;
and tomorrow, it may be the police and the army. And
if the people do not follow the movement, despite the
numerous appeals made by union leaders, it is neither
because they are angels nor because of the creative
genius of the political class. It is merely because of the
contrast between the suffering caused by hunger and
that imposed by 40 years of military dictatorships.
Yes, we trust in the patience of the population, but for
how long? How long will it take hunger and poverty to
become the norms in Burundi?

Poverty in Burundi has become a security issue.
The Government asks that the Security Council treat
it as such, and quickly. Specifically, the Government
asks the Council to intercede on behalf of Burundi
so that the promises made to the people of Burundi
at Geneva are realized. For its part, the Government
of Burundi reiterates its commitment to pursuing the
reforms under way to rebuild and develop the country
in order to achieve the well-being that the Burundian
people deserve.

I should like to conclude my statement by sincerely
thanking Special Representative of the Secretary
General Parfait Onanga-Anyanga and Ambassador
Paul Seger, Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their advocacy work on
behalf of Burundi. I ask that they continue their tireless
efforts. The road ahead may be long and arduous, but it
will one day come to an end.

