Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): 1
would like to express my appreciation to Angola for
today's debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I would
also like to thank the representative of Afghanistan
for his statement, as well as Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his briefing and
presentation of the report (S/2016/218) of the Secretary-
General.

According to the Secretary-General's report, the
security situation deteriorated further in 2015. Indeed,
there was a very high number of recorded security
incidents, representing a 3 per cent increase from
2014 and the second-highest number since 2001. The
situation remains volatile, and Afghanistan continues to
face major security, economic and political challenges.
The sustained support of the international community
is needed to support the National Unity Government in
order to address those challenges in the framework of
national ownership and leadership.

The Taliban's attempts to expand its reach to 24
district centres, in addition to its temporarily seizing
the provincial capital of Kunduz, should be a matter of
great concern to all of us. The report of the Secretary-
General once again refers to the emergence of Da'esh
and its offshoots, including the so-called Islamic State of
Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province in Afghanistan,
along with the spectrum of other terrorist and extremist
groups. This is another reason for international
and regional powers to support the National Unity
Government in its fight against terrorism.

We condemn all violent attacks committed by the
Taliban and all other terrorist groups, as well as any
cooperation with them, since we believe that this will
encourage them in their odious behaviour and thus
be counterproductive to the establishment of peace
in Afghanistan. At the same time, Iran reiterates its
support for an Afghan-led peace process.

Strengthening our regional cooperation with
Afghanistan is a priority and a major pathway to the
consolidation of peace and progress in the region.
We see great potential in our economic cooperation
with Afghanistan and are ready to increase bilateral
cooperation, particularly on security matters, counter-
narcotics efforts, development projects, economic
cooperation in the fields of infrastructure and
agriculture as well as finding a durable solution for
Afghan refugees.

Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah visited Iran
from 4 to 6 January, where he met Iranian leaders at the
highest level. There was also a visit to the Chabahar port
facilities, a venture by Afghanistan, India and Iran that,
upon completion, will be very beneficial to Afghanistan
as a landlocked country. In the joint declaration, Iran
and Afghanistan committed to increasing connectivity,
with emphasis on the Khaf-Herat railway and a planned
trilateral Afghanistan-Iran-India transit corridor, as
well as the need to accelerate progress on a bilateral
cooperation agreement and to form a joint working
group to study transboundary water issues on the
Harirud River.

On the counter-narcotics efforts, we take positive
note oftheAfghanistanDragReport2015, which suggests
that there have been substantial reductions in opium
cultivation and production in parallel with incremental
increases in drug seizures. We take that as a good sign
after several years in which we witnessed an increase
in opium cultivation in Afghanistan. The increase in
narcotics is mainly due to prevailing insecurity and
poverty. Narcotics is a real threat to the region and
beyond, and should be addressed by the international
community in a very serious and comprehensive
manner through support for regional initiatives such
as the triangular cooperation on countering narcotics
among Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan. The strong
support and commitment of international donors,
Afghan authorities and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime are essential to deterring the menace
of drug cultivation and drug trafficking. Narcotics are
not only a social health challenge, but also and more
importantly a major source of income for extremist and
terrorist groups.

Iran continues to participate in the work of the
Tripartite Review Commission in order to plan for
the voluntary, safe, dignified and gradual repatriation
of Afghan refugees. Success in voluntary repatriation
will depend first and foremost on providing for
the reasonable needs of repatriated refugees in
Afghanistan, and underscores the necessity to
mobilize more international support for this purpose.
We maintain our support for hundred thousands of
Afghan refugees, including students at all levels
from primary to university education, pending their
eventual repatriation. We welcome any effort to help
overcome the main reintegration challenges faced by
returnees and to formulate a comprehensive voluntary
repatriation and reintegration strategy.

Iran continues to offer its full support to the
promotion of security, stability and comprehensive and
sustainable development in Afghanistan, as we consider
the security of Afghanistan to be the security of our
borders and the region. We support UNAMA and United
Nations agencies in their efforts to provide development
and reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through a
genuine commitment of the United Nations to sustained
partnership with Afghanistan, as set forth in final
report of the Tripartite Review Commission on the
United Nations in Afghanistan. We need to utilize the
UNAMA mandate and its good offices to strengthen
national institutions and capacities in priority areas
requested by the Government.

