Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French):
Allow me first to say how delighted my delegation is
to see you presiding over the work of our Council, and
to congratulate you on the choice of the topic which is
crucial to the work of the Council, given the challenges
it needs to meet.

For several years now we have witnessed efforts
that seek to move the United Nations from a culture
reacting to conflicts, towards becoming a culture that
prevents conflicts. The result is that the
multidisciplinary nature of United Nations
peacekeeping missions has become an absolute
necessity worldwide.

Improved planning and improved execution of
the military aspect of peacekeeping operations has
required, in particular, that exit strategies be defined.
This has shown that stressing the military aspect in
order to attain lasting peace is not sufficient. The
concept of multidimensional action by the international
community in order to achieve lasting peace has gained
ground and has gradually given way to a more complex
form of peacekeeping and peace-building operations.

Although international military operations have
proven their effectiveness in stabilizing the situation on
the ground, their ability to restore law and order and
the normal functioning of institutions based on the rule
of law, to rehabilitate basic public and social services,
or to initiate the socio-economic recovery of a country,
has remained limited in the absence of a dedicated
civilian component.

The importance of the civilian aspects of conflict
management and peace-building has gradually come to
the fore in light of the experience of the international
community. This has been graphically demonstrated by
the successful transition in Timor-Leste, and - we can
say today - in Liberia where, despite the presence of a
very strong military component and of satisfactory
results obtained in stabilizing the situation, the
Security Council surely cannot consider a withdrawal
from that country for several years to come.

Indeed, the phase following the end of
hostilities - which includes the deployment of a
civilian component that includes a police force of an
appropriate size; a rule of law component dedicated to
disseminating the values of democracy, tolerance and
human rights; the rehabilitation of the judiciary and
penitentiary system; and civilian administration and
electoral assistance components - is an essential stage
for returning to normalcy before tackling the critical
stage of reconciliation, reconstruction and the initial
stages of development.

The multitude of civilian and military
stakeholders working for various international and
regional organizations, in addition to the increasingly
significant contributions provided by humanitarian
non-governmental organizations, make the existence of
a correct exit strategy absolutely essential.

Improving interagency coordination within the
United Nations system can provide a model for
complex international operations. From our standpoint,
the same concerns relating to the need for exit
strategies for military operations should lead us to
define exit strategies for the civilian components of
international operations. The success of the civilian
aspects should, in fact, be gauged by the strength of the
institutional capacities of the country concerned and
the links they have established with the stakeholders in
reconstruction and development partners in the long
term - particularly companies and development
institutions which are set to take over after the conflict.

The increasing number of crises and the many
demands made on the international community have
shown how great the needs for conflict resolution are.
More than 56,000 blue helmets and about 11,000
civilians are now involved in various international
operations at an annual cost equivalent to $3.5 billion.
It is foreseeable that the trend will increase,
particularly when it comes to the size of the civilian
component of the operations. That means we must
think about planning for the human and material
resources to meet those needs.

We are seeing a marked tendency in the
Organization to have recourse to the possibilities
outlined in Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter,
including increasing the involvement of regional and
other international organizations in preventing conflicts
and managing crises. My delegation supports that
approach since it is unanimously acknowledged that
the regional organizations have a definite comparative
advantage for carrying out the civilian tasks of
missions where the cultural dimension is decisive and
when it comes to working closely with the local people
and facing the sociological realities of a situation.

I would like to stress two principles that we deem
to be essential to make that international cooperation a
success. First, reliance on regional pillars should not be
understood as any neglect by the United Nations - or
in particular, the Security Council - of any of its
obligations to maintain international peace and security
or neglect in its cooperation for development.

Secondly, we need to take account of the clear
disparity that exists between the various regional
organizations concerning financial resources, expertise
and capacities, with a view to giving them assistance at
the appropriate level, but without diverting resources
from development. We believe that the support in the
area of peace and security that the European Union has
provided to the African Union's new structure through
the African Peace Facility fund - which we
welcome - meets that concern. That kind of initiative
could advance the cherished goal of planning and
setting up standby civilian crisis management
capacities at the national level that could be mobilized
at the regional level if necessary.

Moreover, the civilian dimension of international
operations raises institutional issues that should be
examined. From that perspective, a greater role should
be given to the Economic and Social Council, which is
directly concerned by several aspects and has gained
some experience in that area through its Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on African countries emerging from
conflict.

Finally, I should like to emphasize that the
increased importance given by the international
community to civilian aspects of conflict management
and peace-building is fully in keeping with the
priorities defined by Africa in the framework of the
New Partnership for Africa's Development -
particularly the strengthening of reliable institutions
and governance to ensure successful economic
development. I should also like to reiterate our
conviction that support from the international
community in that area before conflict erupts would be
far less costly and have greater chances for success.

