Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
at the outset to welcome the presence here of the
President of the General Assembly, the President of the
Economic and Social Council and the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs.

As we have stated on a number of occasions, the
causes of conflict can best be explained by looking at
the structural patterns of societies that have suffered
from civil war. These structural characteristics reveal
the complexity of the internal conflicts under
consideration by the Council, particularly those in
Africa, as well that of as the tasks of post-conflict
recovery, reconstruction and reconciliation.

There is no doubt about some of the structural
characteristics common to all these conflicts. Societies
with a very low per-capita income; societies that are
dependent on the production of natural resources and,
more generally, of commodities; societies with a low
level of economic growth; and countries whose
economic structures still reflect the influence of
colonialism and that are poorly integrated into global
markets tend to be more prone to violent civil conflicts.
That tendency towards violence is even greater when
factors of ethnic or cultural exclusion, among others,
are involved.

To prevent the resurgence of conflict in such
societies, it is necessary to create viable economic
structures that will promote the diversification of
production, integrate technology into the end product
and give it greater value added. We also must work to
counter their extreme vulnerability to a drop in
commodity prices.

However, better commodity prices are not
sufficient, just as it is not sufficient to sign an
agreement or to hold elections. Above all, it is
necessary to create viable economic structures and
inclusive democratic institutions, as well as to ensure
the smooth functioning of a society based on the rule
of law, with systems in place to protect human rights
and endowed with a transparent and sound judicial
system.
Broad-based efforts are under way to analyse and
pinpoint the link between natural resources and conflict
situations. We should recall that there are a number of
ways of viewing the link between conflicts and natural
resources - a link that Peru does not see as being
intrinsic or unavoidable. Given such a broad
conceptual perspective, the Council should focus its
reflection on common elements, that is to say, based on
its own experience with the countries on its agenda and
bearing in mind the character of each particular
conflict.

From that standpoint, an initial observation might
be that the tools used by the Council have not served as
a substitute for the political will of the parties to a
conflict to restore peace or to rebuild a country's
institutions and its political, economic and social
governance. On the contrary, the will to rebuild has
been strengthened when viable agreements have been
reached on the use and distribution of the wealth
emanating from natural resources and other
commodities. There is no doubt that one of the
prerequisites for the success of the Council's work is
ownership by the parties in conflict of such
resources- that is to say, such processes must be
based on the recognition of the sovereignty of States
over their own natural resources.

We can conclude, therefore, that we must place
greater emphasis on enhancing the effectiveness of the
instruments used by the Council to strengthen the
internal regimes for the sovereign management of
natural resources agreed on in peace accords, and to
ensure that financing for the parties in conflict does not
prolong or intensify a violent struggle for power. That
approach has been used by the Security Council with
positive results in the quest for peace in Liberia and
Sierra Leone. Internal agreement on the sovereign
management of natural resources also appears
necessary with respect to the future stabilization of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, we
believe that it can be key also in other situations on the
Council's agenda, such as in the Sudan, Iraq and
Timor-Leste.

As we stated earlier, we cannot generalize or
assert that, wherever natural resources exist, there must
necessarily be conflict. Nor can we state that the mere
existence of natural resources will ensure peace,
stability and development. It is up to the Security
Council, therefore, on the basis of the security situation
prevailing in the countries on its agenda, to follow
closely the political developments in each of those
countries, strengthen political agreements to help
States regain control over their territory, and ensure
compliance with arms embargoes and sanctions
regimes.

Similarly, in cooperation with other United
Nations bodies, regional organizations, neighbouring
States as well as other relevant actors, in particular in
the area of financing and development - such as the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund -
the Council must ensure that the capacities of States
are strengthened so as to promote the sovereign and
transparent management of their natural resources and
the process of peacebuilding.

Finally, we believe that our experience should
enable the Council to take an approach that is based on
agreements reached by the parties to a conflict
concerning the sovereign and sustainable use of natural
resources, thus assigning mandates that are appropriate
to United Nations integrated offices and peacekeeping
operations. Sanctions regimes must be made more
effective, and expert groups must be encouraged to
consider the lessons learned, make use of them and,
when necessary, propose that modifications be made to
the mandates of peacekeeping operations or to
sanctions regimes.

