Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We thank
Special Representative Haysom and Executive Director
Fedotov for their briefings. We thank and extend our
heartfelt congratulations to Ambassador Tanin for the
work he has done for Afghanistan and for the wider
membership during his time in New York. We wish him
well in his new assignment.

New Zealand continues to support Afghanistan- its
Government and its people - and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Afghanistan has had to confront and to deal with very
considerable challenges over the last 15 years. We
commend all of those who have helped steer the country
down the path from the essentially lawless State that
gave sanctuary to those that brought down the Twin
Towers to the much more stable State we see today.

When we remember that larger context, we
can only pay tribute to the resilience of the Afghan
people and their determination to hold together their
country, notwithstanding their internal differences. We
commend, too, Afghanistan's leaders for continuing
to work through the challenges of the power-sharing
arrangements that they took on for the wider good of
their people. And we salute the bravery and dedication
of the Afghan National Security Forces, who have taken
on the challenge of securing the safety of the nation and
its people.

That said, we recognize that in the current security
environment, the pace of progress is increasingly
difficult to sustain, as Executive Director Haysom has
made clear to us. Yet, for the good of all Afghan people,
particularly Afghan women, who have an essential role
to play in the future of Afghanistan, that effort must be
sustained.

We recognize that leadership changes have
complicated dynamics within the Taliban and have
made it much harder for the Government to pursue
the peace process on which they have courageously
embarked, despite the attempts made from within
the country and from outside its borders to derail the
process of national reconciliation that is essential to
the achievement of a peaceful and secure future. New
Zealand fully supports the Government of Afghanistan's
pursuit of reconciliation, and we encourage it to stay
the course. Sadly, there is now playing out a new twist
in the struggle for power as the Taliban, Al-Qaida,
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
other associated groups increasingly seek regional and
national ascendancy. That, too, is taking a heavy toll on
the Afghan National Security Forces and the civilian
population.

Meanwhile, as Mr. Fedotov has outlined in stark
detail, the cultivation of and trade in narcotics and related
criminality such as money-laundering, corruption and
financing impose further stresses on local, regional
and national governance structures. These undermine
stability, security, economic and social development
and the health and well-being of society in a country
less able than most to cope with such pressures.

Against that background, it is important to
maintain the integrity and effectiveness of the Taliban
and Al-Qaida sanctions regimes. As a Council, we need
to think carefully about how we can use the sanctions
regime imposed by the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) to better
support peace and reconciliation efforts in Afghanistan.
New Zealand encourages greater use of the travel
ban exemption procedures, where the purpose of the
travel is to enable listed individuals to participate in
peace negotiations. As Chair of the 1988 Committee,
I recognize the need to ensure that the Committee's
processes support such participation.

At the same time we need to be frank about those
associated with the Taliban who display no genuine
interest in peace but rather profit from the ongoing
instability. These individuals have vested financial
interests in the narcotics trade and illegal mining, and
I encourage Member States to submit listing requests
to the Committee in respect of such individuals and
entities.

Afghanistan needs the visible and united support of
this Council and the international community. UNAMA
is a tangible manifestation of that support. The work
of UNAMA and the delivery of well-coordinated
international assistance to Afghanistan can assist
the Afghan Government in laying down the political
and security foundations necessary for the country to
advance in a proper sustainable manner.

At the same time, we recognize that the work of the
United Nations in Afghanistan - that of UNAMA and
of the wider United Nations system - must be fit for
purpose, coordinated and undertaken in tandem with the
work of the Government of Afghanistan and the donor
community. In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-
General's report on the Tripartite Review Commission
(S/2015/7l3, annex), as called for in paragraph 48 of
resolution 2210 (2015), which we have just received. It
will usefully inform future discussions on the role of
the United Nations in Afghanistan.

