Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Harold Caballeros,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Guatemala, for presiding over this debate. I would also
like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Haiti, Mr. Mariano Fernandez Amunategui,
for his comprehensive briefing this morning. And
I would like to pay tribute to the men and women of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) for their commitment and the fortitude
they have demonstrated in difficult circumstances.
I welcome the Secretary-General's report on
MINUSTAH, issued on 31 August (S/2012/678). As the
report mentions, MINUSTAH's personnel has shown
continued dedication and commitment in support of
Haiti's recovery and stability, and we commend them
for that and for the concrete results they have achieved.
Based on the situation in Haiti, we welcome the fact
that MINUSTAH is refocusing its efforts on long-term
stabilization and development.

The international community acknowledges and
welcomes the progress that has been made in Haiti's
recovery.

Since the earthquake in 2010, more than 10 million
cubic metres of debris have been removed and the
number ofinternally displaced persons has been reduced
by more than 75 per cent. As the report of the Secretary-
General points out, plans for the reconfiguration and
consolidation of MINUSTAH warrant consideration.

Now that more than two and a half years have
passed since the deadly earthquake, the necessity and
significance of the Mission remain high, but the needs
of the Haitian people have shifted. Haiti has made
remarkable progress since Japan pledged $100 million
for emergency relief and reconstruction for Haiti in
2010. In fact, Japan has already disbursed an amount
exceeding its original pledge.

In recognition of such progress on the ground, the
Government of Japan decided in July that it would start
a wind-up phase of the operations of the Japan Ground
Self-Defense Force's engineering unit in Haiti, with a
view to its eventual departure from MINUSTAH. As
Haiti is now entering the reconstruction phase, we
believe that the country has reached a stage where our
Self-Defense Force unit is becoming less needed. The
number of personnel who have served in the Japanese
contingent since its beginning now totals approximately
2,200. The contingent has made contributions to the
recovery of Haiti through a variety of efforts, such
as the removal of rubble, dismantling of damaged
buildings, repair of facilities in camps for internally
displaced persons, road repair, construction of
orphanage facilities and water distribution in response
to the cholera outbreak.

In spite of the progress made on the road to recovery,
it is certain that Haiti will still be obliged to improve
its basic infrastructure services with respect to roads,
electricity and potable water, as well as social services,
including access to education and medicine. High
levels of unemployment and delinquency problems also
exist. Many challenges remain for Haiti with respect
to its recovery, reconstruction and development.
International support will still be needed.

However, we acknowledge the fact that Haiti has
been making serious efforts towards its reconstruction,
and we are convinced that Haiti will do its utmost
to achieve most of its recovery on its own. President
Martelly has said he is making the five "E"s - education,
employment, environment, establishment of the rule of
law and energy - a priority.

We welcome the Haitian efforts to strengthen the rule
of law and improve the security situation. Japan expects
Haiti to continue its efforts, not only in those areas, but
also in poverty reduction and in ensuring the welfare of
all Haitian people. We further welcome the publication
of a corrected version of the constitutional amendments
and the establishment of the Superior Council of the
Judiciary. We urge all relevant political actors in Haiti
to continue their dialogue and cooperation towards the
establishment of a permanent electoral council. Japan
expects the next election in Haiti to be carried out in a
peaceful and democratic manner. It is our hope that the
rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts in Haiti will
be further accelerated under the leadership of President
Martelly and Prime Minister Lamothe, along with the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala, Mr. Harold
Caballeros Lopez.

Even after the withdrawal of its engineering
unit, Japan intends to continue its support for Haiti.
The Japan Self-Defense Force's engineering unit's
contributions include human resource development
for Haitian citizens through the sharing of expertise in
the use of civil engineering equipment. In addition, we
are now considering the possibility of donating such
equipment to the Haitian Government.

The time has now come for us to shift from
emergency support to long-lasting contributions.
Through our efforts, including providing training the
delivery of basic social services such as health, hygiene
and education, we will continue to support Haiti's
reconstruction and development.

As the Council is aware, more than one and a
half years have passed since 11 March 2011, when the
Great East Japan Earthquake struck our country. We
are most grateful for the solidarity expressed to the
Japanese people by the people of Haiti as we embark
on similar endeavours. I am confident that both Haiti
and Japan, in close collaboration with the international
community, will overcome their difficulties through
mutual encouragement and steadfast efforts to bring
about a brighter future.

