Mr. Davidson (South Africa): We congratulate you
and your delegation, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

It is hoped that the onset of the new year will renew
the commitment of the Security Council to contributing
towards a peaceful resolution of this long-standing
agenda item. We cannot allow another year to pass
without progress on the Middle East peace process, as
every year that goes by makes peace appear even more
elusive. New challenges, as we have seen recently with
the developments pertaining to the status of Jerusalem,
have compounded existing negative developments,
such as the continuing Israeli illegal settlement activity.
South Africa continues to believe that the best option for
the resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict is premised
upon the following.

The first element is the inalienable right of
the Palestinian people to self-determination and
independence, which entails a principled position
against the military occupation of the Palestinian
people and their land. The second element is the right of
the peoples both ofIsrael and of Palestine to live side by
side in peace in their own States, based on the borders
of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as the capital of
the State of Palestine. The third factor is the belief that
there can be no military solution to the conflict and
that peaceful negotiation is the only means of ensuring
lasting peace, security and stability. The fourth factor
is the commitment to multilateralism in order to secure
a sustainable solution and a rules-based international
order. No unilateral act by any party should pre-empt
the final-status issues.

South Africa wishes to use today's debate as an
opportunity to highlight an issue of particular concern
to our delegation, that is, the plight of the children in
military detention in Israel. Those children experience
widespread systematic and institutionalized ill-
treatment in military detention and are easily hidden
from the public eye. Nevertheless, reflecting on data
from UNICEF, we are concerned about the high rates
of physical abuse, strip searches and the use of solitary
confinement in the context of interrogations, as well
as threats and verbal abuse. While the immediate
injustice of those abuses cannot be overstated, it is the
psychological and developmental harm to those young
individuals that is most troubling. Furthermore, such
abuses merely seek to reinforce hatred among the two
sides to the conflict, prolonging the crisis and doing
nothing to reconcile the parties.

South Africa is deeply concerned that unilateral
action by some Member States to recognize Jerusalem
as the capital city of Israel undermines the revival of a
peace process. The relevant United Nations resolutions
and mutual agreements on the status of Jerusalem
should remain a central aspect of any negotiated
solution, to be resolved by the parties. Furthermore,
the city of Jerusalem remains a sacred space for all the
major Abrahamic religions, which is one reason why it
continues to be one of the most disputed aspects of the
peace process. To prejudge the outcome is most likely
to put the entire peace process, in particular the two-
State solution, in jeopardy.

South Africa continues to call for more financial
support for United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which
provides assistance to, and protection for, more than
5 million Palestinian refugees. The continued strong
and generous support of the international community
is necessary to ensure the Agency's continuity of
services, and is especially needed in the light of the
recurrent and severe financial shortfalls that continue
to affect its vital humanitarian programmes. We would
like to emphasize that the funding for UNRWA should
be sustainable, predictable and sufficient. For its
part, South Africa will continue to support UNRWA
through its financial contributions. Furthermore, we
will continue to provide humanitarian assistance to
the Palestinian people through the India-Brazil-South
Africa Dialogue Forum fund.

In conlcusion, South Africa remains firmly
convinced that continued dialogue in support of a
peaceful solution is the only viable option that can
effectively address the issue. To ensure that, the efforts
of the international community need to move towards
building trust among the parties and not lead to the
entrenchment of divisions and long-standing hatred.
We remain hopeful and urge both sides to resume the
peace process for a comprehensive, just and lasting
resolution of the Palestinian issue.
