Mr. Djani (Indonesia): It is with a deep concern
that we note that the most recent report of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Global Trends - ForcedDisplacement in 2017, mentions
that there are 68.5 million people who are forcibly
displaced due to various forms humanitarian crises, of
whom 25.4 million are refugees and asylum-seekers.

We believe that there are three main challenges that
need to be considered priorities. The first challenge is
new emerging conflicts that cause existing humanitarian
crises to deteriorate. In its Mid-Year Trends 2018 report,
UNHCR mentions that an additional 5.2 million people
were forcibly displaced in the first half of 2018 due to
new conflicts. The second challenge concerns durable
and sustainable solutions that are not adequately
implemented. There are 1.4 million refugees in need
of urgent resettlement and voluntary repatriation, based
on the 2018 UNHCR report. The third challenge is the
significant lack of funding. In 2019, UNHCR needs
$8.7 billion in funding support, while currently only
$1.685 billion is available. Those are the challenges.

Such a bleak picture raises a hefty concern for
transit countries, in particular developing countries,
such as Indonesia. We currently host more than 14,000
refugees and asylum seekers from 47 countries,
waiting to be resettled to third countries or voluntarily
returned to their homeland. Indonesia is, of course,
committed to alleviating any human suffering during
humanitarian emergencies. In 2016, we enacted a
presidential decree for assisting refugees, going beyond
our international obligations.

Indonesia also collaborates closely with UNHCR
and the International Organization for Migration
within the framework of their mandates to process and
find a solution. I agree with Mr. Grandi that the key
words here are "management" and "collaboration".
Unfortunately, with regard to such collaboration, the
resettlement number for refugees in Indonesia has
continued to decline from 1,200 in 2016 to only 508
in 2018. That is just a small example of the alarming
trends we are seeing in terms of resettlement. Looking
at this number, we also see a downward trend worldwide
in the acceptance of refugees. We have to do something
about that.

We are of the view that there are a number of
approaches that need to be considered to address the
challenges presented by the global refugee crisis. First,
we need to address the root causes of humanitarian
crises by, for example, mainstreaming the nexus
between peace, security and development, establishing
coherence within the United Nations system, and
looking beyond the obvious causes, such as conflict or
poverty, as Mr. Grandi mentioned, to newly identified
causes, namely, climate change.

Secondly, we must promote an inclusive
participatory process and a multi-stakeholder
approach. A stronger synergy between the United
Nations and regional and national entities, including all
humanitarian actors and stakeholders, would strengthen
the effectiveness of humanitarian operations. A
participatory process is required not only in countries
of origin but also in the transit and recipient countries.
As Mr. Grandi mentioned, the burden on transit
countries is getting much heavier. It is imperative to
come up with more innovative funding and explore
potential areas of collaboration with the private sector
and non-governmental organizations in order to
address the funding gap in humanitarian assistance,
not only in the processing and hosting countries, but
also in countries of origin, where root causes might be
economic difficulties that may lead to conflict.

Lastly, the global compact on refugees should serve
as guidance for the parties to the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees and its Protocol
towards improvement of refugees management, taking
into account the specific resources, capabilities and
international obligations of each country. Under
current circumstances, the importance of the Global
Compact cannot be overemphasized. States Members
of the United Nations should embrace the compact in
order to send the right signal that we are not closing
ourselves off to the refugees that need our collective
support. Member States should also embrace both the
global compact on refugees and the global compact on
migration; denial of either Compact would send the
wrong signal to many in despair in refugee camps.

To be interactive, I would ask about the point that
Mr. Grandi made on refugees choosing not to return.
What other option do refugees have to returning when
the countries that are expected to accept them are closing
their doors? If the doors are closed, refugees will be in
limbo, and the burden will be on transit countries.

The High Commissioner also spoke about the
middle and the long terms. My delegation agrees
with this perspective, but what is most important for
refugees now is immediate solutions and the addressing
of immediate challenges.

In conclusion, the important message of this
meeting should be that solidarity still exists in the
international community and that refugees have not
been forgotten, nor will they ever be.

Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) I thank Mr. Grandi,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, for
his briefing.

At present the global refugee population is growing
year by year, and the refugee situation has been
continuously deteriorating. Wars and conflicts are still
primary contributors to the issue. Developing countries,
which are recipients of the bulk of refugees worldwide,
are under heavy social and economic pressures. At
the same time, we have seen a decline in the will
of the international community to aid and address
the widening gap between humanitarian needs and
financial assistance, the xenophobic sentiment coming
from many quarters, and the increasing politicization
of refugee issues. The international refugee situation
remains grim.

Last year, the General Assembly adopted the Global
Compact on Refugees, which represents a positive
initiative by the international community to cooperate
in addressing refugee problems. Building on the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its
1967 Protocol, it also marks an important step towards
global governance for refugees. China commends this
outcome and supports the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), led by
High Commissioner Grandi, in its efforts to facilitate
full communication between parties towards gradual
implementation of the Compact.

China believes that, based on respect for national
sovereignty, a holistic approach to the refugee problem
is needed to address both the symptoms and the
root causes.

First, the international community, especially
those with the capacity and responsibility to do so,
should scale up its support and assistance to host
countries and communities, and eliminate xenophobia
and discrimination against refugees. The role of the
relevant national Governments deserves particular
respect in the addressing problems relating to internally
displaced persons.

Secondly, efforts should be made to address the
root causes of refugees and displacement, settling
disputes peacefully, reducing armed conflicts,
eradicating extreme poverty and promoting economic
development. Only by addressing such root causes as
war, conflict and poverty can there be fundamental
solutions to refugee problems. The Security Council
should, in accordance with the mandate of the United
Nations Charter, intensify its efforts aimed at finding
political solutions to hotspot issues.

Thirdly, there is a need to adhere to the basic
international humanitarian norms of objectivity,
neutrality and non-politicization. This constitutes
an important bedrock for healthy development of the
international cause ofrefugee protection. In dealing with
refugee matters, the international community needs to
follow the principle of objectivity and neutrality and
refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of the
countries concerned, in order to avoid politicizing and
abusing international refugee-protection mechanisms.
China has long maintained good cooperative
relations with UNHCR, while continuously providing
humanitarian assistance through bilateral and
multilateral channels to improve the living conditions of
refugees and host communities everywhere. China will
continue to strengthen its cooperation with UNHCR
in humanitarian and development assistance and work
with all parties to contribute to the improvement of
global refugee governance.

