The President: I wish to warmly welcome
the Secretary-General, the Ministers and other
representatives to the Security Council Chamber. Their
presence today underscores the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of South Sudan to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Festus Mogae, Chairman of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission and Former President
of Botswana; and Ms. Betty Sunday, Coordinator of
the Women's Monthly Forum on Peace and Political
Processes in South Sudan.

The Security Councilwill now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of participants to
document S/2017/224, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan covering the period
from 16 December 2016 to 1 March 2017.

Following consultations with the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on their behalf:

"The Security Council expresses deep alarm
at the situation in South Sudan, stresses again that
there is no military solution to the conflict, and
renews its condemnation of continued fighting
across the country. The Security Council reiterates
its call upon all parties to immediately adhere to the
permanent ceasefire as called for in the Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan
("the Agreement"), reminding all parties that
implementation of a ceasefire is critical for the
success of any genuine, inclusive political process.

"The Security Council is deeply alarmed
that famine was declared in parts of South
Sudan, that many more South Sudanese face
severe food insecurity, and is deeply concerned
about the actions of all parties to the conflict
that are perpetuating the humanitarian crisis. In
this regard, the Security Council condemns any
undermining of the ceasefire and restrictions
and attacks on humanitarian personnel and their
facilities as well as on the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) to the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, especially
to famine-affected locations, and calls for an
immediate cessation of such actions and immediate
and unhindered access to all those in need. The
Security Council further calls for all parties to take
appropriate measures to protect United Nations and
foreign premises and personnel and other civilians
in South Sudan. The Security Council commends
countries in the region who continue to receive and
host refugees.

"The Security Council condemns reported
human rights violations and abuses and violations
of international humanitarian law, as applicable,
and expresses deep alarm at the numerous and
ongoing reports of sexual and gender-based
violence and recruitment and use of children in
violation of international law in South Sudan. The
Security Council underscores the pressing need
for accountability for any violations and abuses
of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law. The Security Council calls for
swift implementation of chapter V of the Agreement,
and expects all relevant parties mentioned in the
Agreement to take all necessary steps towards
the establishment of the Hybrid Court for South
Sudan. The Security Council also stresses that the
Commission of Truth, Reconciliation and Healing,
as stipulated in the Agreement, is a critical part of
the peacebuilding process in South Sudan.

"The Security Council underscores its
conviction that a political solution to the conflict
is essential, underscores its support for regional
and international efforts to find such a solution
in order to advance the Agreement. The Security
Council supports the Joint Press Statement by the
African Union (AU), Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and the United Nations
of 29 January 2017, which commends the work
performed by the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission (JMEC) Chairperson Festus Mogae,
and encourages the AU High Representative for
South Sudan Alpha Oumar Konare to undertake
active shuttle diplomacy towards ensuring the
implementation of the Agreement and the inclusivity
of the National Dialogue in close consultations
with the J MEC Chairperson, IGAD, and the United
Nations. The Security Council calls on all parties
to fully cooperate with Presidents Konare, Mogae,
and the United Nations in their efforts to advance
peace in South Sudan.

"The Security Council notes the announcement
on 14 December 2016 by President Kiir of the
launch of a National Dialogue process. The
Security Council notes that an immediate ceasefire
by all parties is vital for any National Dialogue to
be credible and recalls statements by Presidents
Mogae and Konare, that an inclusive political
process must also be authentic, autonomous, and
impartially led by a credible facilitator accepted
by the people of South Sudan, and which supports
the Agreement. The Security Council agrees
that an inclusive political process is necessary to
improve and maintain the security in the country.
The Security Council emphasizes that an inclusive
political process would include representatives
of all the main parties to the conflict, the full
and effective participation of women as well as
representatives for a wide range of stakeholders
and constituencies.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern at the failure of the parties to fully adhere
to their commitments to implement the Agreement,
and in this regard, the Security Council calls for
the following steps to be taken:

"1. Immediate adherence to the permanent
ceasefire by all forces of the parties to the
conflict and all other armed groups.

"2. Urgently address the challenges faced
by humanitarian personnel in the delivery of
humanitarian assistance throughout South
Sudan and specifically to famine-affected
areas, including through meetings of the
Humanitarian High Level Oversight Committee
and urgent implementation of its decisions.

"3. Unconditional support of all parties for
the endeavours of the United Nations, AU, and
IGAD towards ensuring the implementation
of the Agreement and the inclusivity of
the National Dialogue as outlined in their
29 January 2017 statement.
"4. Immediate removal of obstacles to
UNMISS and the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism
(CTSAMM) operations including obstacles
to the deployment of the Regional Protection
Force and attacks on UNMISS and
CTSAMM. personnel.

"5. Immediate cessation of obstructions to
and attacks on all national and international
humanitarian personnel and facilities
endeavouring to provide life-saving assistance
throughout South Sudan.

"The Security Council expresses its intention
to review progress on the steps outlined above no
later than 30 April 2017.

"The Security Council expresses concern that
the Government of South Sudan has not upheld all
of its commitments towards implementation of the
4 September 2016 Joint Communique and renews
its invitation to Government to update the Security
Council on the Communique's implementation.

"The Security Council stresses that actions
which threaten the peace, security or stability of
South Sudan may be subject to sanctions under
resolutions 2206 (2015) and 2290 (2016).

"The Security Council reaffirms its unwavering
support for the people of South Sudan."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/20l7/4.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres.

