The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

I would like to thank Special Envoy Kafando for
his briefing. I also agree with my Russian colleague
on the value of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
work of Ambassador Lauber, who is unfortunately on
vacation right now. It is really important that we bring
all elements of the abilities and capabilities of the
United Nations to bear in these situations.

The Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement
brought peace to Burundi after more than a decade of
civil war and hundreds of thousands of civilian deaths.
It is crucial for Burundi's long-term stability that the
spirit and the letter of the accords be preserved. We
welcome President Nkurunziza's announcement that
he will step down at the end of his current term. It
was an important step and an important message for
the people of Burundi, the region and the international
community. A genuine, inclusive dialogue with all
parties remains the only viable option for resolving the
political situation, and so, as Mr. Kafando made clear,
progress on the inter-Burundian dialogue led by the
East African Community remains crucial to the future
peace and security of both Burundi and the region.
We echo his call for the parties to engage openly and
constructively, and urge the region and subregion
to remain fully engaged in order to ensure that swift
progress is made during the coming months and weeks.

The human rights situation in Burundi is deeply
worrying. The United Kingdom urges the Government
of Burundi to take steps to make rapid progress in
improving the situation so that the country is better
prepared to move towards elections in 2020. First, it
should signal its commitment to upholding human
rights by completing its negotiations on a memorandum
of understanding with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),
in order to enable OHCHR to operate effectively in
Burundi. Secondly, the Government should implement
Human Rights Council resolution 36/2, endorsed by
the Group of African States, including Burundi, and
adopted at the thirty-sixth session of the Human Rights
Council in September 2017. We urge the Government
to engage with OHCHR to facilitate the return of
the human rights experts whose visas were revoked
in April.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Burundi.

