Mr. Beyendeza (Uganda): It is an honour for me
to participate in this open briefing of the Security
Council on the important subject of the Great Lakes
region. This follows the Security Council mission to
the area. Therefore, on behalf of the Government of
Uganda, I thank you, Mr. President, and all the
members of the Council for this opportunity.

In welcoming back the Security Council team that
visited the Great Lakes region, including my country,
my delegation hopes not only that the team succeeded
in carrying out the terms of reference with which it was
mandated, but also that the Council will now be
enriched by the tremendous experience the members
must have acquired on this visit and that it will be able
to use it to further the cause of peace in the region.

Within the framework of the terms of reference of
the mission, my delegation would like to use this
opportunity to update the Security Council on two
areas: the progress in Uganda's troop withdrawal,
which is in support of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement,
and the issue of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The withdrawal of Ugandan troops is progressing
well. I could say that it is progressing according to
schedule. Last Friday, the Uganda People's Defence
Forces completed its troop withdrawal from the
northeastern Congolese town of Isiro. The second
phase of complete withdrawal of the Ugandan troops
started yesterday, Tuesday, from a town called Gemena.
Members may remember that in February 2001, our 7th
Battalion was withdrawn from Gemena, but some units
remained behind, guarding the airport. It is hoped that
by the end of this week the last group will be pulled
out.

After the Gemena pullout, our troops will then
leave eight other Congolese towns: Dongo, Basankusu,
Gbadolite, Lisala, Bitembo, Beni, Kanyabayonga and
Bafwasende.

Uganda has requested the Security Council to
allow it to use Bangoka International Airport in
Kisangani to pull out some of its troops and heavy
equipment that are in Bafwasende. The leader of the
Council delegation referred to this matter. We are
pleased that the United Nations has accepted for us to
use Kisangani, but this is still "in principle", and we
understand that the matter has been referred to the Joint
Political Committee of the Lusaka Agreement. I would
like to emphasise that the use of Bangoka International
Airport is very crucial, because our 65th Battalion in
Bafwasende has no other route on which to pull out. So
we appeal to the Security Council to assist us in this
exercise.

The second issue on which my delegation would
like to update the Council concerns the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Members may recall that during the Council debate on
3 May 2001, in this Chamber, following the release of
the report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/2001/357), the Uganda delegation stated that the
Government of Uganda took the allegations in that
report seriously and welcomed the opportunity to lay
these matters to rest.

On 23 May 2001 the Government of Uganda
appointed an independent judiciary commission of
inquiry to investigate these allegations. The
Government has named Justice David Porter, a
distinguished retired British judge, as the chairman of
this judiciary commission. Other members include
Justice Joseph Berko, a judge of the Court of Appeal,
and Mr. John Rwambuya, a retired Ugandan senior
United Nations official.

This independent commission will investigate
these allegations in an open and transparent manner
and will report to the Government for appropriate
action. The commission will start its work on Monday,
4 June. The Security Council will be updated on the
outcome of this commission at the appropriate time.

I am sure that the members of the Security
Council who were on the team to the Great Lakes
region may recollect the undivided attention they
received from President Museveni, who spent many
hours, putting almost all other State matters aside,
discussing and sharing with the members of the team
all possible combinations of formulas to find a solution
to the problem of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Such attention and concern by President
Museveni was not accidental. It demonstrated the
seriousness that Uganda attaches to the need to end the
conflict and to have peace in the Great Lakes region in
general and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in particular.

Uganda has strongly maintained that the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement addresses two fundamental areas
which are at the root of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region. It addresses the
security concerns of all countries in the region,
including the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
its neighbours; and the internal dimension of the
conflict, through a national dialogue involving all the
Congolese parties with equal say. This is part of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.

Uganda therefore reaffirms its support for the
inter-Congolese dialogue under the neutral facilitator,
Sir Ketumile Masire. I would like to inform the
Council, through you, Mr. President, that President
Museveni and Sir Ketumile Masire concluded a
meeting along those lines this morning in Kampala.

Uganda believes that our security will be ensured
if there is peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and we believe that this can be
achieved through the most viable framework, which
remains the Lusaka Agreement. That is why Uganda's
troop withdrawal from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo would not affect our participation in the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement.

