Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We welcome this
debate and extend a special welcome to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, who is with us throughout the
debate today. We very much appreciate and value her
work and the work of her Office.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2015/409) once
again shines a light on the many ways in which children
are affected by armed conflict, on the increasing number
of horrendous crimes committed against them and on
the perpetrators of this Violence. We support many of
the recommendations in the report, in particular the
one on the need to include abductions of children as
a trigger mechanism for listing. My brief intervention
will focus on three points today.

First, we are pleased to see a strong call for
accountability among the recommendations. It is of
the utmost importance to demand full respect for
international humanitarian law, human rights law
and refugee law. We are concerned about the sexual
exploitation and abuse case in the Central African
Republic and the systemic weaknesses within the
United Nations system it has brought to light. We
welcome the Secretary-General's decision to establish
an independent investigation and look forward to its
results. Thirty per cent of the victims of reported cases
of sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Haiti, Liberia, South Sudan
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo were
minors. The United Nations proclaimed zero-tolerance
policy will be ineffective as long as accountability
mechanisms remain opaque or simply not in place and
reporting remains difficult or even dangerous.

The challenges in ensuring accountability for
sexual exploitation and abuse have been discussed for
many years, but with few tangible results. There is a
persistent danger that the important work of so many
could be publicly discredited owing to the unethical
and criminal acts committed with impunity by a few.
Troop-contributing countries have to ensure speedy
domestic investigations and prosecutions for violations
committed by their nationals. Otherwise, the United
Nations role and its crucial function in the area of
peacekeeping will be compromised.

Secondly, the list of perpetrators in the annexes
to the Secretary-General's reports can be a very
powerful tool to influence the behaviour of parties to
a conflict. However, for this to be the case, the listing
and delisting process needs to be fair, consistent and
transparent. The vast majority of parties listed are
non-State actors, with whom it can be difficult to
engage. The International Committee of the Red Cross
and certain non-governmental organizations, such as
Geneva Call, are uniquely positioned in that regard,
and their experience should inform the Council's work
in this area.

Some parties to conflicts seem to have made clear
commitments to engage, are eager to cooperate and have
signed so called deeds of commitment to stop violations
against children. Nevertheless, not a single non-State
actor/entity has been able to qualify for delisting so far,
due, inter alia, to a lack of knowledge and assistance
throughout the process. This has caused frustration
and is also a missed opportunity to motivate other
non-State actors to cooperate with a view to delisting.
It is therefore important to support organizations
that assist non-State actors in their efforts to achieve
delisting. We as Governments can further facilitate
such processes through the ratification of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, which
creates the necessary framework for engagement.

Finally, I would like to briefly touch upon the
issue of underage foreign terrorist fighters. We are
obviously struggling to find a response to this complex
phenomenon. Our knowledge of the root causes,
motivation and recruitment policies and processes
is still limited. We must not forget in this discussion
that we are talking about children, whose judgment
and resulting behaviour is that of legal minors. We
therefore look forward with great interest at so-called
soft-handed approaches based on the assumption that
poverty, discrimination, lack of socialization and
the absence of effective integration are often at the
root of radicalization. Instead of an exclusive focus
on criminalization, those strategies make use of
psychosocial counselling and help returnees findjobs or
education opportunities. We do not claim to know that
one approach works better than another, but we certainly
see value in exploring a stronger focus on reintegration.
What seems to be clear is that a comprehensive response
is needed that covers prevention, psycho-social support
and integration assistance to complement necessary
legal measures and action.

In conclusion, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to the Safe Schools Declaration, which
endorses the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict.
We welcome that elaboration on existing international
humanitarian law and call upon others to join those
of us that have already endorsed the Guidelines at the
recently held safe schools conference in Oslo.

