Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): I would like to
express the sincere appreciation of my Government for
this initiative and for the honour of having you, Sir,
preside over the Security Council today.

The tragic events in Mumbai, with respect to
which I would like to renew the condolences and the
grief of Italy and the Italian people for so many
innocent victims, prove once again that terrorism
represents a fundamental threat to international peace
and security. Effective counter-terrorist policies cannot
be put together only in the heated aftermath of terrorist
attacks. Instead, they require patient and tenacious
work on which cooperation and mutual trust among
countries must be built and strengthened.

Italy endorses the statement to be delivered by
France on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
threat of terrorism is intense and, unfortunately, will
remain as such for the foreseeable future. Globalization
and new technologies favour its spreading across
borders, broadens the risk of a convergence among
terrorist organizations and illegal trafficking, the illicit
use of financial networks and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. The threat is diversified,
complex and continuously changing. It requires long-
term political will, a global vision and the ability to
adapt responses to varied scenarios.

In our view, the United Nations remains the most
suitable framework for improving and better defining
counter-terrorism policies. Initially intended to better
regulate this matter, these policies have progressively
been enhanced with new instruments and updated
structures. The role of the United Nations is all the
more crucial as the need is stronger for all Member
States to give their support in implementing the
necessary interventions.

For all these reasons, today's debate is important.
In the fight against terrorists, we are not in a primeval
era of cooperation among States and peoples. A Global
Strategy agreed on by the entire membership exists and
we must speed up the implementation of its four
pillars. This Strategy should be implemented today,
drawing on the entire United Nations system, including
the three Security Council subsidiary bodies and the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.

The ratification of all 16 counter-terrorist
conventions is a priority. These conventions translate
into binding commitments which highlight the primacy
of cooperation over individual sovereignties at a time
when we acknowledge the indivisibility of peace and
security in a globalized world. Full implementation of
Security Council resolutions on this issue is not only
our obligation, but what we all require.

The promotion and protection of human rights are
also a priority, as is the rule of law, as integral parts of
an effective counter-terrorist strategy. There must be
neither safe havens nor impunity for terrorists.
Technical assistance should be made available to
countries that need it, as well as an assured means for
victims to seek the justice that would allow for
compassion to be translated into solidarity.

Rescuing failing States is also crucial for the
achievement of United Nations-recognized human
rights and for the security agenda. Prevention and early
detection of extremists and radicalization, to which the
younger generation is particularly susceptible, are
needed, as are more effective mechanisms of
information exchange, law enforcement coordination
and mutual legal assistance in criminal matters.

The European Union has a set of instruments for
judicial cooperation among its States which has already
been proved effective in many cases. After the terrorist
attacks in Madrid and London, for example, direct
collaboration among European judges led to the arrest
in Italy of some of the perpetrators and their immediate
delivery to Spain and the United Kingdom.

The challenge we are faced with today can be
won. To reach this goal, all countries need to make a
long-term and consistent effort. We need resolute
international cooperation based on clear strategies and
mutual trust. We must stop heinous crimes from
building walls of hostility and mistrust among
countries and peoples.

Italy fully supports today's draft presidential
statement, and the call for solidarity it should contain,
reiterating the determination of the Security Council to
combat all forms of terrorism.

