Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing.

Latest tragic incidents such as the deadly attack by
a Palestinian of 22 October, the shooting of Palestinian
teenagers and settler violence are developments of
extreme concern. We deplore the loss of lives and call
for thorough investigation into those tragic events. We
fear that, if left unaddressed, this tension may spiral
into yet another escalation of violence. We urge all
sides to refrain from any actions that could heighten
tensions and lead to further incitement and hate crimes.
It is the responsibility of all sides to restore calm and
avoid further tensions.

The European Union and its States members,
including Lithuania, condemned the Israeli
Government's decision to approve plans for new
settlements. Settlements are illegal under international
law. If these plans advance, it will severely threaten the
final status of Jerusalem as the future capital of two
States. We join international community in calling on
the Government of Israel to reverse the plans and put
an end to its settlement policy in East Jerusalem and
the West Bank.

We urge Israel to desist from any measures
aimed at altering the physical character, demographic
composition, institutional structure and the legal
status of the City of Jerusalem. Those actions threaten
the prospects for peace and run counter to the Fourth
Geneva Convention.

Lithuania strongly commends Jordan, the Custodian
of the Holy Sites in Jerusalem, and supports its actions
to preserve the status quo ofholy sites in East Jerusalem.
We have consistently repeated our call to all sides to
cease all provocative actions in and around the Holy Site
of the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif complex that
could prejudice the outcome of negotiations over East
Jerusalem. Our Foreign Minister has just completed
a visit to Jordan that coincided with the twentieth
anniversary of the peace agreement between Israel
and Jordan. The Lithuanian and Jordanian Foreign
Ministers agreed that it was important to resume peace
negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians
as soon as possible.

Lithuania reiterates its call for both sides to
resume peace negotiations and to demonstrate strong
commitment and leadership to reach a two-State
solution. A way must be found through negotiations to
resolve the status of Jerusalem as the future capital of
both Israel and Palestine. A two-State solution achieved
on the basis ofthe relevant Security Council resolutions,
the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference,
including land for peace, the road map, the agreements
previously reached by the parties and the Arab Peace
Initiative is the only viable solution to bring peace and
security to both people and to reduce tensions in the
region.

