Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to congratulate the Australia presidency for taking the
initiative to hold this meeting on the role of policing
in peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding. I
welcome the adoption of resolution 2185 (2014), which
we were pleased to co-sponsor.

I thank Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, and the heads of
the police components of the United Nations Mission
in Liberia, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
for their briefings. We welcome the Australian
innovation of inviting heads of police components to
brief the Security Council.

Chad notes the increasing role of United Nations
police in peacekeeping operations and the increasing
number of individual police and formed police units.
Police staffing has increased from 1,677 personnel in
1994 to over 12,300 personnel as of last 30 September,
throughout 13 peacekeeping operations and 4 special
political missions, which constitutes 14 per cent of
United Nations personnel in uniform today. We believe
that strengthening the police component of United
Nations peacekeeping and special political missions
is making a great contribution to stabilization in post-
conflict situations and in peacebuilding, security sector
reform, the protection of civilians and the rule of law.

Issues related to police training, skills and
equipment and their geographical distribution are
crucial ones. It is important for the police-contributing
country to ensure that the personnel deployed have
among their skills a high level of expertise, appropriate
training and equipment that is adapted to the situation.
Otherwise, they will not be able to effectively discharge
their duties.

Consequently, it is logical that the United Nations
Police Division and Member States maintain close
collaboration in order to identify areas where there are
shortcomings to be addressed or where improvements
could be made. In that regard, we urge Member States
with the resources available to provide them to those
who need them. Furthermore, given that United Nations
police are called upon to interact with the population,
it is important that they have general skills, including
linguistic and cultural knowledge of the host country.
While knowledge of the language and culture of the
host State should not a prerequisite, it is one of the most
important elements that should be taken into account in
the selection process.

Another crucial element is geographic and
linguistic representation, particularly in those areas of
United Nations policing responsibilities. Moreover, we
encourage the Secretary-General and Member States to
increase the number of women police in peacekeeping
operations, including in positions ofresponsibility, with
at least 20 per cent female representation being reached,
in accordance with the global campaign launched in
2009. We would also encourage closer cooperation
between the United Nations Police Division and the
African Union, which recently established the regional
police organization - the African Police Cooperation
Organization. Furthermore, we welcome the efforts of
the African Union in launching policing missions on
the continent, including in the African Union Mission
in Somalia.

In conclusion, we would like to pay tribute to all
police, men and women, in the service of the United
Nations, and to all police-contributing countries that
have made deployments to countries in conflict or post-
conflict situations. Their support to the host country
police in the areas of civilian protection, security
sector reform, rebuilding and providing operational
assistance and other functions for maintaining public
order is considerable. For its part, Chad remains willing
to make its modest contribution to peacekeeping and
international security, as demonstrated by its recent
and current commitments, through the deployment
of police in different United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

With your permission, Madam President, I would
like to ask one question to all three heads of police
components of the three operations. What do the
Police Commissioners think about including general
knowledge, such as linguistic and cultural knowledge
ofthe host country, in the selection process? Should we
make that a selection criteria?

