Mr. Fassi Fihri (Morocco) (spoke in French):
First, allow me to express, on behalf of the delegation
of the Kingdom of Morocco, my warmest gratitude to
the delegation of the Republic of Mauritius and to you,
Mr. President, for taking the highly appreciated
initiative of holding an open meeting of the Security
Council at the ministerial level to examine the situation
in Africa.

I would also like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to Mr. Kofi Annan, Secretary-General of our
Organization, for his tireless efforts to see to it that
Africa receives the urgent priority treatment it
deserves.

As a member of the African family, the Kingdom
of Morocco, fully sharing all Africa's concerns and
aspirations, is gratified to take part in this debate.
Because of our long history of being nourished by
reciprocal influences and our will to construct a better
future with all our African brothers, we wished to be an
active party in this high-level debate.

I would first like to recall Morocco's early
commitments, to which it remains faithful. At the
multilateral level, Morocco contributed to the
conception, launching and implementation of the ideal
of African unity, and, since then, it has continued to be
identified with championing and safeguarding the
interests of all Africa. More specifically, whenever
international forums have so requested, Morocco has
never hesitated to participate in peacekeeping and
peace-making operations, whether in the Congo,
Somalia or Angola.

At the bilateral level, Morocco has, through its
centuries-old relations, played whenever needed a role
in reconciliation and mediation and has also worked to
create and implement partnerships with its African
brothers in the major areas of economic cooperation,
culture, education and social development.

In this debate, allow me to focus on three
essential points that seem to me to be decisive for the
future of our continent. Africa's emphasis on placing
its problems more frequently on the agenda of the
Security Council is explained by the continuation, or
even the worsening, of the situation on our
marginalized continent and also by Africa's wish to see
the international community become more involved in
assisting the efforts of the African countries to
guarantee their security and to ensure progress and
development for their peoples.

The analysis of the situation in Africa has been
completed and confirmed. The problems have been
identified and solutions have been proposed, as is
clearly reflected in the Secretary-General's various
recommendations on this matter. What remains to be
done is put these recommendations in practice, put in
place the structures and mechanisms to promote their
implementation and to gather the resources to
guarantee their success.

For its part, Africa has made its own efforts, and
not without success. Thanks to regional and
subregional initiatives, some conflicts have been
stabilized and others are now being settled. Clear
progress has also been made in several regions of
Africa with regard to democratization, good
governance, respect for human rights and economic
reform.

However, a great deal remains to be done to
stabilize the continent and enable it to play its rightful
role in the current process of globalization. In
particular, there is a need to respond specifically and
appropriately to the nature and complexity of African
conflicts, characterized by the intervention of non-State
transnational networks serving private interests and the
exacerbation of ethnic rivalries - a direct consequence
of artificial, arbitrary borders.

This situation is made all the more dangerous
because it is being fuelled by illegal movements of
conventional and light weapons on a dangerous
scale- I know that you, Mr. President, are keenly
aware of this issue - by the use of mercenaries and
children in conflicts and by the exploitation of raw
materials for the purpose of war.

Meanwhile, the living conditions of African
populations, particularly in the regions affected by
these conflicts, grow worse year by year, forcing
hundreds of thousands of individuals to live in a state
of perpetual exile, exposed to war, famine, epidemics
and all types of dangers. That forced exodus sometimes
jeopardizes the stability of neighbouring States that
host these refugees and displaced persons. This is a
significant burden that saps their limited resources,
which they need in order to meet the basic needs of
their own peoples.
It is clear now that the international community
cannot limit itself to separating belligerents and to
guaranteeing ceasefires. There is now an imperative
need to establish integrated plans that duly take into
account all aspects of a conflict, whether political,
economic, social or humanitarian. Thus, there is a need
to strengthen State institutions and to develop a set of
small projects designed to improve the daily lives of
the people concerned.

Along with the efforts undertaken by the
international community to guarantee the security of
the continent, there is a need to promote the social and
economic development of Africa. For its part, Africa
has taken the initiative in drawing up the New
Partnership for Africa's Development, an economic
platform whose objective is to place Africa on the path
to growth and sustainable development through a
renewed partnership with the international community.
The pursuit of that goal calls both for Africa to make
an organized effort and for sustained interest on the
part of the international community - an organized
African effort to provide clear visibility for the various
partners of Africa, for multilateral and regional
institutions and for the economic players, be they
African or foreign, public or private; sustained
international interest, for the actions undertaken by
Africa can succeed only with substantial and continued
support from the specialized international institutions.
It is clear that the responsibility of each of the African
States remains to mobilize totally its full national
capacity within this framework.

The Kingdom of Morocco has had much
experience and is an active party to this process, which
it has supported since the very launching of the Omega
Project. Morocco is ready to contribute its expertise to
the implementation of a plan of action, in concert with
the specialized agencies, for the implementation of the
objectives set out by Africa in order to extricate itself
from instability and to provide for its development.
Morocco remains convinced that subregional and
bilateral action by States is indispensable in order to
advance the political stability and economic
development of the African continent.

The United Nations Secretary-General quite
rightly made this a high-priority element of a strategy
for Africa. In his report of 13 April 1998, he called
upon "African countries to give priority to establishing
uniform standards for equipment and facilities relevant
to subregional interactions" (S/1998/318, para. 102),
and appealed to donors and trading partners to support
"the development of common standards and equipment
among neighbouring countries" (ibid.).

The Kingdom of Morocco, which historically has
been at the crossroads of various cultures and
civilizations, is working to deepen relations between
the northern and the sub-Saharan parts of the continent
through the development of the infrastructure
necessary to promote and develop exchanges of all
kinds. We are also working for the advancement of an
ambitious partnership in a framework of shared
responsibility between the northern and southern
Mediterranean, and even between Europe and Africa.

In conclusion, I would like to express Morocco's
full support for the proposal of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Guinea calling for the
establishment of a follow-up mechanism within the
Security Council for the implementation of the global
integrated strategy of the international community for
our continent.

