The Secretary-General: Let me begin by saying
that I am very pleased to join the Council today for this
important meeting on Guinea-Bissau, which could not
be more timely. Last week's armed showdown between
the head of the former military junta and the elected
President, which nearly plunged the country back into
turmoil, underscores the precariousness of the stability
in that country, as in many others which are recovering
from conflict.

In this connection, I should like to thank the
Council for taking a firm and timely stand last week, as
well as those leaders in and outside the subregion who
have contributed to the peaceful end of the crisis. I
wish also to commend my Representative, Mr. Nana-
Sinkam, for his tireless peacemaking efforts. The
situation has improved, but requires close monitoring.

I would like to take this opportunity, however, to
urge the Government to manage the aftermath of the
latest crisis within the rule of law and with due regard
to democratic principles and national reconciliation.

Let me now turn to the main subject of my
remarks, which is the challenge of post-conflict peace-
building and some of the lessons to be drawn from the
United Nations experience in Guinea-Bissau. Post-
conflict peace-building includes a range of measures
intended to prevent a relapse into a cycle of conflict
and instability. To be effective, it needs to address the
root causes of conflict, not just the symptoms. In the
case of Guinea-Bissau, these causes include weak State
institutions, a disgruntled and highly politicized army,
endemic poverty, a crippling debt and an insecure
internal and external environment.

Addressing such a grave range of causes requires,
on the part of the Government and the international
community, not only difficult political decisions, but
also a serious and long-term commitment, supported by
the timely deployment of resources. Regrettably, as the
case of Guinea-Bissau amply demonstrates, neither the
Government nor the international community is always
fully prepared or able to play an effective role. A
number of institutional and political lessons can be
drawn here. I will mention just a few of them.

First, the political nature of many post-conflict
crises requires action of the type which should
normally be undertaken by a sovereign Government,
but which the post-conflict Government may not
always be in a position to undertake, owing to
challenges from undemocratic forces. Ideally, of
course, the newly elected Government should be in the
driver's seat. But this is not always the case and may
not be possible, particularly if State institutions are
weak, the coffers are empty and the legitimacy of the
Government is seriously challenged. This situation
should, therefore, be taken into account when devising
mandates for new peace-building missions or when
revising the mandates or considering exit strategies for
existing ones.

Secondly, because of its multi-disciplinary nature,
post-conflict peace-building often falls between relief
and traditional development assistance, and therefore
its needs go largely unmet because it falls between
these two. Although both the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the Bretton
Woods institutions- and I am happy that our
colleague from the World Bank is here with us - have
developed new and flexible financial instruments
dedicated to post-conflict recovery, these instruments
remain modest and under-funded. The donor
community, including the international financial
institutions, must find a way to strike a balance
between the need for macroeconomic stability on the
one hand, and peace-related priorities which require
greater tolerance for public sector expenditures and
budget deficits, on the other.

Thirdly, the representative of the Secretary-
General is increasingly being asked to take on
responsibilities for which his office is not funded or
mandated. In the case of the United Nations Office in
Guinea-Bissau, during the most recent crisis, my
Representative was called upon by the Government and
other political forces to play a "frontline" mediation
role.

Such a role tends to be especially prominent in
the early stages of a post-conflict situation, when State
institutions are weakest, the legitimacy of a new
Government is challenged and the distrust and
animosity between the political and military forces are
highest. But that role cannot be carried out without
resources. I intend, therefore, to seek the legislative
bodies' approval for one of the recommendations in the
Brahimi report.

I refer to the recommendation, and I quote, that:

"A small percentage of a mission's first year
budget should be made available to the
representative or special representative of the
Secretary-General leading the mission in order to
fund quick impact projects in its area of
operations, with the advice of the United Nations
country team's resident coordinator".
(S/2000/809, para. 47 (a))

I hope I can count on the support of Council members.

Peace-building is a multidimensional process. Its
objective is not merely to dismantle the structures of
violence but also to assist in building the structures of
lasting peace and in laying the foundations of
sustainable development. It requires comprehensive
strategies involving all relevant actors and embracing
multiple sectors of activity, including political,
military, diplomatic, development, human rights,
humanitarian and many others. In essence, peace-
building is simply conflict prevention, but with the
additional challenges of an immediate, fragile
transitional situation. If we needed a reminder of this
lesson, Guinea-Bissau provided it last week.

I am glad that you will continue to devote your
efforts to making the Organization more effective in
this crucial area of our mission for peace and security,
and I look forward to the results of your deliberations.

