Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, Sir, I should like to welcome you and to
express our satisfaction at seeing you preside over our
meeting. We would like also to welcome the
representatives of East Timor, the World Bank and the
United Nations Development Programme and to thank
them for their statements. We also thank Mr. Vieira de
Mello for his comprehensive briefing.

We are pleased at the obvious progress that East
Timor is continuing to achieve in various fields
following the election of the Constituent Assembly. We
appreciate the fruitful efforts made in this regard by the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET).

The Chinese delegation welcomes East Timor's
decision to declare independence on 20 May next year.
The independence of East Timor is the result of the
common efforts made by the East Timorese people and
the international community, and it also represents
important progress on the part of the United Nations
towards fulfilling its mission in East Timor.

However, 20 May is by no means a cutoff date for
UNTAET. My delegation has always emphasized the
fact that, even after the independence of East Timor, it
is imperative to maintain a considerable international
presence there, with a view to completing the mandate
entrusted to UNTAET by the Security Council and to
ensure the full success of the work of the United
Nations in East Timor.

The Secretary-General, in his report, has put
forward specific recommendations with regard to the
composition and scale ofa successor mission. We deem
his recommendations practical and feasible. Paragraph
84 of the report emphasizes in particular the views he
expressed in his report entitled "No exit without
strategy":

"The essential requirement in the case of
East Timor is to ensure that the enormous
sacrifices of the East Timorese, the substantial
investments of the international community and
the cooperation of the parties required to bring
about a successful transition to independence are
not squandered for lack of international attention
and support for the new State." (S/2001/983)

This statement cuts to the heart of the matter and
inspires us to deep reflection. The realization of
independence in East Timor represents only half of
what the United Nations has set out to achieve there.
After 20 May, as a newly independent State, East
Timor will be facing the tremendous task of
reconstruction. In many areas, the help of the United
Nations will be indispensable.

The final withdrawal of the United Nations from
East Timor must have as its precondition the
completion of its mandate, as set out in resolution 1272
(1999). After the independence of East Timor, the
continued presence of the United Nations will have the
goal of ensuring that the efforts made to date by the
international community, including the United Nations,
in East Timor are not squandered.

The Secretary-General, in his report, said that he
was submitting his proposals to the Security Council
for its consideration and approval. I want to emphasize
the fact that he used the word "approval". Having
carefully considered the objective needs of the
independence process of East Timor and the practical
recommendations made by the Secretary-General,
China endorses those recommendations. Of course, this
is on the understanding that the successor mission is
guaranteed sufficient financial resources.

Finally, we support the presidential statement to
be made at the end of this meeting.

