Mr. Farhadi (Afghanistan) (spoke in French): I
am grateful to you, Madam President, for having
convened this meeting of the Council in order to
discuss the situation in my country, which today is
experiencing a new chapter in its history. I should like
also to congratulate you on the outstanding manner in
which you are conducting the work of the Council. I
am also grateful to all of those around this table and in
this Council Chamber who have expressed such
important ideas with a view to helping my country.

The security forces of the Islamic State of
Afghanistan entered the capital yesterday without any
bloodshed among the civilian population. When those
forces were still on the outskirts of the city, the
Taliban, before fleeing, began looting the banks and
foreign exchange counters. Our security forces entered
the capital in order to meet the pressing needs and
expectations of the people and to fill the political and
administrative vacuum created by the hasty flight of
Taliban members - both Afghan and foreign - and of
the Al Qaeda mercenaries, who carried out attacks
against the civilian population and who also looted the
banks in Kabul.

The city of Kabul, which has been the capital of
the country for more than two centuries, is located in
southern Afghanistan, south of the Hindu Kush chain.
It should be noted that many of the members of the
security forces who reached Kabul have family and
loved ones there.

We consider that this new phase represents not
only progress towards peace and national unity in
Afghanistan, but also a major victory on the part of the
United Nations, the international community and all
States, including our neighbours, against terrorism in
the world. This new phase does not represent a
monopoly of power that favours certain sectors of the
population over others, but, rather, a new hope for all
Afghans of different ethnic groups, who will freely and
democratically define their political and social future.

The Government of the Islamic State of
Afghanistan and the United Front, which is part of it,
invite the representatives of the United Nations,
international organizations and all friendly countries to
come to Kabul and to see firsthand how our security
forces entered the town, and to also witness the warm
welcome given them by the people of Kabul.

Likewise, one of the Pashtun leaders, Hamid
Karzai, who was Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs in
1996 and who is the son of the famous leader Abdul
Ahad Karzai, is currently organizing a with the
assistance of General Aref Nurzai, who had
accompanied Commander Massoud during his official
visit to the European Parliament in France - the
armed resistance in the southern part of the country. We
know that another leader, Commander Abdul Haq, who
was preparing to fight the Taliban in the eastern and
southern provinces, was betrayed by foreign secret
services and executed two weeks ago by the Taliban.

Since 11 September, when the heinous and
despicable terrorist attacks against New York and
Washington took place - or, more specifically, since 9
September, the date of the cowardly terrorist attack
against our national leader, Commander Massoud -
we the States and peoples of the United Nations face
two important questions.

The first question concerns effective measures to
combat and eliminate terrorism in the world, and the
second question relates to how to establish a political
system in Afghanistan that is based on the rule of law,
pluralistic democracy and respect for the rights of men
and women. Indeed, these two questions are clearly
closely linked.

As the Council is aware, Afghanistan and its
people are the victims of a dual phenomenon that is
completely beyond their control: one the one hand,
terrorist acts carried out by foreign groups and
movements that have illegally settled in Afghanistan
and that are closely linked to international terrorist
networks, and, on the other, a policy of terror carried
out by the Taliban and their foreign allies, in
contravention of the basic principles of Islam and of
the Afghan tradition, and against human dignity.

The first question - the combat against
terrorism - was the object of a comprehensive review
by the United Nations in September and October 2001.
We clearly indicated to the General Assembly and to
the Security Council our strong desire permanently to
rid Afghanistan and the Afghan people, with the help
of the international community, of its hotbeds of
foreign terrorists and of Taliban forces, among them
those led by Osama bin Laden.

As for the second question, regarding the
country's political future, that is today the primary
concern of the United Nations and its Members, as well
as of the Islamic State of Afghanistan and the United
Front, which is a part of it. We fully support all the
actions and measures that have been decided and
implemented in this regard in accordance with the
relevant resolutions and decisions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly, which we have
approved. In that context, we applaud and support the
efforts of Secretary-General Kofi Annan and of his
Special Representative for Afghanistan, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi. Likewise, we count on the unfailing support
of all Member States, and in particular of the States
members of the Security Council.

We have listened very attentively to the very
interesting and useful statements made today, as well as
to the proposals of the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative. We are grateful to Mr. Brahimi
for his services to the Afghan nation, both past and
present. His proposals deserve our full support. In
some cases, his future talks with the Islamic State of
Afghanistan will certainly be fruitful. We will keep this
in mind as much as possible. Our ultimate goal is to be
able to establish the necessary conditions so that the
Afghan people can freely and democratically chose
their constitution and political system for a free and
independent Afghanistan based on the principles of
Islam, the rule of law, pluralistic democracy, the rights
of men and women and respect for the fundamental
principles of international law incorporated in the
Charter and in the practice of the United Nations. We
will also fight the production of, and trafficking in,
drugs.

The establishment and consolidation of peace in
Afghanistan depends primarily on Afghans themselves
and on all those who legally and legitimately represent
them. Thus far, nearly two generations of Afghans have
sacrificed themselves for their freedom and
independence. Today, the Afghan people are paying a
high price for foreign intervention and the fight against
terrorism. No ethnic group - Pashtun, Tajik, Uzbek,
Hazara or other - has an absolute majority in
Afghanistan, and we therefore need a multi-ethnic and
broad-based government in the country.

We respect the agreement regarding Afghanistan
concluded on 1 October 2001 in the framework of the
Rome process and under the auspices of the former
King of Afghanistan. We say very clearly to our
compatriots that Afghanistan and the Afghan people
are in danger and we need our solidarity and national
unity, which have always emerged in exceptional
circumstances regardless of our ethnic or linguistic
differences or particularities, so as to return peacefully
and without internal conflict or quarrels to the path of
peace and security and rebuild our political, economic
and social future.

We also say to our neighbours, to the Member
States of the United Nations and to the international
community that this objective cannot be achieved
without a final end to both direct and indirect foreign
intervention - in particular the intervention practised
by Pakistan, which led Afghanistan to the brink of the
abyss and which is still having disastrous consequences
for our country, the region and the world. In particular,
we recall the tragic events in Afghanistan between
1992 and 1996, especially those in Kabul. Those events
were provoked mainly by direct foreign intervention in
our internal affairs.

Just as we understand the desire of Pakistan not
to see the establishment in Afghanistan of a Power that
is hostile to its legitimate interests, we also reject that a
neighbouring country may dictate to Afghans the
appointment of their government or the conduct of
their domestic and international policy. No country has
the right to exercise a veto over the right to self-
determination of the Afghan nation. Finally, we say the
same thing to other neighbouring countries and to the
rest of the world, who are familiar with the attachment
of Afghans to freedom and independence regardless of
the price.

From a military standpoint, and despite their
largely insufficient material means, the Islamic State of
Afghanistan and the United Front, which is a part of it,
have been fighting for more than five years and will
continue to do so with the same results as we have seen
today and against the power of the Taliban and the
pockets of foreign terrorists on our territory. We must
also stress that the front against the Taliban and the
terrorists is not limited to the northern part of the
country alone, but also extends in large part to the rest
of the country and increasingly involves all elements of
the Afghan people.

Similarly, from the political point of view, we are
striving to establish with representatives of all sectors
of the Afghan population a political regime acceptable
to all Afghans. In accordance with the lessons
conveyed to us by Commander Massoud, we would
like to take all the positive and negative consequences
of our political experience in Afghanistan in the last
two decades, and the changes that have taken place in
the world during those 20 years.

Given the events under way and the advances
made by our military forces with the full support of the
Afghan people, we will do all we can to alleviate the
suffering of our people and prevent any sort of political
vacuum or interruption in the running of the country,
particularly in Kabul. But it is also clear that in the
current circumstances the Afghan people need the
support of the United Nations and international
assistance, as they will in the future. That assistance
will be necessary not only to restore and consolidate
peace, but also for the millions of internal and external
refugees and to be able to establish all the political and
administrative institutions for the reconstruction of the
country, its economy and its social and cultural fabric,
which has been so severely damaged.

The Islamic State of Afghanistan and the United
Front, which is a part of it, like the Afghan people as a
whole, count on the support and assistance of the
United Nations and the international community to be
able to attain all these objectives.

