Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy condemns in the firmest
possible terms the barbaric killing of 21 Egyptian
Coptic Christian citizens in Sirte, and we express our
deepest condolences and solidarity to the families of
the victims and the Egyptian authorities.

The Libyan crisis is one of the most pressing,
sensitive challenges facing the international community
today. There has been a grave deterioration in the
security situation, particularly in Tripoli, as evidenced
by the attack on the Corinthia Hotel on 27 January,
followed by other serious episodes. This requires
that all of us support by every means possible the
diplomatic action that is being pursued to resolve the
crisis. Thanks also to this Security Council meeting,
we are witnessing a growing awareness ofthe crisis and
of the need for a timely solution. What we expect from
this meeting is a realization once and for all that here at
the United Nations we need measures that can stabilize
the country indefinitely.

In its difficult transition to democracy, Libya
has remained vulnerable to divisions between the
factions that compromise attempts to invigorate that
transition. While the election produced a Parliament
and Government recognized by the international
community, it did not mark a turning point in the political
process. Libya's fragile political and institutional
framework risk being filled by the threat of terrorist
groups, against which we must stay strong, and by the
joining of forces of local factions and extremists. We
cannot allow that to happen. On the contrary, we must
redouble our efforts to support the process of dialogue
facilitated by the United Nations, which is showing
increasing signs of vitality, with a view to the rapid
formation of a national unity Government that is able to
stabilize the country, assert its authority over the whole
territory, and jumpstart reconstruction.

Italy has supported the United Nations mediation
efforts from the start, convinced that a political
solution is the only way out of the crisis in Libya. Some
preliminary results have been achieved at the Geneva
and Ghadames meetings, thanks also to the dedication
of Special Representative Bernardino Leon, whom we
thank for his efforts. Italy is pleased to have contributed
to this progress by making available to the United
Nations its network of contacts and providing logistics
support for several sessions.

Our shared goal is to empower the moderate front
on the Libyan political scene. We need a clear-cut,
renewed commitment from all those who believe in
dialogue as the only way forward. The success of that
dialogue will require and must aim for the conclusion
of a credible ceasefire respected by all the parties to
the conflict throughout the country. But the latest
developments also send the message, loud and clear,
that we do not have forever. In Libya, we are dealing
not with monolithic blocs but rather with many
different fronts that have their own internal conflicts
and interests. The splintering of the parties is both a
challenge to and an opportunity for the United Nations
mediation efforts.

The next few weeks, we believe, will be crucial to
the future of Libya. Italy intends to step up its support
for the efforts ofthe United Nations and is ready to do its
part in the framework of the decisions that the Security
Council may take. At the same time, the deterioration
of the situation on the ground demands a change in
pace on the part of the international community before
it is too late. This is why Italy looks with expectation
to the upcoming renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya. The Mission should
be equipped with the mandate, the means and the
resources needed to accelerate the political dialogue and
to stabilize and assist a new reconciliation framework
and a new national unity Government in Libya.

The international community must send the
message that, once the Libyans themselves have
reached the compromise needed to form a national
unity Government, it is ready to resume its cooperation
and support. We must not find ourselves unprepared
when that moment arrives, which we hope will be soon.
If we do, we risk not only an immediate negative impact
on the political sustainability of the national unity
Government, but also the advance of radicalism and a
worsening of the humanitarian situation.

Allow me to recall here the tragedy of the thousands
of persons who flee the country on unsafe vessels
headed for the Italian and European coasts. Since the
beginning of the year, the European Union's Operation
Triton has already rescued 5,302 people from the sea, an
almost 60-per cent increase over 2014. These statistics
clearly indicate to us the dimensions of the challenge
we face. What is happening in Libya has a profound
impact both in Africa and in Europe, on both shores
of the Mediterranean, with grave repercussions on the
stability of Libya's neighbours - including Italy - and
on the success and sustainability of the transition
processes in the area.

It will be ourjob from the start to assist the Libyan
authorities in the stabilization of the country. Even in
the most optimistic scenario, this process may be long
and fragile, requiring coordinated action on the part of
various international stakeholders. Italy is willing to take
a leading role in this task, in the framework of a United
Nations initiative and together with our partners in the
region. We are ready to contribute to the monitoring
of the ceasefire and the keeping of the peace. We are
ready to work to train security and military units, in the
framework of the integration of the militants into the
regular army, and for the rehabilitation of the country's
infrastructures. We are ready to treat and to heal the
wounds of war and to resume our broad programme
of cooperation with Libya. The civilian population
must clearly see the advantages of the reconciliation
championed by the international community.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the full, resolute
support of Italy for the stabilization of Libya through
the dialogue sponsored by the United Nations. We do
so fully aware, as we must all be, that the deterioration
of the situation on the ground demands a change of
pace on the part of the international community. And
it demands the maximum possible commitment of us
all to the pacification of the country so as to prevent
Libya from becoming a victim ofa blind and desperate
terrorism.

