Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of America): The United States condemns the assassination
this morning of Lebanese Minister of Industry Pierre
Gemayel. This assassination is a clear act of terrorism
that shows why it is critical that the Security Council
support democracy and accountability in Lebanon and,
in that vein, support as quickly as possible the
establishment of a tribunal as requested by the Lebanese
Government in the wake of the assassination of Rafik
Hariri. All Member countries, especially Lebanon's
neighbours, must stand against such acts of
intimidation and against those groups that seek to
destabilize and divide Lebanon, and must support
Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial integrity. We will
be working with colleagues to develop a text to address
this situation and to strongly support the Government
of Lebanon.

Nearly two weeks ago, the Security Council met
(see S/PV.5565) and considered an unbalanced and
one-sided draft resolution. Four members abstained
and the United States voted no on that draft resolution.

On 17 November, the General Assembly met in a
politically-motivated emergency special session,
adopting yet another one-sided and biased resolution
(General Assembly resolution ES-10/16) that ignores the
reality of the situation on the ground and does nothing to
make progress toward greater peace and stability in the
region.

The Human Rights Council met 15 November in
Geneva, continuing its fixation on Israel to the
exclusion of addressing pressing human rights issues
elsewhere, including in Belarus, Burma, Cuba, North
Korea, the Sudan, Uzbekistan and Zimbabwe.

Regrettably, none of this frenetic activity has
made a constructive contribution to the reinvigoration
of the Road Map or progress towards the two-State
solution. Hastily-called meetings and polemical
resolutions are no substitute for determination by the
parties to undertake the hard work needed to take steps
toward peace. We urge Member States to reject
diplomatic theatrics that fail to serve the interests of
peace or advance the aspirations of the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples for a more secure, stable and
prosperous future.

Since taking the reins of power in January, the
Hamas-led Palestinian Authority Government has
failed in its duty to the Palestinian people to lead
responsibly and take the steps necessary to create a
better future for its constituents. It is the responsibility of
the Hamas-led Palestinian Authority Government to
prevent terror, stop attacks from within Gaza and
dismantle the terrorist infrastructure. Progress towards
peace requires a Palestinian Government that disavows
terror and violence and accepts the Quartet principles:
renunciation of terror, recognition of Israel and acceptance
of previous agreements.
More terror, whether directed at Israel or at the
United States, is not the solution. Nor will it enable the
Palestinian people to achieve their aspirations. In fact, the
opposite is the case. We again call for the immediate and
unconditional release of Corporal Gilad Shalit.

The Road Map and the principles contained therein
remain the only agreed international basis upon which to
move forward towards the two-State goal. The United
States remains committed to diplomatic efforts to
engage moderate leaders, help the Palestinians
strengthen and reform their security sector and support
Israeli and Palestinian leaders in their efforts to come
together to resolve their differences.

Last week, Assistant Secretary of State
David Welch met with his Quartet counterparts -
European Union, the Russian Federation and the
United Nations- to support implementation of the
Road Map. We will continue to work closely with our
Quartet partners and our friends in the region to create
an environment that will facilitate progress toward
the realization of President Bush's two-State vision.

The Quartet has welcomed efforts by Palestinian
Authority President Abbas to form a government
committed to Quartet principles, and the United States
stands ready to renew engagement and assistance to a
Palestinian Authority committed to peace.

In Lebanon, on 12 July, Hizbollah launched a
conflict that caused enormous suffering and destruction
in both Lebanon and Israel. This highlighted the risks
of acquiescing in a status quo in Lebanon that permits
militias to remain armed and unchecked. We call once
again for the immediate and unconditional release of
Israel Defense Forces soldiers Eldad Regev and Ehud
Goldwasser, kidnapped on 12 July.

The United States supports the efforts of the
democratically elected Government of Lebanon as it
expands its sovereignty over all its territory. The
United States continues to call for the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1559
(2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006), particularly the
provisions regarding the disbanding and disarming of
the militias.

We are alarmed at indications that Syria is
working with Hizbollah and other Lebanese allies to
destabilize the democratically elected Government of
Lebanon.

We are pleased with the Government of
Lebanon's significant progress in deploying the
Lebanese Armed Forces to the south of the country for
the first time in almost 40 years, as well as the historic
deployment of the Lebanese Armed Forces along the
eastern part of the Blue Line and along Lebanon's
border with Syria.

A rearmed Hizbollah could nullify efforts to
restore and maintain peace, so it is vital to implement
all the provisions of Security Council resolution 1701
(2006), especially the creation of a zone between the
Litani River and the Blue Line free of all armed
personnel, assets and weapons other than those of the
Government of Lebanon and of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), as well as the
embargo on the sale or shipment of weapons except as
authorized by the Lebanese Government or UNIFIL.

Syria's political and material support for
Hizbollah's continued existence as a militia was made
clear during last summer's hostilities in Lebanon,
despite the call for the disarmament of all militias in
Lebanon in Security Council resolution 1559 (2004).
We are concerned that Syria is not abiding by the
embargo on unauthorized weapons shipments into
Lebanon imposed by resolution 1701 (2006).

The challenges before the United Nations, the
international community and the countries in the
Middle East demand a serious, realistic approach, and
not political posturing. The people in the region
deserve no less. The United States remains committed
to working with those who can rise to these challenges
and who have the courage to reject stalemate and
polemics.

