Mr. Kumar (India): I would like to join other
speakers in thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Farid Zarif for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in Kosovo and the activities of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). I would also like to thank Mr. Vuk
Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, for his
statement outlining his country's perspective on the
situation in Kosovo. We also listened carefully to the
statement of Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.

The Secretary-General's report on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(S/2012/275) for the quarter ending 15 April highlights
in detail the situation on the ground in Kosovo. We

would like to congratulate Serbia on obtaining
European Union (EU) candidate-country status in early
March this year. We also note that the European Union
launched a feasibility study for a stabilization and
association agreement with Kosovo in late March.
Those events mark the most positive political
developments during the reporting period arising from
concrete progress in the EU-facilitated dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina.

We are happy to note that, in February, the parties
reached an agreement on Kosovo's regional
representation and cooperation in an EU-facilitated
dialogue. We hope that differences in the application of
the footnote concerning Kosovo's status and its
mutually exclusive interpretations will soon be
resolved by mutual agreement and understanding. The
conclusion by the parties of a technical protocol
providing an operational dimension to the agreement
on the integrated management of crossing points is also
a welcome development.

We are seriously concerned about the overall
security situation in Kosovo, which has been marked
by political tension, as well as criminal incidents,
including the attack on an embassy in Pristina.
Compared to the same period last year, there has also
been an increase in crimes affecting minority
communities. Such crimes, including damage to
Serbian Orthodox churches and household property,
have serious implications for inter-communal relations
in Kosovo. In that connection, we suggest that the
concerns of the Serbian Orthodox Church over the
transfer of security responsibilities at Devie Monastery
should be heeded.

We urge UNMIK to continue to prioritize
adequate protection of Serbian religious and cultural
heritage in Kosovo, particularly in view of the
significant resistance that has been noted in the Kosovo
Albanian population against legislative measures and
their implementation aiming at the protection of Serb
cultural and religious sites and the gap between the
commitments made by the Kosovo authorities in that
area and their implementation.

With respect to the rule of law, UNMIK should
continue to provide document certification services of
a civil nature and to facilitate the interaction of the
Kosovo authorities with INTERPOL and other
organizations. UNMIK should also remain engaged in
the missing persons issue and other confidence-
building measures between the communities. We also
welcome the adoption of the law by the Albanian
Parliament to facilitate cooperation with the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, especially the
agreement on the Special Investigative Task Force, led
by Mr. Williamson, allowing the Task Force to fully
implement its mandate.

In conclusion, we encourage UNMIK to continue
to implement its mandate in a status-neutral manner, in
strict accordance with resolution 1244 (1999) and other
relevant decisions of the Security Council. That will
help us to realize the hope of the Secretary-General
that the trend of tension and confrontation that has
become discernible in the past year will gradually
subside and that the positive trends of dialogue will be
strengthened. To that end, leaders on both sides should
exercise their leadership in such a manner as to reduce
tension and promote a climate conducive to dialogue
and mutual understanding.

