Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
through you, Mr. President, to express our gratitude to
all those delegations - that is to say, the vast majority
of delegations - that have expressed their concern
over the Iraqi crisis and that have advocated peace and
opposition to war. In advocating peace they are
emphasizing the fact that they value the noble
principles upon which the Organization and the
Security Council were founded: saving the world from
the scourge of war and maintaining international peace
and security through peaceful means.

At the same time, I also understand the positions
of States that sided with the extreme stance of the
United Kingdom and the United States of America.
Their reasons for doing so are known to us and to
them. I would merely like to call upon them to consider
this issue carefully and to avoid taking hasty decisions
in the future. Issues of war and peace imply a grave
moral and historical responsibility. Careful
consideration entails understanding what Iraq is doing
and what the international inspectors are doing.
Simultaneously, it also means accurately ascertaining
the true position of the United States and the United
Kingdom.

But, what I fail to understand is the kind of
language employed by some speakers - truly debased
language that is not customarily heard in the Council,
which I shall not go into in any detail. Nevertheless,
allow me to point out the following.

First of all, there are no weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq. Secondly, Iraq will continue to
cooperate constructively and productively with the
inspections and will make every necessary effort in that
regard. Let me also reassure those who have called on
Iraq to cooperate that Iraq is determined to do so, both
on substance and on process, in order to cut off at the

knees any allegation to the effect that Iraq possesses
weapons of mass destruction.

Let me also say that there are no real. serious
problems in our relations with the inspectors. However.
there are outstanding issues concerning disarmament.
What is required of Iraq is not that it hand over
weapons of mass destruction; Iraq is to hand over
documents and other evidence attesting to its being free
of weapons of mass destruction. In fact, that is what
Iraq is doing. We are confident that no one will find
weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, because there are
none. Yet. some wish to exploit these disarmament
issues. I call upon those who have stood side by side
with the United States and have supported the use of
military force to consider and examine the reports of
the United Nations so as to ascertain what the
outstanding issues are. They do not relate to weapons
of mass destruction; they relate to evidence and
documents. That is precisely what Iraq is working to
provide. We arc doing our utmost in that regard.

Iraq has therefore permitted everything that has
been described by the great majority of those who have
spoken here on behalf of the international community.
Iraq has opened every door and has allowed everything
it possibly can allow. The inspectors have merely to
carry out their work in a targeted and objective manner,
away from the pressures that are being brought to bear
upon them through the media and directly the United
States and the United Kingdom.

