Ms. Agladze (Georgia): At the outset, let me express our deepest condolences to the victims of the Ukrainian passenger aeroplane crash in Tehran this week. Our thoughts and prayers are with the families of the victims. We believe it is of the utmost importance to ensure a swift and comprehensive investigation of the crash. Almost 75 years since the founding of the United Nations, we still live in a world where the main principles of international law enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations - the principles of the sovereign equality, the non-use of threat or force against the territorial integrity of States and non-interference in their internal affairs - are violated on a daily basis. Multilateralism and the rules-based order are under attack. Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations gives the Security Council the primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and _ security on behalf of Member States. That is why it is so important that today, in this Chamber, we discuss how international law and the Charter are being respected and the implications of this issue around the world. Let me share the worrisome experience of my own region where, due to the destructive role of one of the Security Council members, the territorial integrity and sovereignty of two of its neighbouring States are being violated. This year marks the twelfth anniversary of Georgia experiencing a full-scale military aggression by Russia, which resulted in the illegal occupation of 20 per cent of my country's territory. A few years later, Ukraine fell victim to the same aggressor. In the aftermath of the August 2008 war, the mandate of United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia was brazenly terminated by the veto cast by the Russian Federation, a permanent member of the Security Council and a party to the conflict, thereby creating a total vacuum of the international security presence in the occupied territories of Georgia when it was most needed. Those blatant violations of the fundamental norms and principles of international law and disregard for the territorial integrity of the sovereign States is a massive blow to European security and the entire international order. Despite Georgia's continued commitment to peaceful conflict resolution, which implies the de-occupation of our territories and reconciliation and confidence-building between the war-torn communities, all our efforts are met with resistance from the occupying Power. Russia is not fulfilling its international commitments and continues to violate the European Union-mediated ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008. Let me also underline that, to this very day, even international human rights mechanisms are not allowed to enter the occupied regions. Both regions remain heavily militarized with Russia's full-fledged military bases, regular military drills remaining the source of the destabilization of the already extremely fragile security environment in the wider region. Russia's ongoing steps towards de facto annexation of these Georgian regions by gradually dragging them into its military, political, economic, social and legal system further aggravate the situation. This illegal process also results in the extreme deterioration of the humanitarian situation and violations of human rights on the ground, including the rights of ethnic Georgians to life, health, education in their native language, residence and property, as well as restrictions on the freedom of movement. The practice of installing barbwire fences and multiple artificial obstacles on Georgian territory, as well as regular closures of the so-called crossing points, greatly exacerbate security and humanitarian conditions on the ground, even resulting in fatalities. In conclusion, I wish again to reiterate that we strongly believe that it is only by upholding the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and through respect for international law that we can deliver on our pledge to maintain peace and security and pave the way for the protection of human rights and sustainable development. We therefore once again reaffirm our strong commitment to multilateralism and rules-based order.
