Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would first of all like to say how happy my
delegation is to see you, Sir, assume the presidency ofthe
Council. We congratulate you and thank you for having
chosen the very important topic of a comprehensive
approach to counter-terrorism.

My delegation welcomes the convening of this open
debate, which provides my country the opportunity
to reiterate its firm condemnation of terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations and to reaffirm its full
support for the efforts of the international community
in our fight against the threats of terrorism and its
causes.

The comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism
is of particular importance because the terrorist threat
remains very real, given the tensions and risks that
characterize the international and regional geopolitical
context and the presence of terrorist groups and
criminal networks, whose activities gravely threaten
international peace and security.

The situation in the African Sahel is a cause of great
concern to the region and the international community.
The serious and many problems facing the countries of
that region, exacerbated by arms and drug trafficking
and the emergence of new terrorist groups, are a threat
to international peace and security. It requires urgently
establishing a comprehensive, concerted and holistic
approach that tackles the root causes of the lack of
stability, including in the African Sahel region.

Tunisia, for its part, has always shown a strong
commitment at the national, regional and international
levels to tackling terrorist threats. That commitment
can be seen nationally through the adoption of a
multidimensional national strategy to deal with the
causes that promote the spread of terrorism. The
strategy takes into account the right of all individuals
to enjoy the benefits of dignity, justice and prosperity.

At the regional level, Tunisia has acceded to almost
all initiatives and actions on the issue, in particular by
ratifying all regional counter-terrorism agreements.

Deeply convinced that counter-terrorism exceeds
the individual capacities of a State or any international
organization, my country has also acceded to most
international treaties and agreements to combat
terrorism and continues to strive to meet its obligations
under the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

Post-revolution Tunisia places a high priority on
protecting human rights in the context of counter-
terrorism measures and is committed to ensuring that
all of our counter-terrorism measures are in conformity
with our obligations regarding human rights law and
humanitarian law.

Just as terrorism has neither race, religion or
nationality, it is also multiform and ever-changing in its
manifestations, methods and means. Moreover, today
terrorism is also electronic. It leans increasingly on
new communication and information technologies and
evolves in tandem with cybercrime.

We believe that purely security-oriented and
sometimes unilateral measures have shown their
limitations. The worldwide persistence of political
injustice, the continued non-resolution of certain
conflicts, notably that in Palestine, increasing economic
disparities, exclusionary policies and the defamation of
religions are all factors that fuel hatred and the rejection
of the other, to feed extremism and to encourage the
indoctrination and recruitment of terrorists.

On this subject, Tunisia wishes to reiterate its
proposal for a United Nations summit to be convened
in the near future renew the contract of peace among
members of the human family and to solidify common
plans to fight all attempts to turn civilizations against
one another.

Today, the global challenge of the growing terrorist
threat can be addressed only by strengthening the
United Nations anti-terrorist architecture and by a
balanced and comprehensive implementation of all
the pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. In that context, Tunisia stresses the
importance of strengthening the capacities of Member
States and their security institutions to effectively fight
terrorism, money-laundering, the illicit movement of

funds and arms proliferation, as well as their ability to
contend with terrorists' use of new communication and
information technologies.

A global response to the challenge of terrorism
requires that we mobilize genuine international
solidarity, based on effective regional and international
cooperation and on unity among all international
actors 4 Governments, international, regional and
subregional organizations, civil society and the
media - so as to avoid a diffusion of our efforts and to
increase our ability to prevent and fight terrorism and
reduce its impact.

