Mr. Esono Angue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, the delegation of Equatorial
Guinea would like to thank Secretary of State Mike
Pompeo and the Government of the United States of
America for convening this debate and congratulate the
United States on its excellent work as President of the
Council this September.

The non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and global nuclear disarmament is one of
the main purposes and missions of the United Nations
and Equatorial Guinea. In that regard, my Government
maintains a firm policy of rejecting and strongly
condemning any action involving launching ballistic
missiles, carrying out nuclear tests, developing a
military nuclear programme, as well as violating
the relevant Council resolutions that strengthen
international sanctions against the proliferation of
nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction.

The nuclear and ballistic programmes of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea do not simply
represent a regional concern, but a global one, as the
consequences and effects of any accidental or intentional
nuclear detonation would be catastrophic at the global
level. Equatorial Guinea has always maintained that
sanctions themselves are not an objective; rather, they
are a means to an end. They must therefore be applied
with proportionality and prudence under the premise
that all peaceful means have been exhausted, which
prevents them from causing damage to the weakest and
most vulnerable sectors. It must be clear that, when
sanctions are imposed by the Council, all States must
comply with them.

But we cannot presume that the current sanctions
mechanism of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006) is currently the most effective.
Equatorial Guinea is in favour of improving that
mechanism; establishing stricter criteria for verification
of evidence; strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation
regime through international cooperation and
consultation; deterring in order to maintain the
moratorium on nuclear tests; setting explicit time limits
for resolutions adopted by the Committee; drawing up
a protocol of action for Committee members; taking
practical and effective measures to disseminate and
make universally known the 1718 sanctions regime, on
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea; seeking the
possibility of sanctions that cause fewer humanitarian
crises and have a lesser impact on third countries; and
helping developing countries strengthen their capacity
to enforce and implement sanctions.

We are witnessing both rare opportunities and
serious challenges to achieving the lasting peace and
common development of human society. An example
of that is the peace and complete and verifiable
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, which
remains a main theme of the Council. The latest
developments in 2018 regarding the situation of the
Korean peninsula are a sign of hope. I am referring to
the high-level inter-Korean negotiations between the
leader of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
Kim Jong Un, and the President of the Republic of
Korea, Moon Jae-in, and to the summit that took
place in June in Singapore between the President of
the United States of America, Donald Trump, and the
leader of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
which, if crystallized, would represent profound and
hopeful changes for the international community.
In that regard, we would like to highlight the actions
of those three statesmen, who have put the supreme
interests of their peoples and humankind ahead of their
ideological convictions.

We have before us a unique opportunity that
should not be missed to achieve the pacification
and non-proliferation of the Korean peninsula. The
third inter-Korean Summit, held on 19 September
in Pyongyang between Kim Jong Un and Moon
Jae-in is a thread of hope. The agreements that were
reached therein are another sign of the will to pursue
rapprochement and good intentions in the search for
peace and understanding. The intention of the two
Koreas to present a joint bid to host and organize the
2032 Olympic Games is a sign of a step in the right
direction. Equatorial Guinea can only celebrate and
encourage the two brother countries to continue their
efforts in the search for understanding with the final
objective of signing a peace agreement. We also
encourage the two countries to continue to promote
encounters and contact between families separated by
the Korean War - a welcome step, as evidenced by
the emotional and moving inter-Korean family reunion
event in August.

Finally, Equatorial Guinea likewise calls on
the countries involved in the crisis on the Korean
peninsula, those with influence in the region and the
international community to refrain from any act that
might hinder the negotiations. On the contrary, they
should do everything possible to reach a satisfactory
solution for all and avoid a situation where there are
winners and losers. We call on the authorities of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to comply with
the resolutions of the Security Council so as to achieve
the complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantlement
of its nuclear and ballistic programmes and make that a
success and a milestone in history.

Equatorial Guinea stands ready to provide its small
contribution in finding a definitive solution by offering
our territory, with its excellent facilities, as a neutral
site for a possible future meeting among all the parties
involved in the crisis on the Korean peninsula.

