Ms. Menendez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation, too, welcomes the presence here of Foreign
Minister Ramos-Horta. Spain is also grateful for the
excellent, detailed and comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/117), which takes into
account the conclusions of the technical assessment
mission of the Secretariat that was conducted last
month. We are also grateful to Mr. Guehenno for his
briefing.

The report of the Secretary-General contains an
assessment of the achievements made by Timor-Leste,
with the support of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET), and proposes the
extension of the mission's mandate for one year, as
well as the modification of the mandate and a reduction
in the size of the mission, in order to meet the
objectives initially established and to ensure that
Timor-Leste can be self-sufficient.

Spain fully supports the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in all their aspects, including the
maintenance of a reduced military component within
UNMISET, composed of both military observers and
troops, with a view to ensuring the stability and
security of Timor-Leste. Indeed, the additional
measures proposed in the report - comparatively
modest when compared with earlier efforts - will be
indispensable if we are to ensure the successful
consolidation of the institutions of Timor-Leste and
prevent backsliding. Clearly, the cooperation of the
Timorese institutions will also be necessary; they still
have important tasks to carry out, such as the
enactment of key legislation with regard to officials,
human rights, anti-corruption activities, the police and
defence.

We are pleased by the excellent communication
between the Governments of Timor-Leste and of
Indonesia, and we hope that they will be able to
complete work on two essential issues: the delimitation
of the land border, and the continued presence of
28,000 refugees in the western part of the island. As
the Secretary-General rightly pointed out in his report,
the situation will remain volatile until the problem is
resolved.

Of the three elements of the Secretary-General's
proposals for UNMISET, there can be no doubt about
that relating to the maintenance of security and
stability. Those who - perhaps with excessive
optimism - believe that there are no potential risks
that would warrant a small peacekeeping force seem to
be forgetting that there are still certain elements that
could destabilize the country after May 2004, such as
cross-border infiltration by hundreds of former militia
members. Spain therefore supports the Secretary-
General's assessment that

"The ability of Timorese agencies to respond
without assistance to security incidents would be
very limited at a time when they are thinly
stretched and poorly supported, their
responsibilities are ill-defined, and their relations
with their Indonesian counterparts are at an early
and fragile stage of development". (S/2004/117, para. 49)

Thus, maintaining a military component in
UNMISET for just one more year will undoubtedly
reduce the risk of destabilizing incidents, in particular
in the western districts. Furthermore, it would make it
possible to consolidate stability and increase local
confidence at the same time as the East Timor security
agencies develop their own capabilities and their
relations with their Indonesian counterparts.

In conclusion, we would like to point out that the
United Nations has made an enormous effort to help
and defend the people of Timor-Leste through three
peacekeeping missions and the organization of a
referendum. The donor conference yielded many
proposals for development, institution-building,
poverty alleviation and training. We have invested too
much to lose what has been gained from one of the
most gratifying and satisfying experiences in this
Organization's history. Spain once again wishes every
success for Timor-Leste.

Finally, we would like to say that we support the
statement to be made later by the representative of
Ireland on behalf of the European Union.

