Mr. Jurica (Croatia): I would like to join others
in thanking Assistant Secretary-General Menkerios, the
Secretary-General of the International Maritime
Organization (IOM), the Director of the Africa II
Division of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO), the Permanent Representative of
Somalia and the Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations for their briefings and
interventions.

We take note of the report (S/2008/709) of the
Secretary-General and the observations contained
therein. I must admit that they provide us with a rather
bleak picture. Bearing that in mind, allow me to make
a number of short observations.

We believe that true progress on the political
track is the essence of a sustainable, long-term
solution. In that regard, we welcome the progress made
with respect to the Djibouti peace process, in particular
the technical signing of the Djibouti agreement on
19 August and the signing of a cessation of armed
confrontation agreement on 26 October.

We commend the parties - the Transitional
Federal Government and the Alliance for the
Re-liberation of Somalia - on the commitment to the
peace process they have demonstrated thus far. We
hope that determination will be further translated into
concrete measures, in particular with respect to the
implementation of the cessation of the armed
confrontation agreement and the establishment of a
Government of national unity.

We also echo the Secretary-General's call for all
Somalis to join the peace process. That being said, we
hope that the aforementioned developments will have a
real impact.

The overall security situation gives very little
room for optimism. The continuing insurgency by
Al-Shabaab and alarming reports on the possibility of
the targeting of the United Nations in Somalia itself
and in neighbouring countries in another major terrorist
attack are a source for concern. The targeting of United
Nations personnel and humanitarian workers, whose
unyielding efforts to alleviate the dire situation for the
people in Somalia we value greatly, is not only morally

08-6107]
repugnant, but should be dealt with severely, as
stipulated by the relevant Security Council resolutions.

We welcome the consolidated description of a
feasible international stabilization force, as presented
in the Secretary-General's report, and the subsequent
efforts of the Secretary-General to raise the issue with
potential lead countries and troop-contributing
countries. We hope those efforts will bear fruit, leading
shortly to a robust multinational force on the ground in
Mogadishu. In the meantime, with the African Union
Mission to Somalia (AMISOM), the efforts of which
we value and commend, on the ground and in the light
of the announced role of the Ethiopian troops, we echo
the Secretary-General's call for the strengthening of
AMISOM's capacities.

My delegation shares the great concerns
expressed by Council members about the effect that the
continuing deterioration in security is having on the
already dire humanitarian situation and the civilian
population. The reports from the field about civilians
being at the mercy of all parties involved in the
conflict are extremely disturbing. All parties to the
conflict should be held equally accountable for
violations of international humanitarian law, including
guarantees for the unimpeded delivery of humanitarian
aid. In a situation in which more than 3 million
Somalis are in dire need of assistance, humanitarian
access should continue to be a priority for the
international community as a whole.

Finally, we have strongly supported and will
continue to support the efforts made thus far by the
Security Council, regional organizations - in
particular NATO, with its current operation, and the
African Union stepping in for NATO in December -
and individual countries in addressing the scourge of
piracy off the coast of Somalia. However, we bear in
mind that piracy in Somalia is only a symptom of a
much large malaise and the desperate need for a
holistic approach. We in Croatia stand ready to work
with others towards identifying that approach for the
sake of the Somali people.

