Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): We are grateful to
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting, which provides an opportunity for non-
members of the Council to comment on the situation in
Afghanistan, which remains one of the most vital items
on the Council's agenda. I would like to join previous
speakers in thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Ambassador
Brahimi, for his comprehensive briefing, which
provided us with an in-depth analysis of the recent
situation and of the long-term tasks that lie ahead for
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and for the international community on the
way towards lasting peace in that country.

Ukraine's stance is very much in consonance with
what has been said today around this table. Therefore, I
shall confine myself to a few remarks on certain points
that my delegation considers to be of paramount
importance. First of all, I wish to note the significant
progress made in the implementation of key elements
of the Bonn Agreement, including reconciliation,
humanitarian relief, recovery and reconstruction. Eight
months ago, we could not have imagined what has been
achieved. Today, the hopes and the plans set out in
Bonn have become a reality. Undoubtedly, the
international community and the United Nations have
achieved much.

My delegation welcomes the successful
conclusion of the Emergency Loya Jirga, which
became the single most significant benchmark in the
Bonn process and in the political life of Afghanistan.
We are pleased to congratulate His Excellency Mr.
Hamid Karzai on his election as the President of the
Transitional Administration, and we wish him every
success in his important work.

Of course, not everything is going smoothly;
much remains to be done. Afghanistan, as many
speakers have said today, still faces grave humanitarian
challenges and, especially, security problems. I would
like to make special reference to the security situation
in Afghanistan - in particular outside Kabul - which
remains a major concern. That issue should be one of
the priorities for the Security Council, for UNAMA,
for the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
and, of course, for the Afghans themselves. Progress on
the political, security, recovery and reconstruction
tracks is interlinked. Therefore, continuing insecurity
in many parts of the country - the assassination of
Vice-President Haji Abdul Qadir, a number of armed
attacks and incidents of violence against international
aid organizations - entails the risk of impeding
progress in the political and reconstruction fields and
in humanitarian activities. In fact, this has become a
serious challenge to the efforts of the United Nations.

In our opinion, the establishment and the training
of a multi-ethnic Afghan national army and police
force are critical to the achievement of stability and
lasting peace. In that regard, we welcome progress
made towards the reform of the security sector, in
particular during two special sessions in Geneva. We
pay tribute to the efforts of the donors. At the same
time, it is clear that, despite the successful training of
the new Afghan army and police force, those units will
not be able to provide the necessary security in the
country for many months to come. We believe that the
international community should continue to support the
new Government at this critical stage.

We need to think about how the international
community could use the experience of ISAF, which
plays an important role in ensuring security in Kabul. I
wish to take this opportunity to commend Turkey and
its predecessor, the United Kingdom, for their able
leadership of ISAF; I also hail the tremendous efforts
of all other ISAF participants. We are confident that
ISAF will continue to provide support for the
promotion of peace and stability in Afghanistan.

We are encouraged by the positive achievements
in the fields of economic and social development, the
health and education sectors and refugee returns. I am
pleased to note the active role played by the United
Nations in these processes.

My delegation shares the views expressed today
that reconstruction, humanitarian relief and
development in Afghanistan remain major goals that
require international support and United Nations
leadership. One of the most important problems is to
ensure sufficient funding for activities in all these
areas.

It is also of key importance that we should pay
increased attention to the implementation of a strategy
of the demobilization, disarmament and reintegration
of ex-combatants, the resolution of the problems of
drug production and trafficking and, of course, mine
clearance. It is essential to facilitate the extension of
the influence and control of the Transitional
Administration throughout Afghanistan.

There are many challenges facing us. Still, we are
convinced that with the concerted efforts of the
international community, UNAMA, ISAF and the
Afghans we will succeed in building a new and more
stable Afghanistan.

