Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canada is pleased to welcome Ambassador Klein to the
Security Council today. We thank him for his briefing
and for his excellent contribution to Bosnia and
Herzegovina since his last report on 2 June. In
particular, we are encouraged by his efforts in the areas
of police reform, police restructuring and cooperation
between the police and the judiciary, as well as with
regard to the State Border Service.

(spoke in English)
We particularly want to express our appreciation
to the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) for its contribution to judicial
reform through its now concluded judicial system
assessment programme (JSAP).

We commend the preparations Ambassador Klein
is making for the fulfilment of the United Nations

S/PVAZAS

 

mandate by December 2002. We are mindful of the
Dutch observation that there can be no exit without
strategy. At the same time, we recognize that the
successful conclusion of a mission is often the least
glamorous but most difficult part of an operation.

Of course, the need for international technical
assistance will not end with the United Nations
Mission, even if it can be concluded in two years' time.
We count on the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization to continue to assist in getting Bosnia and
Herzegovina irrevocably on the road to normalcy and
membership in the European Union. As current
commanders of Sector Southwest, we are particularly
aware of the importance of continuing peacekeeping
operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We commend the United Nations Mission's
success, particularly in making the police an example
to their communities. Two specific examples are the
vacating by police of illegally occupied properties and
the inclusion of minority officers; 225 minority recruits
have graduated thus far and 321 are in training. These
steps enable the police to reflect their communities -
the sine qua non of their credibility - and to
encourage people to return.

We will continue to support the work of the
International Police Task Force (IPTF), and bilaterally
continue our contribution to the common effort through
programmes such as our Royal Canadian Mounted
Police (RCMP) police training assistance programme.

Finally, on the issue of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
second what the Malaysian Permanent Representative
said with respect to bringing war criminals to justice.
There will be no closure in Bosnia and Herzegovina
until these war criminals - Mladic, Karadzic and their
supporters in Bosnia and Herzegovina and elsewhere in
the Balkans - are brought to justice in The Hague.

Senator Biden, I would also like to address some
comments to you. You can see that I have a lot of paper
here - I have two different speeches.
Like every Canadian, I am a student of United
States politics. It is necessary for us; it is part of our
survival strategy. We realize that you are and have been
for a long time an ally of the United Nations and the
reform effort here. We paid particular attention to your
welcome remarks on the regular budget and the
peacekeeping scale, and I noted them down,
particularly the words regarding a two-way street: the
United States will pay its arrears in exchange for
United Nations reform.

Regarding your concern that United Nations
reform efforts may fail, we think that the Helms-Biden
legislation was an important step forward, and the
United States is recognizing its legal and financial
obligations to the United Nations. All of us around this
table want reform. Some of us would have preferred a
less arbitrary and a less unilateral approach to the way
in which this reform effort was handled by the United
States, but we regard it as a step forward.

On the scales issue, Canada is prepared to be
helpful and to look at all proposals on their merit. I
have been speaking with Mr. Holbrooke on this issue.
He has been meeting around the clock, as far as I can
tell. I think that success is possible and that reform is
possible.

We appreciate in this regard the United States
increase in its voluntary contributions to the United
Nations system. For those among us who are looking
for something that they can tell their own legislators
and their own taxpayers about why we should go along
with a proposal which, on the face of it, is not fair, the
answer is surely in the argument made by the United
States delegation - that, in fact, one should look not at
what the United States must pay, but at what the United
States voluntarily pays, and take comfort from that
significant difference.

While, as I said, Canada is prepared to participate
constructively, we do not accept, however, a unilateral
decision to write off unpaid arrears. Fifty cents on the
dollar will not work. We believe that it is important for
the United States to state clearly that it intends to pay
its arrears in full, and I was very much encouraged in
that sense by the comment that was made at the outset.

I should also like to add a word on the Brahimi
report to support the sentiment expressed. We in
Canada believe reform of the peacekeeping operations
is probably the most important thing that can be done
in the United Nations in the months ahead, and, in fact,
it is probably decisive to the future viability, in some
important sense, ofthis Organization.

Not all countries see it in that light. Not all
countries see the same need for reform that we do, but
like you, we do not believe that there is a trade-off

S/PV.4245

 

between development and peace and security. If
anything, we think that the relationship is the reverse.

We also do not think that it is necessary to choose
between those countries that stress development and
those countries that have a need for security. Both of
those issues have to be taken care of. There is no trade-
off there to be made.

We particularly think that some deep thought
needs to be given to the idea of peacekeeping reform.
The current system is a recipe for failure. I recognize
that the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) is
not a model to be held up in these precincts, but there
are one or two things that NATO does very well when
it decides to dispatch forces abroad: it makes no
distinction around the table between those who are
contributing troops and those who are in the equivalent
of the Security Council, because in fact they are the
same people. It is just not conceivable that troops
would be dispatched abroad by a Council which was
independent from, and unattached to, those who were
contributing troops. We have to think hard how to
correct that situation in this Organization. The troop-
contributing countries have a serious complaint, and
that needs to be addressed. We need to think again
about how this is done.

I am mindful that in the abortive Zaire
intervention that Canada was to head in 1996, we made
a great effort to try to create a political oversight
committee which was going to comprise troop-
contributing countries and Security Council members
to the extent that they were not the same, and they
were not always the same. I am not sure what happened
to that idea, but I note that I do not see it actually
functioning in Sierra Leone or with respect to the
Congo, Ethiopia/Eritrea or even East Timor.

There needs to be a way whereby troop-
contributing countries participate in the decision to
send forces abroad, in the conduct of the operations
involving those forces abroad and in the political and
military guidance that the commanders get in the field.
I think that until we actually deal with that issue in a
constructive and innovative way, we are going to
continue to have difficulties between troop contributors
sitting in one room down the hall and Security Council
members in another.

