Ms. Tincopa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We, too,
would like to thank Mr. Egeland for his update on the

situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in Uganda. We are happy that there have been some
improvements in those countries. In that connection,
we welcome the agreement signed between the
Government of Uganda and the Lord's Resistance
Army.

Although there has been major progress, I believe
that the challenges are even greater. In this context, I
would like to point to some elements that the Security
Council and the international community need to
continue to work on. The first is the humanitarian
situation. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example, the situation remains critical. Although there
has been some progress, and although there have been
efforts in establishing democratic institutions and in
holding elections, the task is far broader than that. In
our view, that task needs to go hand in hand with
economic progress. The social development of the
country is of great importance, as is respect for the rule
of law.

The second element is the issue of impunity. We
consider that the Security Council and all parties
concerned need to continue to work to end impunity.
We support the International Criminal Court playing a
significant role in seeking reconciliation and
punishment for those who violate human rights. We
believe that there can be no reconciliation if those who
are responsible go unpunished and if due attention is
not paid to the victims of these crimes.

Another situation relates to violence against the
civilian population. The Security Council needs to
continue to work to protect civilians and to ensure
respect for and guarantees of their human rights.
Violence against women is unacceptable; I think that
the Security Council must send a very clear message
about putting an end to this practice, which is
becoming habitual in some African countries.
Governments need to be responsible for taking action
to put an end to this practice.

Yet another issue is that of internally displaced
persons. Assistance to these people must continue to be
a priority. We all realize the difficult situation for
internally displaced persons in Darfur, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in Uganda and in
Chad. In this context, we want to stress the importance
of speedy implementation of resolution 1706 (2006)
for internally displaced persons in Darfur and in Chad.

With regard to the financial situation, we believe

that the international community needs to continue to

provide additional resources and seek intelligent ways

and means to obtain financial assistance. Without such

assistance, populations in these African countries will

continue to suffer, and many more human lives will be
lost.

I have a question for Mr. Egeland on the process
for the forthcoming second round of elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Is there any
indication that this might lead to a resurgence of
violence or a deterioration of the security situation? Is
there a plan to prevent any aggravation of the
humanitarian crisis? Have discussions been held with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, or has Mr. Egeland's Office undertaken a
programme to prevent that potential situation?

