Baroness Taylor (United Kingdom): Let me
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. We are extremely grateful to you and the
Austrian delegation for all your hard work in
promoting an agenda item to which we attach great
importance. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his words and the Under-Secretary-General
for his informative and thought-provoking briefing. We
are also very pleased to see and hear from the Deputy
High Commissioner.

I would like to associate the United Kingdom
with the statement that will be delivered by the
Permanent Representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union.

We share many of the concerns that have been
raised in today's briefing. Given the perilous situations
in which many civilian populations still find
themselves despite the efforts of the Security Council
over a period of 10 years, it is imperative that the
protection of civilians remain at the core of the
Council's work. We welcome the prominence given in
resolution 1894 (2009), just adopted, to the issue of
humanitarian access.

We also agree with the Secretary-General that we
can do more to minimize violations of international
humanitarian law. The Council should be ready to
address flagrant and widespread violations committed
against civilians, even when they take place in
situations of internal armed conflict. Protecting
civilians requires a holistic approach that will
sometimes stray into areas that are sensitive for some
Governments. We must be ready to face up to those
challenges.

We would also like to see the Council show
genuine readiness to engage in conflict prevention as
well as resolution. As a Council, we often talk about
the importance of prevention but only rarely are we
able to achieve consensus on action. If we are to
change that, we will need to increase our ability to
receive and digest information, and, most importantly,
our willingness to address threatening situations at a
sufficiently early stage. As we have said before, the
United Kingdom stands ready to do so.

Parties to an armed conflict bear the primary
obligation under international law to protect civilians.
However, where that obligation is not met or where
national capacities are not adequate to provide
protection, there is a clear role that United Nations
peacekeeping missions can play, both in providing
physical protection to civilian populations and in
assisting the host Government to shoulder its own
responsibilities.

My Government believes that protecting civilians
is an important measure of the credibility of
peacekeeping operations. It goes to the very heart of
what people around the world admire and respect about
the United Nations in action. We all owe a debt of
gratitude to the peacekeepers who take on the vital role
of protecting civilians, invariably in testing
circumstances and often at considerable risk to their
own safety.

We must ensure that we make realistic demands
of peacekeeping missions, matched with sufficient
resources, training and structures to successfully
protect civilians. This is why the United Kingdom fully
supports renewed efforts to improve the dialogue
between the Secretariat, the Security Council and
troop- and police-contributing countries. The Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations has a key role
to play in this process.

There is much good field practice on which we
can build. Peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are actively protecting civilians in very
difficult circumstances, and combining civilian and
military expertise in efforts to deliver a holistic
approach. The United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) has
identified protection hotspots and, with the help of
early warning and rapid-response mechanisms, has
deployed mobile operating bases and joint protection
teams.

These are innovative measures that are achieving
results. MONUC, for example, proves the importance
of a systematic and integrated approach to protection.
It also underlines the need for comprehensive United
Nations guidance to be made available to all who need
it. Both measures would help leaders on the ground by
framing and informing the challenging decisions they
regularly face.

In this context, we look forward to digesting the
findings and recommendations of a timely independent
study on mandate implementation commissioned by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA). It will be important that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs continue to work
closely with one another in taking forward the
recommendations contained in that study. In turn, we
hope that the study will inform the considerations of
the Committee of 34 and the Council's informal expert
group on the protection of civilians.

This meeting today and the resolution that we
have just adopted (resolution 1894 (2009)) are further
steps towards developing a shared understanding on
some of the more complex issues facing United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The United
Kingdom looks forward to progressive discussions on
these issues over the coming months and in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations next year.

