Mr. Feltman: Today I will briefly update the
Council on developments related to the conflict in
eastern Ukraine, as well as on my own recent Visit to the
country, from 15 to 17 December 2014, in continuation
of the Secretary-General's good offices.

I would like to begin by clearly stating our alarm.
Following weeks of relative calm, the Council meets
today amid the worst hostilities in eastern Ukraine
since the ceasefire and the Minsk protocol were agreed
to on 5 September. Encouraging signs of progress,
such as the exchange of hundreds of prisoners, are
quickly being overshadowed by renewed fighting and
a deepening political stalemate. Ukraine, as well as its
neighbours and the broader region, cannot afford the
current violent status quo. The escalation of fighting
threatens to unravel the Minsk protocol.

While the heavy fighting of the past few days
was initially concentrated around Donetsk airport,
the numbers of dead and injured, including innocent
civilians, are quickly rising elsewhere, as violence
spreads throughout the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk,
including in heavily populated civilian areas such as the
city of Donetsk. The conflict is also reportedly inching
dangerously close to cities such as Mariupol and
Debaltsevo, and endangering areas that until recently
have been relatively quiet. In another sign of escalation,
reinforcements of fighters are reported on both sides,
with the deployment of more sophisticated and heavier
weaponry. In Davos today, President Poroshenko stated
that there were more than 9,000 regular Russian troops
in Ukraine, an accusation that Moscow denies.

On 13 January, as a direct result of the renewal
of the fighting, 12 civilians lost their lives and 17
were seriously wounded when their. bus was hit in
Volnovakha. The United Nations has no means of
verifying the facts independently, but after visiting
the site three times and conducting crater analysis, the
Special Monitoring Mission (SMM) to Ukraine of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
concluded that "the rockets that caused craters 1 and
2 had been fired from a north-north-eastern direction"
and that

"the rockets may have been fired approximately
20 kilometres from the point of impact. The SMM
is not able to independently verify the point of
origin of the rockets or to identify the entity that
fired them."

As the Secretary-General stated, this incident, which
must be thoroughly investigated and for which those
responsible must be brought to justice, is a stark
reminder of the urgent need to halt the violence.

Let me also say a few words on the humanitarian
situation, which has deteriorated further as conflict has
again intensified. A country that until a year ago had
no displaced people now has at least 850,000 citizens
displaced within its borders and over 600,000 in
neighbouring States, according to Ukrainian sources.

Humanitarian actors must have access to do
their life-saving work. All parties to the conflict
have an obligation to guarantee free and unhindered
humanitarian access to all people in need, irrespective
of where they are located, and they also have to fully
respect international humanitarian law. A recent
directive with respect to crossing the contact line from
Government-held to rebel-held areas could make it
exceedingly difficult for humanitarian actors to move
aid into areas beyond Government control. It is critical
that resources be made available to meet life-saving
needs on the ground. The 2015 Strategic Response Plan
requests $189 million, and few commitments have been
made as yet.

Regrettably, the upsurge in fighting has been
accompanied by mutual recriminations between Kyiv
and Russia, and a continued impasse on the diplomatic
and political front. As the Secretary-General has
repeatedly insisted, there is no substitute for direct
and constructive dialogue to move peace forward. The
enforcement of a sustainable ceasefire, which presently
exists in name only, is both urgent and of primary
concern. The line of contact should be observed, and
the other elements of the broader Minsk peace plan
require expeditious implementation as well. We hope
that today's Normandy format meeting in Berlin at
the Foreign Minister level will achieve the progress
required to return to the implementation of Minsk
and to bring together the Normandy Heads of State.
Diplomacy has to succeed.

The Minsk agreements offer a solid basis for a
resolution of the conflict in the Donbas. There cannot
be any unilateral attempt to change their provisions,
nor should any party selectively interpret the accords'
stipulations. It is our understanding that the apparent
differences in interpretation of the Minsk accords are
small, but the implications of addressing them in any
other way but through dialogue are immense.

In continuation of the Secretary-General's good
offices, I returned to Kyiv from 15 to 17 December
2014 to exchange views with President Poroshenko,
Prime Minister Yatsenyuk, Foreign Minister Klimkin
and Speaker of Parliament Groisman, as well as
international and bilateral partners. With the new
Ukrainian Government formed under Prime Minister
Yatsenyuk, all interlocutors expressed their conviction
that there was no more scope for delay and that deep
and overdue economic, legislative, judicial and political
reforms had to be tackled immediately.

I assured my interlocutors that the United Nations
would never waver in its solidarity with the country. We
remain ready to support all efforts to end the fighting
so that a durable and lasting peace may prevail, and
we will continue to assist the Ukrainian authorities
and citizens of Ukraine to usher in the changes that
will be vital for a democratic, secure, independent and
prosperous future.

In contrast to the present situation, Donbas was
relatively calm during my visit. Nonetheless, all of my
interlocutors shared the assessment that even if there
is progress on the Minsk process, there is no quick
resolution of the numerous challenges facing Ukraine,
given the deep economic and geopolitical rifts that have
been caused by and remain intrinsically linked to the
conflict.

All of us - especially the parties to the
conflict - have a responsibility to concertedly, and on
a most urgent basis, assist in moving from a narrative
of confrontation to a narrative of cooperation, and from
a logic of war to a logic of peace.

