Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I should like
to welcome you, Sir, and to congratulate you on your
assumption of the Council presidency. I also thank the
presidency for having convened this morning's meeting
on such an important topic, namely, cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, specifically the European
Union, in maintaining international peace and security.

Ithank the Secretary-General and Baroness Catherine
Ashton, High Representative of the European Union,
for their statements. I wish to commend the European
Union's leadership in and its tireless commitment and
immense contribution to the promotion of international
peace and security.

Given the numerous serious conflicts and crises
taking place across the world, cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations is a matter of paramount importance.
Such cooperation is especially significant when it
involves a major regional actor such as the European
Union, given that organization's weight, strengths and
increasingly important role in crisis management.

Chad recognizes the leading role entrusted by the
Charter of the United Nations to the Security Council
in maintaining international peace and security. At the
same time, the not-insignificant contributions made by
regional and subregional organizations to the United
Nations in that area must be underscored. In that
respect, the transfer of authority from the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali is an example of effective cooperation
between the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States and the United Nations.

Similarly, the close collaboration among the

United Nations, the African Union and the Economic
Community of Central African States in the resolution
of the crisis in the Central African Republic through
the deployment of the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic is
yet another example of complementarity and synergy
in crisis management. The deployment of a contingent
of 500 soldiers of the European Union in the Central
African Republic, which was authorized by the Security
Council, has further strengthened that partnership and
reflects the spirit of solidarity in the international
community.

The United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations should further strengthen their
cooperation in the areas of early warning of crisis
situations, conflict prevention and peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The activities of
regional and subregional organizations in those areas
can effectively complement those carried out by the
Organization in accordance with Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. Moreover, their
geographical proximity to and their understanding
of local situations mean that such organizations are
partners placed to better understand the causes of
conflict and to help resolve them.

The cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations should translate
into regional capacity-building and ownership in the
area of peacekeeping in order to promote regional
responsibility for crisis management. The United
Nations logistical support for the African Union Mission
in Somalia and the valuable financial and political
support of the European Union for that operation are
good examples of partnerships aimed at strengthening
regional capacities. It should also be underscored and
welcomed that the many instances of European Union
assistance to the African Union Peace and Security
Architecture meet that criterion. We encourage the
European Union to continue providing support to
the African Union and United Nations peacekeeping
operations in general.

Strengthening regional capacities in maintaining
international peace and security should have a holistic
focus, so as to enable regional and subregional
organizations to develop the skills needed to deal
with issues involving human rights, impunity and
the protection of children and women, which are an
integral part of peacekeeping operations. To that end,
they must have the appropriate funding. We call on the
United Nations and the European Union to provide their
expertise and financial support to the African Union in
such areas.

In conclusion, we would like to say that preventing,
managing and effectively resolving crises in the
world require close and ongoing cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations and concerted international action on
the basis of a pragmatic results-oriented approach,
while taking into account the relative advantages of
the various actors. The European Union is a leading
partner of the United Nations that can help to promote
such a partnership.

