Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
meeting. We welcome the new representative of Japan,
Ambassador Nishida. We would like to thank the
Secretary-General and Ms. Patricia O'Brien for being
here with us this morning and for the information they
have shared with us. We also welcome the presence of
the Permanent Representative of Somalia, Ambassador
Elmi Ahmed Duale.

We also support the presidential statement that
has been agreed by the members of the
Council(S/PRST/2010/16), which reflects the points of
agreement on the subject, including my delegation's
perspective.

The adoption of resolution 1918 (2010) and the
presidential statement adopted on the occasion of this
debate constitute a firm response by the Security
Council with a view to arriving at effective responses
to different aspects of the problem in Somalia and in
other States of the region in order to combat piracy. In
this context, we acknowledge the important work of
the international operations to combat piracy in the
region undertaken by the European Union, NATO and
other States, which reveal the staunch determination of
the international community to tackle this issue.

In addition, we acknowledge the political
commitment of the States of the region and the
progress that has been made, as shown by the cases of
Kenya and Seychelles.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2010/394) is
comprehensive, balanced and thorough. We are
particularly interested to note the seven options
identified by the Secretary-General to tackle the
problem of prosecution and, where appropriate,
imprisonment of perpetrators of acts of piracy or armed
robbery at sea. The measures identified constitute a
broad range of possibilities to deal with this
phenomenon.

In this regard, my delegation very much favours
the first option, that is, strengthening the Somali legal
system and those of the countries of the region in order
to promote their capacity to prosecute and imprison
those responsible for such crimes.

We feel that this first option offers various
advantages. First, it would bring broad benefits to the
rule of law in Somalia and regional stability. It would
also establish a long-term view that is more aware of
local realities and needs and is potentially best situated
to contribute to a genuine and lasting solution.

Secondly, we believe that the aim must be to seek
to ensure that Somali institutions have the capacity to
try cases of armed robbery committed within their
territorial waters. Taking into account existing
challenges and limitations, the States of the region are
required to cooperate in prosecuting piracy cases
themselves. This is a mechanism that already exists
and that has proven to be functional; it would involve
strengthening existing capacity rather than starting
from scratch. Compared with any of the other options,
the costs are moderate in the light of the current
economic difficulties that we are all facing. It is a
practical, viable solution that can be pursued without
further delay.

This leads me to a subject that my delegation has
emphasized on various other occasions: the need for
clarity on the distinction between piracy and armed
robbery at sea. The Council has stated repeatedly that
the legal framework applicable to combating piracy
and armed robbery at sea is that embodied in the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
which clearly defines the elements that constitute
piracy, in terms of both its material scope and its
sphere of action.

Mexico is therefore firmly convinced that
references to the applicable judicial framework must
take that distinction into account. When discussing
international crimes, analogies do not apply. So, we
welcome the fact that the Secretary-General has left no
doubt in paragraph 39 of his report that we are talking
about an international crime, as embodied in
article 101 of the Convention, which in turn reflects
customary international law. Armed robbery, on the
other hand, is a crime that takes place within a State's
territorial waters and thus falls within the jurisdiction
of the littoral States. We reiterate that in the
international community must keep in mind the
existence of this distinction in its future efforts and
should always seek to coordinate and seek the
consensus of the States whose territory is involved.

My delegation shares the concern about the
transfer and imprisonment of those suspected or
convicted of these crimes. We believe that this is one
of the major challenges underpinning the choice of
options regarding prosecution as laid out in the report.
It is therefore necessary to bolster international and
regional cooperation, to enter into transfer agreements,
and to build prison capacity in Somalia and the region.

Another challenge in implementing the chosen
mechanism is that of funding. The Secretary-General's
report is also instructive in this regard. Mexico
considers that the shipping companies whose
protection is one of the aims of the international
community's current efforts should contribute to the
fund supporting efforts by States to counter these
dangers.

In conclusion, we must remember what members
of the Security Council have unanimously and
repeatedly pointed out, and which was made clear yet
again by yesterday's violence in Mogadishu: the
central causes of piracy and armed robbery originate on
land rather than at sea, and are rooted in the country's
lack of social and economic development and the
fragility of its institutions, which jeopardize the
viability of Somalia itself. It is only by adopting an
integrated approach within the region, incorporating
full respect for the arms embargo and the sanctions
adopted by the Security Council and by introducing an
inclusive domestic political process fully supported by
the international community that it will be possible to
achieve the minimum conditions necessary for peace
and stability and to strengthen Government institutions
and the rule of law in the country.

Lastly, we cannot fail to echo the Secretary-
General's condemnation of the mass-scale rapes of
women in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
denounce those acts, which deserve to be categorically
condemned by the international community and for
which impunity is unacceptable under any
circumstances. We believe that the Security Council
should, in due course, give this recent serious incident
in a particularly violent situation the attention it
deserves.

