Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I say, at the
outset, how much we welcome Cote d'Ivoire's initiative
to bring this issue back to the Council's agenda, which
I think we last considered in 2013. It is a timely moment
to look at it.

May I also welcome the briefing by Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and thank
UNODC for its efforts in that area, including, of course,
through its Regional Programme for West Africa.

Conflict, corruption and ungoverned spaces
all allow criminality to flourish. It can take many
forms and includes the trafficking of drugs, but not
only drugs. It includes the trafficking of people and
of weapons. Organized criminal networks can also
support and facilitate the emergence and operations
of terrorist groups. Indeed, it is quite frequent and
common that, in their early stages, terrorist groups
rely upon income from organized crime. Sadly, West
Africa has been affected by those issues in recent years
and we have seen that it is marginalized groups - be
they children, women or minority ethnic groups - that
often suffer the most.

The impact of such criminality is not only felt by
individuals; it is felt in communities and by States.
It undermines the rule of law, human rights and the
ability of States to provide services and pursue the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development for all of their
citizens. Cross-border criminal networks, smuggling
and trafficking goods and people across State
jurisdiction can also constitute a threat to international
peace and security. Drug trafficking is one form ofthat
challenge, but we saw the same argument convincingly
made in resolutions 2331 (2016) and 2388 (2017) on the
trafficking of people.

As we have heard today, that has unfortunately been
the case in the West African region, which, as UNODC
has outlined, has become a significant consumption
and transit zone for heroin and cocaine, enabling
flows towards destination markets. The money and the
Violence that accompany that trade have devastating
consequences. As I have said, drug trafficking can
be both a means by which armed groups raise funds
but also a source of conflict in themselves. Criminal
gangs can corrupt and weaken a State at just the time
that a strong State with strong institutions is needed to
prevent conflict. I agree very much with those around
the table who have talked about the importance of
considering the issue holistically within the prevention
and peacebuilding setting.

We should note and welcome the efforts in the
region, in particular the work of the Group of Five for
the Sahel, for greater stability and in tackling terrorism.
We also need to support the Economic Community of
West African States; the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, Mr. Chambas; and
the excellent efforts of the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel, as well as those initiatives
that address the drivers of instability, including, of
course, climate change, poverty, marginalization
and corruption. The United Kingdom is playing its
part. We are increasing our staffing and expertise on
tackling organized crime in the region and are working
with our partners in the region to counter trafficking
and strengthen the rule of law and border security, as
well as supporting development and the provision of
services.

There is no silver bullet to ending drug trafficking
and organized crime in West Africa or, indeed,
anywhere else. It will take a comprehensive approach
by the States in the region, holistically supported by the
United Nations family and its international partners.
We welcome the renewed focus on criminality brought
by you, Mr. President, in calling today's meeting, and
we stand ready to assist all countries suffering from
this insidious threat, as we ourselves suffer too.

