Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba)(interpretation from Spanish): We congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency, and we wish you full success.

We express our thanks also to the Permanent
Representative of the Czech Republic, for the efficient way
in which he carried out his functions as President last
month.

Pursuant to document S/1995/366, the Security
Council has been convened to discuss, once again, the
situation in the occupied Arab territories, and particularly
in the occupied Palestinian territories.

This new hotbed of tension resulting from the recent
orders of the Israeli Government to confiscate Palestinian
land in East Jerusalem, however, should not this time give
rise to a mere repetition of appeals to the occupying
Power. The situation on the ground and the hopes that the
Declaration of Principles signed by the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) and the Government of
Israel would be a basis for a just and lasting peace in the
area, enabling the Palestinian people to progress towards
the exercise of its inalienable right to self-determination,
oblige the Security Council, this time, to adopt firm and
serious measures. In my delegation's opinion, failing to
do that would amount to sending a wrong message,
which, rather than contributing to progress in the peace
process, might endanger it - perhaps irreparably.

Despite the aforementioned Declaration of Principles
and other steps that we regard as positive in Israel's
relations with its neighbours, we must note that the
situation in the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories,
including the city of Jerusalem, has deteriorated since
1967, because of Israel's failure to comply with its legal
responsibilities under, in particular, the Fourth Geneva
Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, and to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions, especially resolutions 242 (1967),
465 (1980), 478 (1980) and 904 (1994), and the relevant
General Assembly resolutions, such as resolution 194
(III).

The repressive actions carried out in recent months
and the illegal act that has compelled us to meet today
seem to show little change in the hostile policy of the
occupying Power against the Palestinian people, its
property and its internationally recognized, inalienable
rights. Continuing such practices could endanger the terms
of the agreement on the Declaration of Principles, its
timetable, and the peace process itself.

The implementation of the peace process will also
continue to be in permanent danger; that is, the process
will be jeopardized of Israel's fulfilment of resolution
242 (1967) and its consequent withdrawal from the
territories occupied since 1967, as will be its fulfilment of
the Declaration of Principles, under which the parties
agreed that the final-status negotiations to resolve the
remaining issues, including the question of Jerusalem,
would begin as soon as possible and at the latest by the
beginning of the third year of the interim period.

 

The Israeli Government's decision to confiscate
53 hectares of Palestinian land situated in the area of East
Jerusalem under the pretext of using it to keep up the
process of establishing Israeli settlement is a serious attack
on the peace process in the Middle East and prejudges its
outcome. Measures such as these and any others aimed at
changing the status and the demographic composition of
Jerusalem are illegal - indeed, null and void - and
violate the fundamental rules of international customary and
humanitarian law. Moreover, the decision not only promotes
a continuation of the policy of settling the occupied
territories, which is one of the greatest dangers facing the
peace process today, it would also seem to show that Israel,
the occupying Power, has no intention of changing this
policy, despite the international community's repeated
condemnation of it. The destruction of the Palestinian
people's economic infrastructure and the hamstringing of its
efforts towards peace, reconstruction and development are
also an affront to the United Nations and the Security
Council in their responsibility in terms of the question of
Palestine.

The Government of the Republic of Cuba deplores the
recent actions by the Israeli Government, which are in
flagrant violation of the principle of self-determination for
the Palestinian people, and hopes that the Security Council
will adopt the necessary measures to ensure that they are
rescinded and pass the draft resolution from the Group of
Arab States on this matter. The future of the peace process
in the Middle East, the credibility of the Council's authority
in maintaining international peace and security and the
realization of the international community expectations for
at last achieving a just, lasting and responsible peace in the
region to a large extent hang upon it.

