Ms. Chan (World Health Organization): Many of
the Governments represented here have been helping
with treatment facilities, mobile laboratories, hundreds
of medical staff and money. I thank them.

This virus, this deadly and dreaded Ebola virus,
got ahead of us in a fast-moving outbreak, as described
by Dr. Nabarro, that keeps delivering one surprise after
another. Now we must catch up in the most urgent and
pragmatic way possible. In the hardest hit countries,
an exponentially rising caseload threatens to push
Governments to the brink of State failure.

The World Health Organization (WHO) has
successfully managed many big outbreaks in recent
years, but this Ebola event is different - very different.
This is likely the greatest peacetime challenge that the
United Nations and its agencies have ever faced. None
ofus experienced in containing outbreaks has ever seen
in our lifetimes an emergency on this scale, with such a
degree of suffering and such a magnitude of cascading
consequences. This is not just an outbreak; this is not
just a public health crisis. This is a social crisis, a
humanitarian crisis, an economic crisis and a threat to
national security well beyond the outbreak zones. This
week, the World Bank Group warned of a potentially
catastrophic blow to the economies of the hardest-hit
countries.

In some areas, hunger has become an even greater
concern than the virus. For example, the fertile fields
of Lofa county, once Liberia's breadbasket, are now
fallow. In that county alone, nearly 170 farmers and
their family members have died from Ebola. For these
reasons, the Secretary-General and I are calling for a
United Nations-wide initiative that draws together all
the assets of all relevant United Nations agencies. In my
talks with the Presidents of the three affected countries
and in my recent speeches in the United States and
Europe, I have consistently called for an immediate and
massive increase in international support, as described
by Dr. David Nabarro.

We have spelled out our most urgent needs
in the WHO Ebola response road map and in the
12 mission-critical actions appeal launched last week by
Valerie Amos. l and my staff wholeheartedly welcome
announcements like those from the United States and
the United Kingdom Governments earlier this week.
This is a massive ramp-up of support that entails a
transformative change to our collective capacity to get
a grip on this outbreak and bring it under control. These
announcements are statement of concern at the highest
level of Government, but also a clarion call for other
countries to follow. Many are doing so, and we look
forward to hearing from many more.

The fact that the United States, the United Kingdom,
China, Cuba and other countries are using a variety of
assets, including military, speaks to the complexity of
the challenge. This surge of support could help turn
things around for the roughly 22 million people in the
hardest-hit countries, whose lives and societies have
been shattered by one of the most horrific diseases on
the planet. The support of the United Nations and its
agencies is also undergoing a transformative ramp-up
under the leadership of the Secretary-General. The scale
of deployment to Africa of WHO and international staff
under this outbreak umbrella is unprecedented in the
history of the WHO.

Everything now is unprecedented. Everything
now is happening faster than ever before. The needs
are immense, and we know it. Reports show that
more than 5,500 people have been infected. Well over
2,500 have died. And those shocking figures are vast
underestimates. Health, medical, and clinical care
issues must remain the heart, the soul and the spirit
of this response. It will take some time, but the Ebola
outbreak can be contained.
Let us consider the stable situation in Nigeria and
Senegal. When the first imported cases occurred in
those two countries, we knew very well what we were
dealing with. Governments' ownership and leadership,
supported by the United States Centers for Disease
Control, Doctors without Borders and WHO, responded
immediately with the right emergency actions. And
let us remember that people crisscross West Africa's
porous borders all the time. Other countries will have
to deal in the same aggressive way with imported cases.
As support for the United Nations-coordinated response
continues to pour in, I am confident that we can do so.

