Mr. Starcevic' (Serbia): At the outset, let me
welcome the President and Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
Judge Theodor Meron and Mr. Serge Brammertz,
as well as the President and the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
Judge Vagn Joensen and Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow. I
would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate
Judge Joensen on his assumption of the presidency of
the ICTR, and Judge Meron, Prosecutor Jallow and
Registrar Hocking on their new appointments within
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.

With respect to Serbia's cooperation with the ICTY,
it is my pleasure to inform the Security Council that
the assessments of my Government and the ICTY's
Prosecutor in his report (see S/2012/354) are once again
in accord. Since the arrest of Goran HadZic', in July
2011, there is no longer a single ICTY accused person
at large. All of the indictees believed to be in Serbia
were arrested by Serbian authorities and transferred to
the Tribunal.

With regard to access to documents, archives and
witnesses, I am pleased to say that Serbia's cooperation
has been impeccable for a long time and that the level
of success achieved in those areas has been maintained
during the reporting period. New requests for assistance
from both the ICTY Office of the Prosecutor and the
defence teams for the accused are being received
on a daily basis and dealt with without delay. We
completely agree with the Prosecutor's assessment that
"the cooperation provided by the Serbian authorities
continued to fully meet expectations" (S/2012/354, annex 11, para. 48). We believe that the defence teams
would give the same assessment with regard to their
cooperation with Serbian authorities.

In his May 2012 report, the Prosecutor also paid
attention to the issue of the investigation of fugitive
networks. Although that question does not fall within
the competence of the ICTY, my Government agrees
that the issue has certain weight. Since the fugitive
issue has been quite a burden for Serbia for a number of
years, it is important for us to find out who harboured
fugitives. Despite our belief that fugitive harbouring
is predominantly an internal issue, my Government
has shared information on the ongoing domestic
investigation into the issue with the ICTY Office of the
Prosecutor in good faith, and will continue to do so.

Serbia is confident that the full level of cooperation
achieved with the ICTY will continue in the coming
period and that that will ensure a smooth transition
to future cooperation with the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

I would like to repeat that Serbia is willing to
continue to cooperate with the Security Council's
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals on
the issues raised by the archives of the Tribunal. Serbia
maintains the position it expressed to the Security
Council in October 2008 and reiterates its readiness
to actively participate in all future discussions on the
matter. Serbia is also willing to share its experiences in
cooperating with the ICTY and the results of its domestic
war crime trials with other countries and international
stakeholders.
My Government will continue to work on the
initiative to let countries of the former Yugoslavia
sign agreements on enforcement of sentences with
the Tribunal. It is clear that Serbia and the entire
region have greatly changed since the time when the
Secretary-General suggested in his 3 May 1993 report
(S/25704) to the Security Council that the enforcement
of sentences should take place outside the territory of
the former. That is why we continue to reiterate that the
Republic of Serbia is ready to share the responsibility
with other countries on that issue. We believe that Serbia
and other countries of the former Yugoslavia willing
to do the same should be allowed to sign agreements
on enforcement of sentences with the Tribunal. Serbia
would like to express its expectation that the Security
Council will consider our initiative.

By virtue of its efforts and the results obtained,
Serbia has contributed to the achievement of international
justice, further normalization of the situation and
improvement of relations between the States of the
Balkans, while making significant contributions to the
process of strengthening confidence in the work of
national and international institutions.

Our success in cooperating with the Tribunal
gives us a moral right to insistently press for effective
investigations into allegations of homicide committed
for the purpose of organ trafficking by the so-called
Kosovo Liberation Army. Serbia expects that the
ongoing investigation into those war crimes allegations
referred to in the report of the Rapporteur of the Council
of Europe dated 7 January 2011 will be conducted
professionally, impartially and efficiently in order for
the truth to be established and the perpetrators brought
to justice.

We have followed the investigation launched by
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and have expressed our concerns about the
lack of transparency in the conduct of the inquiry.
My Government hopes that many critical questions in
connection with the EULEX investigation, especially
those related to accountability, mandate, jurisdiction
and witness protection, will receive satisfactory
answers as soon as possible. Bringing the truth to light
on allegations of such heinous crimes must remain our
top priority.

