Mr. Al-Sameen (Oman) (interpretation from Arabic): On behalf of my delegation and of my country,
the Sultanate of Oman, I extend our sincere
congratulations to the representative of China on his
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of March. I wish also to thank the
representative of Botswana, Ambassador Legwaila, for the
exemplary manner in which he presided over the work of
the Council last month; my thanks go also to the other
members of his delegation.

There is no doubt that the matter before us today,
relating to the situation in the Republic of Croatia, the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and The Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, is of particular
importance because of its effect on security in those three
Republics and, indeed, on the prospects for a peaceful
settlement of the conflict in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia.

We would underscore the crucial role of the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in fostering
hopes for peace and in improving living conditions there.
Yet we agree that a United Nations military presence does
not in itself constitute a final solution; it is an interim
measure of limited duration during which the parties must
be helped to achieve a final, comprehensive settlement of
their dispute. My country believes that the parties
concerned bear primary responsibility for achieving true
peace in conformity with the expectations of the
international community.

With respect to the United Nations Protection Force
in the Republic of Croatia, we share the concerns about
the international military presence there coming to an end,
while we also understand why the Government of Croatia
took this decision. We welcome the recent decision by the
Government of Croatia to permit international forces to
remain on the territory of the Republic.

Work is under way towards a solution for the area
held by the Croatian Serbs that shows due respect for the
territorial integrity of the Republic of Croatia. While the
number of United Nations personnel in Croatia will be
reduced under the United Nations Confidence Restoration
Operation in Croatia (UNCRO), we believe that the
number of personnel should accord with the mission and
tasks entrusted to the Operation so that UN CRO can carry
out the mandate assigned to it by the Security Council on

 

the recommendation of the Secretary-General in his report
(S/1995/222 and Corr.1). We trust that it will be enabled to
discharge its mandate as completely as possible.

The United Nations Protection Force in The Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is primarily a preventive
operation. We express our satisfaction at the cooperation
that has been established between the United Nations and
the Government of The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. We believe that such cooperation is necessary,
and of great importance for ensuring the success of any
effort by the international community to dispel the spectre
of war that has been hovering over the region.

We recognize the crucial role that could be played by
the United Nations Protection Force to improve the
humanitarian situation in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to help the parties implement the
agreements they have achieved. We urge UNPROFOR to
make the best use of its possible assets and powers to carry
out its mandate fully, including use of the support under the
mechanism agreed upon between the United Nations and
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). In that
connection, we call upon UNPROFOR in the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to continue its coordination with
the legitimate Government of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, while also taking account of the views and
proposals submitted within the framework of the confidence
restoration process there; this could facilitate the work of
the international Force and improve prospects for security
and stability in the region.

My delegation welcomes the role played by the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative in helping
the parties arrive at a peaceful settlement. We also wish to
express our full support for all efforts made towards that
end by, amongst others, the members of the international
Contact Group. We also call upon the countries of the
region to recognize the independence and sovereignty of all
the States in the region within their internationally
recognized borders. We believe this is a necessary measure
if the international community is to demonstrate its good
will and its resolve to achieve comprehensive and lasting
peace in the region.

In conclusion, and in keeping with what has been said
here by members of the Security Council and in the spirit
of consensus, my delegation wishes to state that it intends
to vote in favour of the three draft resolutions now before
us.

 

