Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to express our
wholehearted thanks to the Secretary-General for his
report on the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB) and to thank Mr. Danilo Tiirk,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
this morning's briefing on recent developments on the
ground. It gives us pleasure to welcome among us the
Permanent Representative of the friendly nation of
Papua New Guinea and to express to him personally
and to his Government our gratitude for the important
information that he provided to us on recent
developments in Bougainville and on the positive
cooperation of the Government of Papua New Guinea
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

The delay in completing stage II of the weapons
disposal was a source of concern because it prevented
any progress in the establishment of an autonomous
government in Bougainville and the implementation of
the referendum among the population of Bougainville
on their political future.

Despite reports of enhanced efforts for
concluding this stage, only 80 per cent of it was
completed. As well, Francis Ona and the Me'ekamui
Defence Force belonging to him have not yet
participated in the peace process. We hope that appeals,
initiatives and communications directed at him will
convince him to join the process. We also hope that
those contacts will allow us to get a clear commitment
that no measure or policy that could hinder the Peace
Agreement will be pursued.

With respect to the constitutional process, we
would like to express our optimism at the preparation
of the draft Constitution for Bougainville. We hope that
the second draft will soon be discussed, with the hope
that internal consultations will be carried out easily and
quickly. We agree with the report that no constituent
assembly can be established before verifying the
completion of stage II of weapons disposal.

We believe that the report is realistic in its
description of the process in Bougainville. Although

the Office mandate's final objective - to verify that
weapons collected in stage II are in secured containers
under the supervision of the Office - is not fully

realized, it has been effective. We also hope to
complete the other measures, including the elections
that are to be held prior to the end of the year, and
establishing an autonomous Government by the end of
its mandate.

We had hoped that the report would have more
details about the exit strategy, the time frame for this
strategy and the succeeding stages in the
implementation of the mandate of the Office.

On the other hand, we wish to express our
appreciation for the commitment by the new
Government of Papua New Guinea to implementing the
Peace Agreement, particularly the signature of a
memorandum of understanding between the National
Government and the parties in Bougainville, which
have established a mechanism for consultation. We
share the Secretary-General's view that the
establishment of that mechanism is an indication of the
confidence between the two parties.
We also express our appreciation for the Peace
Monitoring Group's contribution to the peace process
and thank the regional donors for supporting the peace
process. We encourage them to provide their assistance
in the future.

Finally, we wish to join the Secretary-General in
expressing appreciation to Mr. Noel Sinclair and the
members of his team, who are working hard to assist in
achieving peace and stability in Bougainville.

