Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Mr. President, thank
you for taking the time to come to New York to preside
over this important debate on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security. I would
also like to welcome the representatives of regional
and subregional organizations.

Greece fully aligns itself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the European Union (EU).

Today, it is a particular honour for me to speak on
behalf of the South-East European Cooperation
Process, the chairmanship of which is currently held by
Greece. It is a genuine mechanism of regional
cooperation that springs from the countries of the
region themselves - Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Romania, Serbia and
Montenegro, The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey and Greece, as well as Croatia as
an observer.

This timely debate is taking place in a year that is
crucial for the United Nations, just a few weeks after
the High-level Plenary Meeting of world leaders in
September 2005, where important decisions were taken
to strengthen the capacity of the United Nations so as
more effectively to meet the security challenges of our
time.

The heads of State and Government recognized
the importance of multilateralism in addressing those
challenges. They also recognized the important
contribution to peace and security by regional
organizations, as provided for under Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter. At the same time, they
expressed their resolve to strengthen and expand
cooperation between our global and regional
organizations and to ensure that regional organizations
that have the capacity for preventing armed conflict
and for peacebuilding consider the option of placing
such capacity in the framework of the United Nations.

Allow me to remind Security Council members
that the need for a closer and more structured
relationship between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations was also recognized by
the sixth high-level meeting between the United
Nations and regional and other intergovernmental
organizations that was held on 25 and 26 July 2005 at
United Nations Headquarters in New York, with the
participation of 20 organizations.

In his opening statement, the Secretary-General
called for, among other things, a common vision of a
global architecture of peace and security, with
interlocking capacities, based on comparative
advantages of the global and regional institutions.
Participants at the meeting endorsed proposals and
agreed on measures aiming at a more structured
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations.

In our view, the decision of the high-level
meeting to convene on an annual basis to monitor
developments in international security, to promote the
goals of the United Nations and to have these meetings
coincide with those held by the Security Council with
regional organizations is a most important decision in
terms of achieving better coordination and
complementarity of agendas.

While stressing the primary responsibility of the
Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security, I wish to emphasize the
complementarity of regional and subregional
organizations in facing new threats and challenges and
in promoting peace and stability, as I said in my
statement at the aforementioned high-level meeting,
speaking on behalf of the Security Council during the
Greek presidency last July.

Today, more than ever, regional organizations
have a vital role to play in conflict prevention and
management, as well as in post-conflict peacebuilding.
Geographic proximity and close historical and cultural
ties among their members give regional organizations
comparative advantages to better understand the root
causes of regional conflicts and to find peaceful
solutions to these problems.

Recent peace-support operations of the United
Nations have been carried out in close cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. Successful and sustainable
peacebuilding also requires the active involvement of
regional and subregional organizations, in particular as
regards implementation of post-conflict reconstruction
policies.

As a member of the European Union, Greece
strongly supports cooperative and effective
multilateralism and fully subscribes to the EU security
strategy adopted in December 2003, which
incorporates, among other things, the objectives of
enhancing stability, promoting the rule of law, good
governance and international justice and tackling
global challenges and threats.

Regional cooperation is a key priority to an
agenda for peace, stability and development. In South-
Eastern Europe, it is also a key element for the
fulfilment of our common strategic goal, which is
integration into the larger European family - itself the
most successful example of regional cooperation - in
close synergy with the United Nations, as well as with
other regional organizations, for the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts.

Following a succession of painful conflicts and
crises on a long and bumpy road, our region today
stands at a turning point. We are moving away from the
syndrome that the Balkans were doomed to endemic
and endless crises, and we are moving closer to
political and social stabilization and economic
development. We have a common responsibility to rise
to the challenge and turn our region into a beacon of
peace, stability and cooperation, acting in solidarity for
the fulfilment of the aspirations of our peoples.

In this context, the South-East European
Cooperation Process is gradually showing itself to be
the organized voice of the region, an efficient and
results-oriented mechanism aspiring to effectively
contribute to peace and stability and committed to
building and sustaining mutually reinforcing and
effective relationships throughout our region.

This meeting offers a good opportunity to
identify methods of enhancing cooperation and
interaction between the United Nations and regional
organizations. We believe that a closer and more
effective partnership between them and a greater
coordination in both policy and action is needed if we
are to establish genuine complementarity.

Likewise, regional organizations should further
develop their organizational capacities in conflict
prevention, resolution and peacebuilding. In this
respect, we support the development of the 10-year
capacity plan of the African Union.

In closing, we are convinced that the
recommendations agreed by the high-level meeting
between the United Nations and regional and other
intergovernmental organizations concerning the
institutionalization of this relationship are crucial for
forging an effective partnership able to face the new
challenges and threats of our time.

