The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Permanent Representative of New
Zealand.
Anniversaries of important events are rarely
straightforward celebrations. That is certainly the
case for today's anniversary marking 20 years since
the adoption of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT). The Treaty's adoption, in this building
two decades ago, occasioned considerable euphoria.
Something that had seemed impossible - because it
had been so strongly opposed by a number of significant
countries until just a few years before - was now a
done deal. Like other long-term supporters of nuclear
disarmament, New Zealand believed something of real
significance had been achieved.

Prior to the Treaty's adoption, New Zealand had
vigorously pursued the objective of a nuclear-test-ban
treaty for more than three decades. Twice, with support
from others in the Pacific region, New Zealand had
even gone to the International Court of Justice in an
effort to stop the nuclear testing, which had inflamed
our region, damaged the Pacific environment and
caused deep tensions with some of our oldest friends
and allies. Largely in response to testing in our region,
the countries of the South Pacific had also adopted and
brought into force the South Pacific Nuclear-Free-Zone
Treaty.

For us, and for the Pacific region, the banning of all
nuclear test explosions was the culmination of a long-
sought-after goal. For New Zealand, therefore, there
is real cause to remember and celebrate that historic
moment in 1996 when the CTBT was adopted. However,
as others know only too well, there is cause, too, for
deep disappointment that 20 years later the Treaty is
still not in force.

New Zealand supported the initiative by the United
States to create new momentum for the Treaty's entry
into force and voted in favour of today's resolution 2310
(2016). We join others in calling upon all States that
have not yet signed and ratified the Treaty - especially
the remaining eight States whose ratification is needed
for entry into force - to do so as soon as possible. Until
they do, we will not, as a matter of international treaty
law, have closed the door on nuclear testing.

A strong international norm against testing has been
created by the Treaty. That norm is being complied with
by all States except the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea. North Korea's repeated nuclear tests are an
affront to the international community's commitment,
through the CTBT and the ongoing moratoriums against
testing, to end the era of nuclear tests, as well as blatant

violations of the resolutions ofthe Security Council and
of that country's commitments under the Charter of the
United Nations.

While the CTBT is an important instrument in
its own right, it is important to remember, as others
have noted today, that it sits within a wider nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation context. That context
would have been better reflected in today's resolution
2310 (2016) had the draft contained stronger language
on the need for progress on nuclear disarmament, as
New Zealand and others had proposed.

New Zealand also shares the reservations of other
Council members about the reference in the resolution
to the joint statement by five nuclear-weapon States
that are also permanent members of the Council. While
recognizing the value of the commitments in the joint
statement, we are uncomfortable with the Council being
used to validate the perspectives of any sub-group
of Council members, whether they be permanent or
elected, nuclear-weapon-holding or non-nuclear-free.

While we must continue to call for States to join
the Treaty, after 20 years we also recognize that simply
restating commitments to the entry into force of the
CTBT is hardly progress towards nuclear disarmament.
That is particularly true in the light of the modernization
programmes that are under way in all States that possess
nuclear weapons and which cut across the contribution
that the CTBT can make to nuclear disarmament. For as
long as some States retain nuclear weapons, and declare
them to be essential for national security, others will
seek them. That highlights the mutually reinforcing
nature of nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear
disarmament. The neglect of one will set back the other.

New Zealand looks forward to working with the
wider United Nations membership during the current
session of the General Assembly both to promote
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and to
reinvigorate efforts towards nuclear disarmament in
line with the long-standing commitments set out in the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The representative of Ukraine has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.

