Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): Today the
Security Council, in authorizing the Stabilization Force
(SFOR) and extending the mandate of the International
Police Task Force will be taking two important steps in the
international community's efforts to assist in the resolution
of the tragic problems confronting the former Yugoslavia.
In the year since the parties at Dayton agreed to engage in
a serious, long-term peace process, we have witnessed
much progress, but it is clear that much remains to be
done.

Instrumental to the successes we have witnessed in
Bosnia have been the multinational Implementation Force
(IFOR) and the United Nations International Police Task
Force (IPTF). Under the leadership of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), IFOR has assured
compliance with military aspects of the Dayton Accords,
created secure conditions for conducting other tasks
associated with the peace process and assisted in other
aspects of implementation. Similarly, the IPTF has
promoted long-term civil security by working with the
parties to achieve fundamental reforms in law-
enforcement institutions.

The United States would like to take this opportunity
to express its appreciation and gratitude to all the men
and women who have served with IFOR and the IPTF,
and to the Governments which have cooperated to make
these operations successful. The United States also
expresses its appreciation to the High Representative and
his associates, who have worked to implement civilian
aspects of the Peace Agreement in a manner that both
benefits from and enhances the activities of the military
and police forces. And, of course, we express our
appreciation to the non- governmental organizations and to
the private individuals who are working to achieve peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and throughout the region.

Knowing that IFOR' 5 Security Council authorization
was for approximately one year and bearing in mind the
still very delicate nature of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the United States and other members of the
international community have carefully considered the
need for maintaining a military presence there. The
United States believes that the deployment of a
multinational Stabilization Force is an appropriate next
step. SFOR will carry out IFOR's crucial functions but,
in view of the progress that has been made, at a reduced
scale. The United States encourages all members to
cooperate with this Force, and all States to assist it in
accomplishing its goals.

The United States also firmly supports the extension
of the IPTF mandate. The law enforcement reform
process that the IPTF has initiated with the parties, and
will continue to oversee, is vital to maintaining not just
basic law and order but also broader peace and stability.
The provisions of the draft resolution that we are about to
adopt will enable the IPTF to follow through more

 

effectively in this process. The ability of the IPTF to fulfil
its responsibilities has in the past been handicapped by the
lack of full cooperation by the parties and by serious
administrative and logistical problems. By taking steps to
ensure that the IPTF has the necessary resources in terms
of both the quality of its personnel and adequate logistical
support for its operations, we will permit the IPTF to focus
on its most important mission. That mission is to help the
parties develop law enforcement structures that are
competent and dedicated to upholding internationally
recognized standards of democratic policing and human
rights.

In particular, we urge the parties to abide by the IPTF-
promulgated internationally accepted principles of policing
in a democratic State. To do so will require a vigorous
process for screening, investigating and evaluating police
officials in order to make sure that their performance
conforms to international standards of policing and human
rights. In general, we are convinced that improvements in
this area, rather than any numerical increases in the number
of IPTF personnel, will be the key to the success of the
IPTF. The United States looks forward to regular reports
from the Secretary-General that describe not only the
IPTF's progress on these and other issues related to its
mandate but also the parties' degree of cooperation with the
IPTF.

To support the parties' efforts, the United States has
pledged to provide appropriate assistance where significant
progress towards these goals can be demonstrated. We will
provide this aid through bilateral channels in coordination
with the efforts of, and in furtherance of, the guidelines set
out by the IPTF. We call on other Member States to do the
same.

The United States and the international community
maintain their commitment to working for peace and
stability in the region, and the action we have taken today
underscores the depth of that commitment. But we must
also emphasize that, ultimately, the responsibility for
maintaining peace and achieving reconciliation rests with
the parties. We can assist, but only the parties can take the
necessary steps to make peace a permanent feature of their
landscape. In order to help achieve that goal, the United
States calls on the parties to cooperate fully with the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) and the IPTF, and with the
several other broad-based international efforts now in
progress in the region.

Indeed, it is the parties' responsibility not only to
cooperate with SFOR and the IPTF, but also to implement
all aspects of the Dayton Accords. In this regard, all
States and parties must fully cooperate with the war
crimes Tribunal in The Hague. The obligation to
cooperate includes, as a matter of urgency, the arrest of
individuals indicted by the Tribunal and their expeditious
transfer to The Hague to stand trial. Efforts to avoid this
obligation with so-called constitutional arguments or
delays in transfer of apprehended indictees lack
credibility.

We note that SFOR will continue to have the
authority to detain indictees when it encounters them in
the performance of its duties. All States and parties
should recognize that there will be consequences for non-
cooperation.

We call on the parties to honor commitments that
would allow freedom of movement to all, including
refugees and displaced persons, thus permitting them to
return to their homes in dignity and without fear, and we
emphasize the need for all parties to secure for each and
every individual, regardless of his or her religious or
ethnic background, the highest level of human rights.

If these steps are taken, the parties will be much
closer to achieving stable democratic institutions and
norms that promote the peaceful resolution of disputes
and that encourage respect for a variety of beliefs and
political views. For our part, the United States remains
committed to the peace process and to promoting
international engagement to help the parties achieve
peace.

