Mr. Santos (Timor-Leste): First, allow me to
convey to the Council the regrets of Deputy Prime
Minister J 056 Luis Guterres, who had travelled to New
York last week to attend this debate. But, as we all
know, the incidents of 11 February compelled his early
return to the country.

After the comprehensive and insightful
presentation by Under-Secretary-General Guehenno,
and given the constraints of time, I shall read out only
part of my statement. The full text will be circulated in
the Chamber.

On behalf of the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste, allow me to express our gratitude for the
convening of emergency meeting immediately
following the attempted assassination of the President
and Prime Minister of the Republic of Timor-Leste
(see S/PV.5833). That was indeed a tragic event and an
attack against the democratically elected leaders of my
country.

Subsequent to the failed attacks, the Government
took measures to capture the perpetrators and bring
them to justice, in strict observance of our constitution
and domestic laws. The Government is fully committed
to adhering to the highest standards of human rights in
its efforts to resolve the situation. An investigation is
under way to ascertain the facts that led to the
attempted assassination of the President and the Prime
Minister.

In addition, allow me to inform the Council that
President Ramos-Horta is under excellent medical care
in Darwin, Australia, and is on the road to recovery. On
behalf of President Ramos-Horta and his family, I wish
to convey their gratitude for, and acknowledgement of,
the thousands of messages of sympathy and good
wishes they have received from all corners of the
world. In particular, I wish to thank the Secretary-
General, representatives of Member States, members of
the Secretariat and all others who have expressed their
solidarity and good wishes.

We profoundly thank the Australian Government
for attending, through the International Security
Forces, to the President's immediate medical needs in
Dili, and for providing the best medical care possible,
which promptly enabled his clinical stabilization.
Without that treatment, the outcome could have been
far more tragic for the people of Timor-Leste. We
would also like to thank the Government of Australia,
and in particular Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and
Foreign Minister Stephan Smith, for responding
immediately to our request for increased security
measures in Timor-Leste.

We extend our sincere gratitude to our good
friend Ambassador Kumalo for his leadership of the
core group on Timor-Leste. In response to a speech
delivered in February 2007 by then Prime Minister
Ramos-Horta in this very Chamber, Ambassador
Kumalo stated that Timor-Leste might not be the centre
of the universe, but that for South Africa, Timor-Leste
was indeed the centre of the world. A year later, we
know that Ambassador meant exactly what he said.

Last November, my country was honoured with a
visit by a Security Council mission, led by Ambassador
Kumalo. A few weeks later, another high-level Visit
was conducted by the Secretary-General himself.
Those two visits demonstrated the continuing
commitment and support that Timor-Leste enjoys from
the United Nations and the international community
five years after the restoration of independence.
Moreover, both visits provided an ideal opportunity to
engage with local stakeholders while at the same time
experiencing at first hand developments and challenges
facing our nascent democracy. The positive impact of
the two visits is evident.

A continued United Nations presence remains
crucial for consolidating peace and security, as well as
for highlighting our collective role and responsibility
in resolving the causes of the crisis. At the same time,
we need to thwart the perception that we are becoming
too dependent upon the international community to
solve our own internal problems.

My Government expresses its profound
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2008/26), as well as to Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno for his
insightful presentation. The Government of Timor-
Leste fully accepts and strongly supports the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's

report. The extension of the mandate for a year,
maintaining the same broad objectives and the current
strength, meets the needs and expectations of the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste.

As reflected in the report of the Secretary-
General, the root causes of the 2006 crisis in Timor-
Leste still need to be addressed. We agree that
Timorese leaders must put aside their political
differences and focus on resolving the manifold
challenges facing the country, including the challenges
of the internally displaced persons and petitioners. The
future of our country depends largely upon resolving
the root cause of the crisis.

The current Government took office six months
ago, with an agenda to reform and develop the country.
We have made significant advances in rebuilding our
institutions - the police and the judiciary in particular.
Although slow, that progress affirms our commitment
to rebuilding our own capacity. The United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste has been an
invaluable enabling factor. But the success or failure of
our objectives rests entirely with us, not with the
international community. Needless to say, the Council's
ongoing support in the crucial areas of democratic
governance, socio-economic development, the rule of
law and security sector reform greatly increases our
chances.

In conclusion, in my country we differ in our
political views - which is rather normal and is a part
of our young democracy. But we are united in our
recognition of the invaluable contribution of the United
Nations and the need for its continued and sustained
presence in the country. Resolving our problems will
take time, and time is crucial for consolidating the
peace and stability achieved thus far, so that
development can replace the air of uncertainty that
many of us feel today.

Finally, allow me to express our utmost gratitude
and sincere appreciation to the men and women of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste,
under the able leadership of our friend Mr. Atul Khare,
for their dedication and sacrifices. We congratulate
them for doing such an excellent job.

