Mr. Seck (spoke in French): The Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People is, first of all, pleased to have seen the Minister
for Foreign and Expatriate Affairs of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan preside in person over this meeting.

Allow me, on behalf of the Committee, to condemn
the attack perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant against the Palestinian refugee camp of
Yarmouk in Damascus. Like their Syrian brothers and
sisters in other communities, having seen their living
conditions deteriorate and their sufferings increase, the
Palestinians of Syria are now caught in violent clashes
that force them to endure appalling conditions and
suffer a second displacement. They certainly deserve
our attention and support.

The situation in Syria highlights once again the
precarious legal and humanitarian conditions in which
Palestinian refugees, one of the most vulnerable
communities in the region, have been living in since
1948. In that regard, I pay tribute to the work of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and other United Nations
entities that, despite the war, remain in Syria and in
other host countries to continue to provide basic
assistance to the victims of the conflict.

The war last summer against the people of Gaza has
left the coastal strip in a disastrous state. That is why,
on 31 March and 1 April, our Committee organized a
seminar at the United Nations Office in Vienna on the
theme of speeding up relief, recovery and reconstruction
in post-war Gaza. That event, which brought together
representatives of many States, international experts,
heads of United Nations agencies working in Gaza and
representatives of the State of Palestine, allowed us to
take stock of Gaza's pressing needs, in particular in the
fields of water and energy. Although the pace of the
process is far too slow, we note the implementation of the
tripartite temporary Gaza reconstruction mechanism.

We underscore that, although the relief operations
under way are beginning to bear fruit, reconstruction
continues to be hampered by certain obstacles linked
to the delivery of vital construction materials and
essential humanitarian supplies. In this regard, the
international community has an obligation to meet the
most urgent basic needs of the people of Gaza and to
allow them to seek out new means for subsistence so
as to recover their full dignity and regain courage. The
participants at the Vienna seminar therefore called on
the international community and donors to quickly
disburse the promised funds and on Israel to lift the
blockade so that life in Gaza could resume and offer
fresh hope to its people.

On 1 April, Palestine became a State party
to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, as it intends to achieve the full recognition
of its sovereignty and statehood through peaceful
means and legal means. The Committee notes with
satisfaction that Israel has reversed its decision to
withhold Palestinian tax revenues, which it will give
to the Palestinian Government in accordance with its
international commitments. In the same spirit, Israel
should cease taking punitive measures that exacerbate
the suffering and despair of thousands of Palestinian
families that rely entirely on Government salaries and
the benefits and funds of the international community.
Furthermore, the Committee cannot ignore the ongoing
settlement activities in the West Bank, the evictions of
Palestinians and the confiscation of their property in
occupied East Jerusalem, which are also an affront to
their rights and dignity and must come to an end as
soon as possible.

The Committee takes note of the recently held
elections in Israel and calls on the new Israeli
Government to return to the negotiating table in order to
engage with its Palestinian partner and the international
community to put an end to one of the most flagrant
situations of injustice in the twentieth century, which
deprives a whole nation of the opportunity to live in
peace, freedom and security on its ancestral lands.
A comprehensive, fair and lasting settlement to the
Palestinian question will allow us to create favourable
conditions for the advent of a new Middle East and will
pave the way for cooperation that will benefit all the
peoples of the region at a time when many threats loom
on the horizon.

We commemorate this year's seventieth anniversary
of the establishment of the United Nations and the
fortieth anniversary of the establishment of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People. I take this opportunity
to reiterate once again that we must take action to
ensure that the Council's resolutions on the question
of Palestine are effectively implemented in accordance
with a previously established deadline.

Finally, the Committee wishes to reaffirm its
commitment to the principle of a peaceful settlement to
the conflict providing for the existence of two States,
and its determination that the Palestinian people shall
be able exercise its legitimate rights in a sovereign,
viable and independent State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel
in peace and security.

