Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the Special Envoys of the Secretary-
General and the African Union for their briefings. I
commend them for their commitment and tenacity.

The political process that Mr. Jan Eliasson and
Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim are trying to bring about is
crucial to peace in Darfur. Like all of our colleagues,
we call on all the parties to end the violence and
engage unconditionally in the political process. That of
course applies, first of all, to the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM), whose attack in Khartoum in May
France and the European Union have condemned. It
also applies to the ruling party, which, as the mediators
have said here, has carried out indiscriminate attacks
against villages in recent months, including aerial
bombardments and the use of Janjaweed militias, in
spite of the repeated appeals of the Security Council
and in flagrant violation of international humanitarian
law. Lastly, that also goes for all the other movements
in Darfur. For its part, the French Government is
continuing its efforts to convince Mr. Abdul Wahid
al-Nur to rejoin the peace process. It is true that the
task has become more difficult while we await a
genuine meeting.

My delegation agrees with the choice of the
co-mediators to organize consultations with the
movements on security issues. We regret that the
holding of those consultations has had to be postponed
due to the lack of sufficient participation at this stage.

However, we must break out of the vicious circle into
which the political process risks becoming trapped.
While that process is coming together, as Mr. Eliasson
has said, it is also essential to pursue negotiations with
civil society in order to listen to their expectations and
not allow those who have taken up arms to be the sole
representatives of all Darfurians. Finally, my
delegation welcomes the upcoming appointment by the
United Nations and the African Union of a joint chief
mediator to strengthen the mediation team. The
political process is not a separate process detached
from other aspects of the crisis. To the contrary, we
cannot hope to move the political process forward
unless we make progress on the other issues.

The effective deployment of the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
continues to be essential and urgent. That United
Nations operation has the task of protecting the
population and actively monitoring the ceasefire. So
long as the operation does not have the sufficient
capacity to meet its mandate, the civilian population
will continue to live in fear, humanitarian workers will
risk their lives on a daily basis and the parties will
continue to view each other with suspicion. It is
therefore urgent that we strengthen UNAMID. That
means that we must have the full cooperation of the
Sudanese authorities, which is still lacking. In the
meantime, we believe that in no way can UNAMID
hesitate to assume its responsibilities, in particular by
organizing more secure convoys and by ensuring the
safety of road corridors. During the Council's mission,
we saw that that task was not impossible.

Combating impunity also continues to be an
essential task. How can we persuade the population of
Darfur to adhere to their genuine desire to make peace
when a person wanted by the International Criminal
Court for war crimes and crimes against humanity
continues to serve in the Government and is in charge
of humanitarian affairs? The people of Darfur have the
right to justice. Those responsible for the gross
violations committed in Darfur must be held
accountable. The response of the President of the
Sudan to the Security Council mission's request in that
regard has been inadequate. In that connection, I
should like to reiterate that the European Union has
stated its readiness to consider additional measures
against those who continue to refuse to cooperate with
the International Criminal Court.
As the mediators have said, the proper
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement is also an essential element in bringing
peace back to Darfur. The Government of National
Unity, which was established by virtue of the
Agreement, has the primary responsibility to bring
about peace in the entire country, and therefore in
Darfur as well.

My delegation is pleased to note that the recent
crisis in Abyei has been overcome and that the United
Nations was able to learn valuable lessons as a
consequence. We hope that the north-south process will
be strengthened as a result, thereby contributing to
establishing the environment for a national agreement
on Darfur. At stake is the unity and prosperity of all of
the Sudan, to which we are especially committed.

Lastly, regional tensions must be calmed. We
welcome the commitment of regional partners,
especially that of Libya and the Congo, to follow up
the Dakar Accord. It is in the interest of both the Sudan
and Chad to re-establish cooperative and good-
neighbourly relations. As the Security Council's
mission declared, people in both Khartoum and
N'Djamena must distance themselves from the armed
rebel groups. That is the only way to establish trust
between the parties.

My delegation believes it crucial to make
progress in all those areas in order that the efforts to
relaunch the Darfur peace process can produce results.
We therefore once again reiterate our confidence in the
Secretary-General, Jan Eliasson and Salim Ahmed
Salim.

