Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): The draft
resolution that we are about to adopt provides for the
creation of a United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET). This is an essential step; those who
initiated it should be congratulated. We also congratulate
the Governments of Portugal and of Indonesia, the countries
of the region and all the Secretariat officials who have
helped bring about this peaceful conclusion and the
realization of the principle of self-determination.

Following the popular consultation of 30 August,
Indonesia and Portugal agreed to transfer authority over
East Timor, in due and proper form, to the United Nations;
subsequently, the Indonesian People's Consultative
Assembly decided to revoke the 1978 decree annexing East
Timor to Indonesia. Like previous speakers, France hails
this courageous and positive decision taken by Indonesia.
It constitutes a milestone in East Timor's transition towards
independence, a process that should be supported by the
United Nations. That is the role of UNTAET, which should
be responsible not only for peacekeeping, following on the
activities of the International Force, East Timor
(INTERFET), but also for the reconstruction of East Timor.

We welcome this ambitious mission, since it attests to
the resolve of the Security Council to fully assume its
responsibilities with respect to peacemaking and
peacekeeping in crisis areas, wherever in the world they
may be located. This mission will also be an example of
the global approach to peacekeeping that takes into account
the need for economic and social reconstruction in the
Territory, without which the long-term stability of Timor
would be imperilled.

In order to be successful, UNTAET must be deployed
and begin to carry out its mandate as early as possible. In
particular, its military component should be deployed as
soon as possible, as envisaged.

The long-term stability of Timor will not depend
solely on UNTAET, but also on all the parties concerned,
first and foremost the people of East Timor themselves.
That is why, along with other countries, we call on all the
Timorese people to engage in a process of national
reconciliation in order to guarantee peace, stability and
respect for human rights in East Timor.

