Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank you very much, Mr. Minister, for
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council this
morning. I thank also Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her
very concise and comprehensive briefing.

I should like to begin by reiterating Uruguay's
previously expressed position that the issue of
Venezuela is not on the agenda of the Security Council
and that this is not the most appropriate body in which
to consider the situation in that brotherly country.

By the same token, Uruguay reiterates the relevance
and validity of Article 52, paragraph 2, of the Charter
of the United Nations - under Chapter VIII, entitled
"Regional Arrangements" - which states that:

"The Members of the United Nations entering

into such arrangements or constituting such
agencies will make every effort to achieve pacific
settlement of local disputes through such regional
arrangements or by such regional agencies before
referring them to the Security Council."

The Government of Uruguay has been following
very closely the evolution of the political, economic
and social situation in Venezuela and reiterates once
again that the worst possible solution for the people
of Venezuela would be to deepen its international
isolation. In that spirit, a few days ago the Government
of Uruguay, together with the Government of Mexico,
appealed to all of the parties involved, both within and
outside the country, to reduce tensions and to avert any
escalation of violence. In keeping with the principles
of international law, both Governments urged all
stakeholders to find a peaceful and democratic solution
to the complex situation in Venezuela and proposed
a new round of inclusive, credible negotiations that
would fully respect the rule of law and human rights.
Both Governments reiterated their full support for,
commitment to and willingness to work jointly for the
stability and well-being of the Venezuelan people and
peace in their country.

But there will be neither stability nor peace in
Venezuela absent a political agreement between the
various stakeholders that is reached through a broad
and fully inclusive process of dialogue that includes
the Government, actors from the entire political
spectrum and civil society. Dialogue is not a succession
of monologues, but requires listening to the other
party, understanding their points of view and seeking
understanding. The Uruguayan Government once again
urges all parties to follow that path in the strictest
respect of human rights and while taking into account
the legitimate interests of all the Venezuelan people.

To conclude, I would like to highlight the attitude
with which Latin American countries have reacted
to the sad phenomenon of massive migration of
Venezuelan citizens, which has been to open our
doors and societies, without rejecting migrants at
the border or building walls. Uruguay emphatically
reaffirms its determination to uphold international law,
peacefully settle disputes and strengthen democracy
and the legal equality of States. Likewise, regardless
of the circumstances, Uruguay will never, in no
setting whatsoever, support an armed intervention in
any country in the region as a supposed solution to an
internal crisis.

