Mr. Valle (Brazil): At the outset, I would like to
associate my delegation with the statement made by the
representative of Peru on behalf of the Rio Group. It is
my intention, however, to make a few remarks in my
national capacity.

I also avail myself of this occasion to reiterate
our deep sympathy for, and solidarity with, all those
who suffered in connection with the tragic loss of life
caused by the recent heinous terrorist attacks in
Baghdad, Haifa and Gaza. Those despicable acts were
received with outrage in Brazil. Our thoughts and
prayers go to the victims and to their families.

I would like to express our appreciation for the
work performed by all those involved with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), in particular
Ambassador Arias, for his skilful performance as
Chairman of the Committee and for the clearly stated
goals he has set for its continued work. We are also
grateful to the independent experts of the CTC, whose
work has been instrumental in the progress achieved.

As reported, the Inter-American Committee
against Terrorism of the Organization of American
States (OAS), in cooperation with the CTC, held a
meeting less than two weeks ago to examine how
regional and international organizations can advance
global efforts to combat terrorism. That meeting - a
direct follow-up to the meeting promoted by the CTC
and held at the United Nations in March - is a clear
example of the broad range of possibilities that exists
for cooperation between regional organizations and the
United Nations and other international organizations in
the identification and implementation of strategies and
practices to promote cooperative efforts to counter the
threat of terrorism.

In that regard, we look forward to the follow-up
programme for activities in the field of cooperation
with international organizations announced in the
CTC's programme of work for the current 90-day
period. As has been repeatedly stated, the OAS has
been taking a leading role in terms of concerted
regional initiatives in reaction to the threat of
terrorism. The results of that meeting could constitute a
helpful input for future meetings under the same format
with other regional and international organizations.

I would like also to mention the report that the
Chairman of the Committee intends to circulate by 15
November regarding the difficulties encountered by
States and by the Committee itself in implementing
resolution 1373 (2001). That document should
constitute a valuable contribution to the evaluation of
the appropriate course to be taken in promoting
universal compliance with the resolution and in
allowing for the careful planning of further actions.

As a final comment regarding the work
programme, it is to be noted that all Member States
have complied with the obligation of presenting at least
their first report to the CTC. Integral compliance with
the initial stage of reporting on the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) is a considerable achievement
and shows that the ambitious benchmarks set out in
that resolution, although hard to attain, can be reached.
Through the work of the CTC and of other bodies such
as the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) in combating terrorism, the Security
Council is carrying out its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, in
accordance with its mandate as set out in the United
Nations Charter.

Despite those achievements, terrorism remains
one of the greatest threats to international peace and
security, fundamental freedoms, human rights and
democratic institutions. As recent developments in the
Middle East and Iraq make blatantly clear, we are still
far from eradicating the scourge of terrorism. On the
contrary - as tragically demonstrated by the terrorist
attack carried out against United Nations headquarters
in Baghdad, which claimed the lives of 22 people,
among them Sergio Vieira de Mello - no one, not
even those strictly involved with humanitarian and
reconstruction efforts and the promotion of human
rights and dignity, is safe from the scourge of terror.

Regardless of achievements with respect to
compliance with the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, the adoption of pertinent
international conventions and coordinated efforts in the
combat against terrorism, injustices and inequalities
still victimize large portions of humanity. Young
people living under such conditions are prone to heed
the call of radicalism. Any comprehensive long-term
strategy to combat terrorism will have to deal with
those issues.

As President Lula stated at the international
conference on "Fighting Terrorism for Humanity":

"Terrorism is a symptom of social disease.
By promoting democratic values and respect for
human rights, and by promoting the economic
development of nations and the social well-being
of peoples, we will be building healthy societies,
immune to the scourge of terrorism".

In reaffirming my Government's condemnation of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, I renew
the Brazilian commitment to fight against terrorism and
its readiness to contribute, with cooperative efforts, at
the national, regional and international levels, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter,
international law and respect for human rights.

