Ms. Power (United States of America): Thank
you, Madam President, for convening this important
debate on United Nations cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations. I also thank you,
Madam President, Foreign Minister Carrera, Foreign
Minister Mammadyarov and Ambassador Gasana
and all of my colleagues here, who have welcomed
me so warmly today. I am most honoured to be in the
Chamber for the first time representing the United
States in the Security Council, and I am especially
honoured to sit here among so many distinguished
Ministers, colleagues and guests. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and the representatives of
the African Union (AU), the League of Arab States, the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
and the Union of South American Nations for their
briefings.

Their comments provide a glimpse into the critical,
essential contribution that regional organizations
make to global peace and stability. The United States
believes that regional organizations can be invaluable
partners for the Council as it carries out its unique
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. That is why we in the Obama
Administration have intensified our engagement with
regional organizations, including the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, the Organization of American
States, the African Union, and the League of Arab
States.
Anchored in their regions, such organizations
have a keen understanding of the political, social and
historical contexts that can drive conflicts there and can
help prevent them. Regional organizations can leverage
local knowledge, relationships and resources to mitigate
and, hopefully, end conflict, as well as support post-
conflict recovery and stabilization efforts. Because
instability in one State can and often does adversely
impact its neighbours, regional organizations have a
compelling interest and sense of urgency in addressing
conflicts in their neighbourhood. Preventing conflict
often depends upon early action to diffuse internal
and cross-border tensions, protect civilians and halt
mass atrocities. Regional organizations are essential
to such efforts, and, as we saw in Libya, the League
of Arab States was among the first to sound the alarm
that Al-Qadhafi's regime was on the verge of killing
thousands of his own people. The League's call helped
galvanize the Council to take decisive action to protect
civilians and give the Libyan people the chance to shape
their own future, free of oppression.

The United Nations strong partnership with the
African Union has been vital to stabilizing the volatile
relationship between the Sudan and South Sudan
and has helped prevent another outbreak of war. The
Security Council, the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy and the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei have provided critical political and material
support to the AU as it continues to seek solutions
to the difficult disputes that divide the Sudan and
South Sudan. They have contributed great creativity
and perseverance. Despite our best efforts, however,
prevention sometimes fails and conflict rages. In those
cases, too, regional organizations play an essential role.

As the twin governance and security crises
threaten the stability and unity of Mali, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) helped
broker a political deal that culminated in the signing of
an important peace agreement in June and nationwide
presidential elections just last month. African Union
and ECOWAS troops formed the nucleus of the United
Nations newest peacekeeping mission. Continued
cooperation among ECOWAS, the AU and the United
Nations will be vital to ensuring that the security and
constitutional order are fully restored in Mali. That
coordinated action serves as a good example of how the
United Nations and regional organizations complement
each other and underscores the value of offices like
that of the United Nations Office for West Africa,
where the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General's productive partnership with ECOWAS serves
to facilitate regional and subregional approaches to
addressing the cross-cutting threats to peace and
security across the region.

Cooperation between regional and United Nations
efforts in the field is essential to success. The United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) has
begun vigorous outreach to the African Union to create
a dynamic, UNSOM-AU partnership that can bring
peace and stability to Somalia.

Finally, regional organizations help States and
people recover from conflicts and other crises. The
Security Council last met to discuss cooperation
with regional organizations on 13 January 2010 (see S/PV.6257). That was just one day after a massive
earthquake devastated Haiti. Speakers that day voiced
profound sorrow at Haiti's loss, yet expressed hope that
the international community would pull together to help
Haiti recover. Today we can see that United Nations and
regionally led efforts have made a major difference for
Haiti and its people. The Organization of American
States and the Caribbean Community led a j oint observer
mission to monitor Haiti's post-earthquake elections,
which helped ensure a credible democratic outcome,
while the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) worked with the Government of
Haiti to ensure security throughout the election period.
The United States applauds States around the region,
including many represented in the Chamber, for the
essential support they give to Haiti by contributing
troops to MINUSTAH, providing development
assistance and helping build Haitian capacity.

While United Nations cooperation with regional
organizations will remain important, we must also be
clear-eyed about its limits. Although the League of
Arab States has been at the forefront of pushing for a
political transition in Syria, well-known divisions have
prevented the Council from supporting that effort.
Moreover, as the Council continues its cooperation
with regional and subregional groups in order to fulfil
its core mandate to maintain international peace and
security, we must remember that collaboration needs to
be based on the facts of the crisis at hand, and solutions
need to be agreed on and pursued together.

As we look to the future, the United States will
continue to support and strengthen cooperation between
the United Nations and its regional partners, and we
will look to leverage the valuable capabilities that
regional and subregional organizations can contribute
to our shared goal of building a more peaceful, just and
secure world.
