Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
topic of this open debate is of great importance to my
delegation. Mexico thanks Luxembourg and its Minister
for Foreign and European Affairs, Mr. Jean Asselborn,
for making it possible for us to assess the progress in
our common challenges in this area. Mexico believes
that resolution 2143 (2014), adopted today, which we
joined as a sponsor, strengthens our commitment to
ensure that children be children, not soldiers.

Despite undeniable progress in recent years on the
agenda of children and armed conflict made as a result
of the cooperation amng the Organization, Governments
and civil society, thousands of children continue to be
recruited as soldiers, sexually abused and excluded
from the right to education and other basic services.
The efforts and resources devoted by the international
community since the adoption of resolution 1261 (1999)
makes it possible for us today to use tools to monitor and
prevent the recruitment of children in specific contexts,
but it is clear that those are not enough. As with other
functions of the Organization in the maintenance of
peace and international security, the agenda of children
and armed conflict calls for financial, human and
technical capacities that are tailored to the needs in the
field.

The novel tactics used by any parties to conflict,
such as attacks on schools and hospitals, call for
equally strong, effective and innovative responses
from the international community. Mexico believes
that the political will we have achieved around this
challenge should be accompanied by a robust strategy
to strengthen national and international capacities,
especially in the justice and security sectors, from
prevention to reintegration. In order to prevent the
recruitment of children, we need a legal framework
that responds to impunity and makes it possible for
us to have effective age verification mechanisms. The
Council in particular, as well as the United Nations in
general, can provide decisive support to ensure that
national plans and strategies in the post-conflict stage
include care for children among their priorities.

My country condemns attacks on schools and
hospitals as a tactic of war, as well as the use of
unmanned aerial vehicles and explosives in densely
populated areas, given the impact on the civilian
population and on minors in particular. Such practices
violate obligations under international humanitarian
law and human rights law.

a

We welcome the "Children, not soldiers'
campaign, launched yesterday by the Office of the
Special Representative and the UNICEF, and reiterate
our absolute commitment to its objectives. We also
acknowledge Member States for having signed action
plans in that regard. We also believe it is necessary to
redouble our efforts to ensure respect for the rights of
children by non-State actors. To that end, we propose
devoting greater finacial, human and political resources.

We recognize the work of Sanctions Committees
that have included in their working criteria grave
violations of the rights of children, and we urge the
Security Council to adopt similar parameters in all its
other committees.

Lastly, Mexico calls on the Council to continue
including specific provisions to protect children in
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
We call on troop- and police-contributing countries to
such missions to train personnel before deployment so
that they can respond in a timely fashion to challenges
in the field.

