Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank the Australian presidency for
having taken the initiative of convening this high-level
meeting on the issue of small arms. I also wish the
President every success in her new functions.

The impact of the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons on international peace and security can be felt
in a number of the geographic situations and thematic
issues ofwhich the Security Council is seized. I strongly
welcome resolution 2117 (2013), which we have just
adopted, the first of its kind, in order to counter the
phenomenon.

I thank the Secretary-General for his
presentation and his report (S/2013/503). We support
his recommendations. My thanks also go to the
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for her very enlightening briefing about a sad
reality. It is estimated that, each year, small arms claim
the lives of more than 500,000 people. The majority of
the victims - 300,000 persons - die in situations of
armed conflict. The uncontrolled proliferation of small
arms and light weapons undermines peace and security,
particularly in Africa, and it has a devastating impact
on civilians in armed conflict. Women and children
often bear the brunt of that impact. The President of
Nigeria recalled that fact last Tuesday, 24 September,
during his address to the General Assembly (see A/68/ PV.5) : for Africa, those small arms are the weapons of
mass destruction.

Over the course of the past year, several countries
in the Sahel have become more vulnerable as a result
of the proliferation of weapons from within and outside
the region, a lack of governmental control over army
and police stockpiles, terrorist activities and related
organized crime. To counter that threat in Mali, the
Security Council established the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). On 25 April we gave MINUSMA
the mandate to assist the Malian authorities in weapons
and ammunition management, notably through training.

At the regional level, we have high expectations for
the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, which has to be carried out in close
coordination with the relevant regional organizations.

For its part, Luxembourg is committed to working
alongside its African partners, notably by supporting
the activities of the African Francophone Network on
Small Arms, a non-governmental organization and
think-tank network whose objective is to improve
shared knowledge on small arms proliferation, security
and disarmament with a view to conflict prevention and
peacebuilding.

The illicit transfer and destabilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons are often
done in violation of embargoes imposed by Security
Council resolutions. It is therefore the responsibility of
our Council, through the various Sanctions Committees
and with the assistance of the associated panels of
experts as well as the United Nations missions deployed
on the ground, to ensure the effective implementation
of sanctions decided by the Council. All the States
Members of the United Nations need to lend their
support to the task. Our credibility is at stake.

On 2 April, the General Assembly adopted the
Arms Trade Treaty, which more than 100 Member
States, including Luxembourg, have already signed.
The majority of the members of the Security Council,
including now the majority of its permanent members,
have signed it. My country resolutely supports that
historic instrument and will continue to work towards
its rapid entry into force and its full implementation.
By setting norms for the responsible transfer of all
conventional arms, the Treaty will have a positive
impact on international law, international humanitarian
law and human rights. By prohibiting arms transfers
in certain cases and by imposing the obligation on
exporting States to assess whether the arms could be
used to commit or facilitate serious acts of violence
against women or children, the Treaty will contribute
in a concrete manner to reducing human suffering and
ensuring peace, security and stability.

With the growing number of signatures and
ratifications of the Arms Trade Treaty, the commitment
by the whole international community and the
momentum generated by today's meeting at the level
of the Security Council, I trust that we will be able to
decisively stem the scourge of the illicit trade in small
arms.

