Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): We have participated
in and assumed responsibility for the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) decision because there was no other
solution. As for the Netherlands, this decision was not taken
lightly; it was taken with conviction. Responsibility for the
NATO action lies squarely with President Milosevic. He is
responsible for the large-scale violations of the October
agreements with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and NATO. It is President
Milosevic's recourse to violence in Kosovo that has finally
convinced us that the impending humanitarian catastrophe,
at which the Council expressed its alarm in its resolutions
of September and October, could not be averted by peaceful
means.

In some capitals, our determination to avoid a
humanitarian catastrophe in Kosovo has apparently been
underestimated. It goes without saying that a country - or
an alliance - which is compelled to take up arms to avert
such a humanitarian catastrophe would always prefer to be
able to base its action on a specific Security Council
resolution. The Secretary-General is right when he observes
in his press statement that the Council should be involved
in any decision to resort to the use of force. If, however,
due to one or two permanent members' rigid interpretation
of the concept of domestic jurisdiction, such a resolution is
not attainable, we cannot sit back and simply let the
humanitarian catastrophe occur. In such a situation we will
act on the legal basis we have available, and what we have
available in this case is more than adequate.

The Netherlands has been deeply involved in the
events in the former Yugoslavia ever since the beginning of
the breakup of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
on 25 June 1991. In spite of this, we have accepted a
situation in which the leading role was played by a Contact
Group of which Russia is an important member. Our
acceptance of this arrangement was always based on the
assumption that Russia had so much influence in Belgrade
that it could persuade President Milosevic to accept a
reasonable solution. The present state of affairs should
convince every delegation that with regard to the problem
of Kosovo, the diplomatic means of finding a solution are
now exhausted. As stated by the Secretary-General,
diplomacy has failed, but there are times when the use of
force may be legitimate in the pursuit of peace. The
Netherlands feels that this is such a time.

Allow me further to refer to the statement issued by
the European Council in Berlin on behalf of the European
Union. The Permanent Representative of Germany will
later draw the Council's attention to that statement.

