Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I,
of course, join you, Mr. President, in welcoming the
Secretary-General, the Foreign Minister of Serbia and
Montenegro and the Foreign Minister of Germany, to
this Council meeting.

The events that have taken place in Kosovo
threaten the security of Kosovo and the wider region.
These are the most serious security incidents since the
end of NATO's intervention in Kosovo in 1999. They
must halt and must not be repeated.

The United States fully supports the strong efforts
of KFOR and of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri, to re-establish order
and to calm the situation. KFOR, together with the
international civilian police and the Kosovo Protection
Force, are fully engaged. Those responsible for the
violence, on whatever side, should be brought to
justice.

My Government resolutely condemns these
incidents of serious violence in Kosovo. It is tragic that
a still undetermined number of people, perhaps 30 or
more, both Serbs and ethnic Albanians, have been
killed and many more injured. Churches and homes
have been burned. The United States extends its sincere
condolences to the families of all who have lost their
lives in Kosovo in the last days or who been injured or
have seen their property lost. We also condemn attacks
on the international presence, which are completely
unacceptable and which must cease.

We call on all people in Kosovo immediately to
restore calm, observe order, return to their homes, stop
damaging cultural, religious and historical sites, lift the
blockage of transportation arteries and support the
efforts of KFOR and the international civilian police.
We also urge the people and the Government of Serbia
and Montenegro to continue to support our efforts to
restore calm in Kosovo and to stop arson attacks on
religious sites in Serbia.

There can be no way forward for the people of
Kosovo other than to respond to yesterday's joint
appeal of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the leaders of the
Kosovo Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
urging the restoration of calm and order. The rule of
law is an essential condition for the future. We urge
leaders of the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government from all communities to continue to urge
their constituents to desist from violence fully and
unconditionally.

My authorities have asked me to conclude with an
appeal to the leaders of Kosovo: that they understand
that the complete cessation of violence is the
prerequisite for us to make decisions on Kosovo's
future political status. This cannot be accomplished
through violence.

