Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): On behalf of the United States, as the host nation of the United Nations, we warmly welcome His Majesty the King and Her Majesty the Queen of the Belgians to the United Nations and New York. We also warmly welcome you, Mr. Minister, and thank you for presiding over the Security Council today. We thank the Vice Foreign Minister of Indonesia and the Deputy Foreign Minister of Estonia for being here with us today as well. There is perhaps no group of people harmed more by the absence of peace and security than children. In most cases, they are the most vulnerable among us. We therefore deeply appreciate the efforts of Belgium to highlight global child protection, including through leading consensus on conclusions on Syria, Burma and the Sudan and by chairing the Security Council's Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict since last year. We also thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, Commissioner Chergui and Ms. Becker for their briefings today. Yesterday Ambassador Craft (see S/PV.8717) noted that how we allocate our time defines what we believe is important, and their presence here today affirms the importance of integrating the children and armed conflict agenda into our discussion on peace processes and conflict prevention. We thank them. The importance of doing so was also reaffirmed by the Council in August 2019 (see S/PV.8591), as it has been by members, numerous resolutions and presidential statements since 1999. In August, we reiterated that those who suffer the most in war are often children and that our discussions about armed conflict cannot ignore the devastating impact that it has on them. We are hopeful that both the frequency of the Council's Working Group meetings and Special Representative of the Secretary-General Gamba's engagement and advocacy involving parties to armed conflict will increase. Continued meetings, signed action plans and briefings like today's will all help generate needed progress. We should see the Council's unity on this issue as an opportunity to better protect children from armed conflict. And, by engaging with armed groups, building trust and offering alternatives to violence, as allowed by our mandate, the United Nations and other regional organizations, including the African Union and the European Union, can create new possibilities for sustainable peace. Today's adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2020/3 recognizes just that. AS we see in countries around the world, conflict prevents children from achieving their potential and saddles them with burdens that no young person should have to carry. For example, in South Sudan most children have never known peace, but only the threat of violence, abduction and abuse. A pause in political violence has created space for advocacy, including the action plan signed last week. But the best protection for children in South Sudan will not come from an action plan; it will come from President Kiir Mayardit and Mr. Machar sitting down and negotiating a lasting peace. Today we call on South Sudan's leaders to finallyput aside their differences and prioritize the hopes of their nation's children. In Colombia, the United States is dismayed by continuing violations and abuses against children. Yet recent trends give reason for optimism, as the Final Agreement for the Termination of Conflict and the Construction of a Stable and Lasting Peace and the demobilization of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia are clearly improving circumstances for the nation's young people. Amid the regional fallout of the crisis in Venezuela, we also applaud President Duque Marquez's efforts to protect the children and Venezuelan refugees, including by granting citizenship to those born in Colombia. In addition, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, United Nations efforts to extricate child combatants from armed groups have led to the signing of agreements to disarm and demobilize. In the Central African Republic, the engagement of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission with armed groups appears to offer the same inroads for education and change. But beyond country situations on the children and armed conflict agenda, we are deeply concerned about the fact that at least 600,000 children in Cameroon have not been able to safely attend schools in the country's English-speaking regions for more than three years. That is a stark reminder that mediation requires follow- through to prevent children from once again falling prey to the deadly cycles of violence. The Council has a duty to speak out on behalf of children, for they are our future and our hope. But to realize a future of greater safety and prosperity for all children, there must be meaningful action. That is what makes the children and armed conflict agenda so critical, and we are grateful for the opportunity to discuss its implementation today. The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.
