Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is deeply disturbed by the current humanitarian crisis in the
Balkans and has profound sympathy for the over 700,000
Kosovar refugees who have been left homeless and
separated from their loved ones. We have a saying in
China: "Nothing on Earth is more precious than human life
and no benevolence is greater than that which treasures
life." I believe that, to each and every one of us, there is no
place like home. The pain of having one's home ravaged
can hardly be put into words. We would like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
international relief agencies for the tremendous relief work
they have done.

What is equally of concern to us is that, bypassing the
United Nations and without the authorization of the
Security Council, the United States-led North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) has launched military attacks
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and thus
unleashed a regional war in the Balkans. Over the past 52
days, this war, conducted in the name of humanitarianism,
has created the largest humanitarian disaster since the
Second World War. Residents within the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia - including Serbs, ethnic Albanians,
Hungarians, Slovaks and other ethnic minorities - are
living in miserable and inhuman conditions. Oil refineries
and chemical plants have been levelled by NATO bombs.
As a result, poisonous gas and pollutants are threatening the
health and lives of hundreds of millions, especially children,
in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Europe at large.

All the bridges over the Danube in the Federal

Republic of Yugoslavia have been destroyed. Water and
electricity supplies have been cut off and television
stations seem to have become legitimate bombing targets.
The national economy and infrastructure of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia have been devastated, resulting in
a large number of civilian casualties. In this connection,
I cannot fail to mention that, even as the Security Council
deliberated today on the draft resolution on the Balkans,
another tragedy took place in Kosovo. Six missiles
launched by NATO hit a refugee camp in south-western
Kosovo, causing over 100 deaths and more than 50
injuries. The tragedy was horrific, the area being strewn
with dead bodies. These refugees were on their way
home. We express shock at this incident. I repeat: We are
shocked by this latest incident.

We believe that, in addressing the crisis in various
regions in the Balkans, the Security Council should not
apply double standards.
While stepping up its bombing campaign against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, NATO has brazenly
attacked the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade. 8 May 1999
was an extremely painful day that the 1.2 billion Chinese
people will never forget. On that day, the United States-
led NATO ferociously attacked the Chinese Embassy in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia with five missiles.
Three people in the Embassy were killed and more than
20 injured. The Embassy building was severely damaged.
Such a criminal act is a flagrant encroachment on China's
sovereignty and a serious violation of the international
law and norms governing international relations. It has
aroused great indignation among the Chinese people. The
Chinese Government issued a solemn statement that very
morning, strongly condemning this barbaric act of NATO.
This tragedy shocked the international community and
met with worldwide condemnation.

Despite the tragic incident of the bombing of the
Chinese Embassy that caused death and injury to Chinese
diplomats, NATO is still saying that its air campaign will
continue. Such perversity in NATO has outraged the
entire world and should be strongly condemned by
everyone who has reason and conscience. As a victim,
China has every reason, on moral and legal grounds alike,
to demand that NATO immediately and unconditionally
stop the bombing. Are not the shedding of blood and loss
of life of Chinese diplomats tragic enough to restore
NATO to sanity? As a permanent member of the Security
Council, China shoulders unshirkable responsibilities in
upholding justice and safeguarding peace. In our view, it

 

is illogical for NATO to continue with the bombing
campaign while talking about the return and relief of
refugees. An immediate cessation of NATO's bombing
campaign against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
should be the prerequisite for any political solution to the
Kosovo issue and also the minimum condition for
alleviating the humanitarian crisis in the Balkans.

For these reasons, the Chinese delegation put forward
constructive amendments to the draft resolution and
proposed to add to it such words as "there must be an
immediate cessation of all military activities". It should be
stated that this was called for also in the Non-Aligned
Movement's statement of 9 April. However, this important
position of the Chinese side was not accepted; we find this
most regrettable. We note also that the draft resolution
refers to the principles adopted by the Foreign Ministers of
the G-8. We cannot accept that the Council has prejudged
those principles in its draft resolution without first
deliberating on them, and therefore we deem it necessary to
express our reservations. On the basis of these
considerations, the Chinese delegation has no choice but to
abstain in the voting on the draft resolution.

NATO's bombing of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has resulted in a number of horrifying incidents
involving civilian casualties. People cannot but wonder how
many more innocent civilians will have to fall victim to
so-called collateral damage. Will more diplomats lose their
lives under NATO missiles? What has NATO done in the
name of humanitarianism? Among the three persons killed
in the bombing of Chinese Embassy were a young couple
married less than a year ago. The father of the woman
wrote a letter to President Clinton that said:

"T we innocent young people were killed by your
bombs, thus deprived of their right to live. Back in
Beijing, my wife spends her days and nights crying
and waiting for her daughter and son-in-law, who will
never return. Our son-in-law's mother lives in the
remote countryside of Jiangsu Province. She passed
out upon receiving the tragic news. The happiness of
my whole family was destroyed in the twinkling of an
eye. As a father, a human being and a longtime
human rights advocate, how do you feel about having
created such a tragedy?"

