Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
It was three years ago, under the Chinese presidency,
that the Security Council authorized the immediate
deployment of the Multinational Interim Force in Haiti,
which was followed by the establishment of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Over the past three years, with the firm support of all
parties, including China, MINUSTAH has played a
crucial role in Haiti by stabilizing the situation,
conducting presidential and parliamentary elections
and launching post-conflict reconstruction.

In his most recent report (S/2006/1003), the
Secretary-General indicates that the security
environment continues to be relatively stable in most
of the country and that various reconstruction
programmes are ongoing. China welcomes those
developments and highly appreciates MINUSTAH's
efforts.

Together with the progress being made in the
peace and reconstruction processes, there have been
major changes in the principal challenges facing Haiti.
The United Nations, and MINUSTAH in particular,
must respond to that changed situation by updating the
Mission's mandate, reordering its priorities and
adjusting its composition so that it can more effectively
meet the current needs of the Haitian people.

We believe that, in the coming period,
MINUSTAH's central task will be to assist Haiti in the
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. Haiti's
progress towards stability and development will
depend on the long-term support of the international
community. Essentially, however, such progress will
depend mainly on Haiti itself.

The Haitian people, with their security and safety
needs largely met, are increasingly demanding
07-2399]
improved living conditions, a revitalized reconciliation
process, economic development, social justice and the
rule of law. The elected Government should take
positive steps to fulfil their desire for a credible,
competent and transparent Government. We also hope
that the Government will honour its commitments to
the people and to its international partners, because
that is essential for the sustainable engagement of
MINUSTAH.

On the basis of those considerations, China
proposed a number of amendments to the draft
resolution during the Council's consultations. We
proposed extending MINUSTAH's mandate for six
months, in keeping with general practice related to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. At the same
time, we requested the Secretary-General to carry out a
comprehensive assessment and to report to the Council
on the changed situation and the security risks in Haiti
so that, before discussing and taking a decision on the
next extension of MINUSTAH's mandate, the Council
will have a chance to determine the overall functions of
the Mission and devise a feasible and viable long-term
strategy for both the United Nations and Haiti. Because
such an assessment might be time-consuming for
MINUSTAH, China agreed to an extension for a
reasonable period, as an ad hoc arrangement, beyond
the original six months. Also, we hope that the Council
will continue to follow previous practice regarding the
duration of MINUSTAH's mandate.

MINUSTAH recently reinforced its military
operations against armed gangs. Although they are
necessary for the short term, those military operations
cannot be a long-term strategy. Certain paragraphs of
the draft resolution overemphasize military means
while failing to pay adequate attention to such
important priorities as political reconciliation and
economic recovery. In the consultations, China
proposed appropriate adjustments to the draft
resolution. It is our hope that MINUSTAH will abide
by the established principles and practices of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and that the Haitian
Government will continue to tirelessly promote
political dialogue and reconciliation.

The Security Council, in operative paragraph 3 of
its resolution 1608 (2005), decided on a temporarily
increase in the military and police components of
MINUSTAH for the elections in Haiti and requested
the Secretary-General to devise, in a timely manner, a
progressive drawdown strategy of the MINUSTAH
07-23991
force levels for the post-election period. We believe
that, with the conclusion of the electoral cycle, timely
implementation of that provision will enhance the
effectiveness of the limited resources of the United
Nations.

We have noted that, although some amendments
proposed by the Chinese delegation were incorporated
into the resolution, a number of important elements
were not reflected in the text. That leaves the
resolution not as balanced and comprehensive as we
had hoped. Bearing fully in mind the strong wishes of
the sponsors, China, in order to show the maximum
flexibility, agreed to put aside a number of pending
issues and did its best to facilitate consensus. We hope
that, when the Security Council next revisits this issue,
those insufficiencies will be fully addressed in
considering a renewal of MINUSTAH's mandate.

Security Council resolution 1743 (2007),
unanimously adopted a few minutes ago, demonstrates
once again the long-term commitment and vision of the
United Nations with regard to Haiti. China is prepared
to work with others to ensure that the Organization
adapts itself to changing realities in its endeavour to
assist the Haitian people in reassuming ownership over
their own country.

