Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): By
convening today's emergency meeting on a Sunday,
it is our collective conscience that you, Madam, are
appealing to. Just some four days after the high-level
meeting that was organized here by your country, we
meet here once again at the joint request of France, the
United States and the United Kingdom, whom I thank
for this initiative, to consider once again the untenable
situation of the Syrian people, who are victims of a
conflict that is completely out of their hands. I thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for the first-hand information he has provided
us with and for his ongoing commitment to his work,
despite calls for his resignation.

The President of Senegal announced here four
days ago (see S/PV.7774) that what is happening
in Syria is unsustainable. Despite meeting after
meeting, negotiation after negotiation, resolution after
resolution, under the bombs human lives are destroyed
and houses, markets, schools and health-care clinics are
destroyed in violation of all international humanitarian
rules. Despite the praiseworthy efforts and good will
of humanitarian organizations, an entire population
is suffering and an entire country is collapsing along
with its economy and rich, multi-faith cultural heritage.
Here, four days ago, the President of Senegal asked
how long this could last. The cessation of hostilities
that was obtained through resolution 2268 (2016), and
which is critical to the timely delivery of humanitarian
assistance and the relaunching of the political process,
is now seriously compromised.

Moreover, the hope we had pinned on the recent
cessation of hostilities agreement reached between the
United States of America and the Russian Federation,
co-Chairs of the International Syria Support Group
(ISSG) - which provided safe humanitarian aid
corridors and coordinated action against terrorist
groups, in particular the Islamic State and Fatah
al- Sham, formerly the Al-Nusra Front - has ultimately
been dashed by the large-scale attack on eastern Aleppo.
At the high-level meeting on 21 September, Senegal
urged the ISSG co-Chairs to ensure the maintenance of
the ceasefire. The Senegalese delegation reiterates its
support for the establishment of a joint command centre
to monitor the situation for as long as the ceasefire is
in effect.

Given the serious nature of the situation in Syria,
and in particular in Aleppo, Senegal is convinced more
than ever that peace in Syria must be underpinned by
scrupulous respect for international humanitarian law.
That is why we support the three recommendations
made by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
