Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Allow me, first
of all, to congratulate you, Madame President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
as well as to wish you every success. I also wish to
thank Ambassador Nawaf Salam and his team for the
very efficient and wise way in which they conducted
the Council's work during the month of September,
often in very challenging conditions.

We deeply regret that the Security Council was
unable to unanimously and unequivocally condemn,
and demand an immediate end to, the Syrian
Government's violent repression against its population,
even though the situation in the country has continued
to deteriorate since the adoption of the presidential
statement of the Council on 3 August
(S/PRST/2011/16).

As underlined all throughout this process, the key
concern and objective of the draft resolution was to
prevent further bloodshed and ensure a peaceful
solution to the crisis in Syria. As such, and in an
attempt to ensure a unified voice from the Council on a
situation of such troubling proportions, the members of
the European Union engaged openly and constructively
with all members of the Council to ensure the adoption
of a meaningful resolution with a View to sparing
Syrians further suffering. We are therefore deeply
disappointed with the outcome of today's voting.

The situation in Syria is of the utmost concern.
The Syrian Government's violent repression against its
population and the ongoing violations of human rights
and fundamental freedoms must cease immediately. We
regret the huge loss of life and strongly condemn the
widespread human rights violations. Those responsible
for human rights violations must be held accountable.
We urge the Syrian authorities to cooperate fully with
the commission of inquiry mandated by the Human
Rights Council and to allow it expeditious and
unhindered access.

We equally regret that the Syrian Government has
repeatedly failed to heed the many calls urging an end
to the violence and the undertaking of genuine,
credible and inclusive political process. By persistently
ignoring the appeals of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, members of the Council and the Human
Rights Council, the League of Arab States and its own
neighbours, the Syrian authorities have allowed the
situation to escalate and undermine the security and
stability of the country and that of an already fragile
region.

As it has stated many times before, Portugal
remains fully committed to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Syria. We therefore once again call for an inclusive and
credible Syrian-led political process aimed at
effectively addressing the legitimate aspirations and
concerns of Syria's population. Dialogue is the one and
only way to ensure a peaceful outcome to the crisis in
Syria. Violence and repression can never be the answer.

