Mr. Hughes (New Zealand): May I start, Mr.
President, by saying how pleased my delegation is to have
this opportunity to participate in an open debate of the
Security Council on this very important topic. I would
like to congratulate you on your initiative in calling this
meeting.

We have prepared our statement today drawing
largely on our national experience in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, such as the United Nations
Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) and the
United Nations Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ).
I must say that I found the statement made earlier by the
representative of Mozambique particularly valuable. We
have also drawn from our participation in regional
arrangements, such as the Peace Monitoring Group in
Bougainville, Papua New Guinea, where the United
Nations is also playing a key role in the peace process
through its Political Office (UNPOB), and which was, of
course, the subject of my Australian colleague's statement
earlier.

It seems to us that, in designing a framework for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants, three factors are essential. These are
flexibility, building capacity and sustainability.

 

With respect to flexibility, we suggest it is essential to
recognize that different circumstances warrant and should
be accorded different approaches. For instance, where a
society has been severely disrupted by civil war or ethnic
conflict to the point that its domestic institutions have
collapsed, the role of the United Nations and other external
agencies is likely to need to be extensive. In other
situations, however, where an established and
internationally recognized Government remains in place
after a period of conflict, the role of outsiders, including the
United Nations, is likely to be more limited. A rigid
conceptual framework should therefore be avoided.

As for building capacity, there is the need to provide,
at the level of the individual, education, training and
information regarding options which may be available to
ex-combatants to help them deal with problems encountered
on demobilization. At the national level, it should be an
overriding concern to develop as soon as possible a national
capability in demobilization and reintegration activities so
as to reduce dependence on external inputs.

Sustainability, of course, implies that initiatives are
designed with a view to avoiding a return to conflict. It also
means promoting growth and development over the medium
to long term and ensuring equitable access to the benefits
of such growth.

The successful implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants in a
peacekeeping environment depends a good deal on the
provisions made in the agreement ending the conflict in
question, as a number of others have pointed out today.
Activities in support of these processes should, as far as
possible, be carefully planned and designed from the very
beginning. In particular, this means early consultation with
the parties to the conflict. As for external resources, we can
only agree with the observation made by several speakers
today that it is essential that our collective peacekeeping
efforts enjoy a more secure financial basis than exists at
present.

One of the key lessons learned from New Zealand's
experience in Bougainville, Papua New Guinea, is the need
to give ownership of the peace settlement and subsequent
disarmament and reconstruction mechanisms to the parties
concerned. Along with Australia, Fiji and Vanuatu, we
continue to provide personnel to the Peace Monitoring
Group and to take part in regular peace process consultative
meetings. However, our own role is essentially peripheral
to that played by the political leaders themselves.

Reintegration nevertheless remains a complex and
expensive activity. It is particularly difficult to implement
successfully in economies which are stagnant or severely
disrupted as a result of conflict. Ideally, emphasis should
also be placed on programmes which promote
reconciliation at the same time, for example, by recruiting
former combatants to work side by side in a new police
force, where this is feasible.

In regard to Bougainville, New Zealand is continuing
to provide, by means of official development assistance,
support for the peace process, including the restoration of
civil authority and a variety of vocational training
programmes with a focus on reintegration. It is pleasing
to report that we have found it possible to offer training
programmes in which former protagonists learn side by
side.

A further essential building block is the promotion
of good governance. We are attracted to the definition set
out by the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) that good governance is

"the exercise of economic, political and
administrative authority to manage a country's
affairs at all levels in a manner that is participatory,
transparent and accountable".

Good governance, in effect, means that priorities are
based on a broad consensus in society, while at the same
time the voices of the poorest and most vulnerable are
heard.

Finally, we believe it is useful to recall the words of
former Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali when he
wrote in An Agenda for Peace that

"Preventative diplomacy is to avoid a crisis; post-
conflict peace-building is to prevent a recurrence".
[A/47/277, para. 57]

This concise statement captures very well the need to take
adequate steps to deal with problems which, if left
unresolved, could lead to a return to armed conflict. It
also underlines clearly the need for due weight to be
given to the reintegration aspect of the tripartite topic we
are discussing today. For, without a successful
reintegration effort, the dividends of disarmament and
demobilization may prove short-lived.

