Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): We are deeply
concerned about the renewal of large-scale fighting in
Afghanistan since late September 1996. The recent
developments in Afghanistan have exacerbated the mass
suffering among the civilian population and are jeopardizing
efforts to provide humanitarian assistance to those in dire
need. Most alarmingly, they foreshadow a major setback to
the international efforts to bring peace and stability to this
war-stricken country.

The scourge of nearly two decades of war has taken
an unimaginable toll upon the country and its people. The
dismal situation in Afghanistan - characterized by a
massive loss of human life, the aggravated suffering of the
most vulnerable groups, the destruction of property and
serious damage to the economic and social infrastructure -
also poses a threat to the security and stability of other
countries in the region. We believe that, now more than
ever, the international community should renew its
commitment to a peaceful solution to the Afghan conflict.

This is all the more important at a time when the
efforts of the United Nations, through its Special Mission,
are facing the risk of being stifled even before any
significant initiative has been taken to bring the Afghan
parties to the negotiating table. In the face of the escalation
of the conflict, it is imperative that the Afghan parties cease
immediately all hostilities so that the political process to
create a broad-based Government acceptable to the Afghan
people can be initiated without further delay.

The steps needed to bring about a peaceful solution to
the situation in Afghanistan have already been set out in
General Assembly resolution 50/88. These are the steps that
the Afghan parties had already agreed upon and that the
Security Council had welcomed in its presidential statement
of 30 November 1994. We believe that the most important
task for the international community at this critical juncture
is to reaffirm the continued relevance and feasibility of
these steps and encourage the Afghan parties to move
towards these agreed measures.

In this regard, more resolute action by the international
community is urgently called for. First, the flow of arms to
the Afghan parties from outside has to be stopped to put an
end to further military build-up in Afghanistan. This is a
basic precondition for stabilizing the situation not only in
Afghanistan itself but also in the region. As a corollary,
States, particularly the neighbouring ones, must strictly

 

refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan and use their influence on the Afghan parties
only in an impartial way to help the Afghan people
determine their own destiny through peaceful means. We
once again urge all States, particularly those neighbouring
Afghanistan, to immediately review their policies towards
Afghanistan in a manner that fully addresses the urgent
need for an unconditional cease-fire to take effect and for
a real political process to start in that country without any
preconditions.

We believe that the Council should reaffirm the
principles of national reconciliation, democracy,
protection of human rights and the territorial integrity of
Afghanistan. These principles ought to govern all the
Afghan parties as well as all States in any effort they may
make to resolve the conflict in Afghanistan. In the
meantime, the suffering of the Afghan people must be
alleviated by making all the Afghan parties fully observe
international humanitarian law in all its aspects and by
making those who violate it bear individual responsibility.
Last but not least, we have to make sure that the
involvement of certain Afghan parties in the narcotics
trade, as reported by various sources, is not tolerated by
the international community.

In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that the
ultimate responsibility for finding a peaceful solution to
the current situation in Afghanistan lies with the Afghan
parties themselves. In this regard, we cannot fail to
express our deep concern about the lack of progress in
starting a genuine all-Afghan dialogue for the
establishment of an acceptable and broadly representative
mechanism in which all segments of society, including all
ethnic and religious groups, are represented. We once
again call upon all the Afghan parties to renounce the use
of force and settle their differences by peaceful means at
the negotiating table rather than on the battlefield.

Finally, we commend and support the efforts of the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan to bring
about the restoration of peace, normal life and national
reconciliation in this war-stricken country. My delegation
stands ready to make due contribution as a responsible
member of the international community towards the
peaceful settlement of the situation in Afghanistan.

