Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): We say in Icelandic
that there is a raisin at the end of a sausage. The only
good thing about this raisin is that it will be very brief.

Let me first of all thank you, Sir, for holding this
debate. I apologize in being late in sending my letter.
My authorities in Iceland are a little far away
sometimes. We are grateful that this meeting affords us
an opportunity to openly discuss the situation in
Afghanistan. Afghanistan, Iceland and Sweden became
the first new non-founding members of the United
Nations, on 19 November 1946. Our histories have
gone somewhat different ways since, but we keep an
eye on our brethren both from Sweden and
Afghanistan.

I would like to join previous speakers in thanking
Special Representative Koenigs and Mr. Costa from the
United Nations Office for Drugs and Crime for their
reports this morning. We fully share their assessments.
Iceland, a member of the European Economic Area,
aligned itself with the statement made by Ambassador
Matussek on behalf of the European Union. We also
align ourselves with what was just said by the
Ambassador of Norway on promoting the participation
of Afghan women.

A number of previous speakers have stated that
we are once again at a crucial juncture in Afghanistan
and that a thorough and comprehensive international
approach with the Government of that country is
needed. Such an approach should encompass, first, the
security of the whole country and should reverse the
negative trend of increased Taliban and extremist
activities. Secondly, stronger countermeasures against
the trafficking in and production of narcotics are
urgently needed. Thirdly, corruption throughout
Afghanistan must be addressed seriously. Fourthly,
legal economic activities should be strengthened,
thereby increasing Government revenue. Fifthly,
infrastructure in Afghanistan must be enhanced, and
sixthly, the Government of Afghanistan must be able to
rely on long-term international support. In that
connection, Afghanistan's neighbours, UNAMA, ISAF,
the European Union and others are key.

Iceland has two persons in NATO headquarters in
Kabul. One is a political adviser in the Special
Representative's office, focusing mainly on the
country's aviation sector. The other is chief
administrator in the public information office, dealing
with media and internal information for Headquarters.
Currently Iceland holds six positions at the Kabul
airport, and as of 1 April there will be seven positions
there manned by Icelanders. The staff deployed to
Kabul International Airport work mainly on overseeing
maintenance operations and support and the camp at
Kaya. They deal with engineering, logistics, the motor
pool, billeting and oversight of the manpower at Kaya,
to name a few tasks.

Iceland is currently cooperating with NATO in
looking into how the transition of the airport to Afghan
authorities can be prepared by starting the training of
local staff. That is part of a larger overall plan for the
Kabul International Airport and requires the assistance
of many international organizations such as the
International Civil Aviation Organization. Iceland will
closely follow the preparations for the transition and is
ready to commit more people to work on that transition
and even to manage it.

For the past year and a half, Iceland has operated
a six-person mobile liaison and observation team in the
provincial reconstruction team in Shagarkhan, under
Lithuanian control. It has also deployed one
development officer to the team to assist with
07-27564

reconstruction and development plans in the area. A
decision has been taken to discontinue the mobile
liaison and observation team and look to assisting in
more civilian assignments and positions instead, if
possible. That is currently being looked into, and
information has been sought from Lithuanian officials
on the positions that need to be filled within the
provincial reconstruction team and could be available
for Iceland.

