Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council, and to thank
you for having invited non-members of the Council to
participate in this discussion.

Switzerland commends the Secretary-General on
his excellent report on ways in which the Security
Council could deal with the question of illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons in situations under its
consideration. The report shows that significant
progress has been made in various fields of concern,
even though there is still is a long way to go.

Resolution 58/241 of 23 December 2003 on "The
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects" provides for the establishment of an open-
ended working group to negotiate an international
instrument to enable all States quickly to identify and
reliably to trace illicit small arms and light weapons
and follow their movements.

On 15 January, during informal consultations, the
Swiss Ambassador, Anton Thalmann, was appointed to
chair that group. The group intends to proceed in an
open and transparent manner.

The opening of negotiations on an international
instrument to identify and trace illicit small arms and
light weapons is an important step towards
implementing one of the important commitments made
in the United Nations Programme of Action.
Switzerland encourages all Member States to
participate constructively.

One issue that requires our full attention is the
question of United Nations arms embargoes. The report
of the Secretary-General underlines the fact that they
have proved extremely difficult to enforce, which
contributes to the prolongation of conflicts. In order to
enforce embargoes and to bridge legal gaps, it is
essential effectively to combine national, regional and
international means of monitoring the arms trade.

Switzerland believes that international
cooperation can succeed only if each State introduces
its own relevant national legislation.

An arms embargo is a whole chain of action;
therefore monitoring mechanisms should be included
that can identify the weakest links in that chain -
particularly since such mechanisms may, because of
their very existence, have a deterrent effect on those
who might be tempted to violate such an embargo.

But such mechanisms require sufficient
resources; otherwise, their effects will remain
incomplete. It is therefore essential that States
Members of the United Nations provide all the
necessary technical and financial support to the various
expert groups working in the area of arms sanctions.

The report of the Secretary-General notes that the
Security Council has focused in particular on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes in its peacekeeping operations. The parties
to conflicts must undertake a political commitment to
include DDR components in their peace agreements.
Likewise, closer cooperation should exist between the
Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations. This would be extremely
beneficial.

In conclusion, I would point out that DDR
programmes are complex and require considerable
financial resources, as do campaigns to collect and
destroy illicit weapons. Switzerland contributes
substantially to the World Bank Fund for disarmament
in Sierra Leone and to the United Nations Development
Programme Fund for Liberia. These programmes have
aspects that are very closely related to the areas of
work of national or multilateral development agencies.
But members of those agencies are beginning to
understand to what extent armed violence can thwart
development programmes. Therefore, in order to
increase the effectiveness of such DDR strategies,
United Nations system agencies and Member States
should try to mainstream the problem of small arms
and light weapons into their development programmes.

