Mr. Kerim (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia): I would like to thank you personally, Mr.
President, and all the representatives of the members of
the Security Council and of the other countries that
joined today's discussion for the condolences
expressed concerning the deaths of three innocent
soldiers of the Macedonian army. They were victims of
violence, but their lives are an invaluable asset, as a
part of the peaceful policy of Macedonia in the region
and in Europe. I can assure the Council that
Macedonia's peaceful policy and the philosophy behind
it, based, among other things, on the inter-ethnic
balance, will continue.

Nothing in this world will prevent us from
pursuing this policy. The fact that our security forces
did not intervene proportionally is not a matter of
political tactics on the part of my Government and the
President. It is a matter of deepest conviction that we
do not regard our own population, including the
Albanian part of it, as targets. If there are any targets at
all, targets have to be terrorists and extremists. I am
very glad to state today that they have been regarded as
a target in this discussion, and I would like to thank the
Council very much for its support for the measures we
have presented here on behalf of my Government and
for the policy that my country is pursuing in the region.
I am grateful for the support expressed in the
President's statement and in all the other statements
made in this discussion.

Finally, in response to the question of the
representative of Ireland, I would like to stress that my
country is pursuing a policy of inter-ethnic relations
based on concrete measures, and these measures imply
further measures in higher education for the various
nationalities, particularly the Albanian nationality, and
in local government. In this respect, I would like to call
on the European Union and all friendly Governments
and other friendly partners to support these efforts with
concrete measures and concrete projects. This is how
we can carry out preventive diplomacy and fight
successfully against extremists. I can assure all those
people who still believe that they can turn the wheel of
history backwards in the Balkans that my country will
not support or participate in such actions. On the
contrary: we will pursue our policy that was outlined in
my statement today.

