The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
condemnation of mass rapes which occurred in
the East of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in late July and August, reaffirming its
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1882 (2009), 1888
(2009), 1894 (2009) and 1925 (2010) and
recalling its statements to the press on 26 August
and 8 and 9 September, the Security Council
urges the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to ensure a swift and fair
prosecution of the perpetrators of these terrible
crimes and to inform the Security Council on
measures undertaken to this end.

"The Security Council expresses its
readiness to consider all appropriate actions,
including targeted measures against the
perpetrators.
"The Security Council stresses the primary
responsibility of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for ensuring
security in its territory and protecting its civilians
with respect for the rule of law, human rights and
international humanitarian law.

"The Security Council calls upon the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to condemn these atrocities, to provide
effective assistance to the victims of sexual
abuse, to support efforts undertaken by all
relevant stakeholders, including civil society, to
protect and assist the Victims and to prevent
further violence.

"The Security Council reiterates its urgent
call to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in cooperation with the
United Nations and other relevant actors, to put
an end to impunity; in particular, those bearing
responsibility for gross human rights violations
must be held to account. The Security Council is
determined to support the Congolese authorities
in addressing the root causes of the above
incidents.

"The Security Council stresses that the fight
against impunity is an integral part of the
urgently needed reform of the security sector. It
encourages the Congolese authorities to pursue
their efforts with the support of relevant
multilateral and bilateral donors and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
within its current mandate, to strengthen its
military capacity, to reinforce the training and
equipment of the Congolese National Police and
to enhance the capacities of the justice and
corrections systems.

"The Security Council takes note with
interest of the recommendations made by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
enhance efforts to protect and defend civilians
and improve MONUSCO's impact in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

"The Security Council underlines the need
for MONUSCO to improve relations with
communities, including through better
information-gathering mechanisms and
communication tools. In that regard, the Security
10-53846

Council urges MONUSCO to pursue efforts to
enhance its regular interaction with the civilian
population to strengthen confidence and raise
awareness and understanding about its mandate
and activities. It draws attention to the
importance of increased community liaison,
increased patrolling and appropriate
communication equipment in needed areas.

"The Security Council supports the launch
by MONUSCO and the United Nations country
team of a sensitization campaign, including
through Radio Okapi, to encourage victims of
sexual violence to report and to seek treatment
and legal assistance.

"The Security Council reaffirms its resolve
to eliminate all forms of violence against women
and children during and after armed conflict. It
supports the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, and encourages her to regularly interact
with MONUSCO's sexual violence unit to
coordinate the United Nations response and
monitor the implementation of the United Nations
comprehensive strategy on combating sexual
violence in the Democratic Republic of Congo.
The Security Council looks forward to her trip to
the country later this month and requests a
briefing upon her return.
10-53846

the

"The Security Council requests a briefing
by the Secretary-General on MONUSCO's
strategy for the protection of civilians and the
overall challenges the Mission faces in
implementing this strategy. The Security Council
continues to support a comprehensive approach to
the protection of civilians and to ensuring peace
and security in the region, in particular efforts to
accelerate the effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of Congolese
armed groups and the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration of foreign armed groups, to fighting
against the illegal exploitation of natural
resources and to establishing effective State
authority and strengthening the rule of law in
conflict-affected areas."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2010/17.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.

