Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein: I am
honoured to present this briefing as Chairman of the
Peacebuilding Commission's configuration for Liberia,
and to be joining the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Liberia and head of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), Her Excellency
Ms. Ellen Margrethe Loj. Given my current association
with Liberia, I would also like to commend publicly
the superb leadership of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in all areas involving UNMIL'S
work - and there is not a single person I met in
Liberia who does not agree with this assessment - and
to acknowledge the very high quality and caliber of her
two Deputies, as well as the great contributions of the
UNMIL Force Commander and the Commissioner of
United Nations Police. With every visit to the field, I
am also reminded of the extraordinary talents of the
United Nations staff members, and find myself in a
position always of never knowing enough.

I would also like, Mr. President, with your kind
permission to note publicly What I have said privately
to the Council on a previous occasion. What I find
encouraging about the future of Liberia is the great
number of talented and committed officials and public
personalities from the highest levels of Government
through the county and down to the district levels;
from the judiciary and Parliament to the independent
commissions; in the Liberia National Police and the
Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization; in civil and
religious society, and in the media. I have completed
two visits to Liberia and I have learned enormously
from all of them.

Before I focus on my presentation, may I first
support entirely what the Special Representative has
said with respect to the Ivorian refugees. On
19 February, I visited Sanniquellie in Nimba county -
the worst-affected county - and spoke both to the
representatives of the county and to the senior Liberian
officials who were with me. From all of them, I
grasped fully just how quickly the security situation
could degenerate either as a result of any further
swelling in the number of Ivorian refugees or if no
assistance were given to the Liberian authorities - in
the form of transportation and communications - to
manage this delicate situation as it exists now.

While in Sanniquellie, I also met with a number
of traditional leaders to learn about the alternative
traditional land dispute mechanisms used by them.
Many observers, as well as officials both in and out of
Liberia, believe that sorting out the numerous land
disputes would, as a priority measure and in
conjunction with other measures - such as the use of
the Palava Hut discussions, youth employment
programmes and ceremonies to memorialize the
past - be sufficient in leading the country towards
national reconciliation.

What became clear to me in the course of my
discussions with these traditional leaders, however,
was the extent to which the problems of Liberia extend
some distance beyond the resolution of competing land
claims. While it is undoubtedly true that sorting out
land disputes would indeed go a long way towards
blunting the lingering ill feelings that exist between the
two principal communities in the country, they will not
remove them. The land disputes have only amplified
what is already there and has existed for a long time; it
does not account for them entirely. The Palava Hut
mechanism is not a sufficient basis for dealing with the
competing historical narratives either. It is a means for
resolving fixed disputes, one that the Liberians place a
great deal of trust in and which has enjoyed broad
success, but it generally works well only until the next
crisis, problem or dispute comes along. If it had been
sufficient to sort out the deeper resentments, Liberia
would not have suffered the upheavals it has over the
course of 30 years.

What is needed is a firm foundation in the form
of a single, uniform historical narrative. The Truth and
Reconciliation Commission proposed the establishment
of a historical commission, and I believe that should be
the centerpiece of and the first step towards the
construction of a unified national memory. The
Government has, commendably, picked this up,
although it has asked the Ministry of Education to
undertake this activity. Most respectfully, I believe,
however, that this requires a much higher profile, and I
will continue to discuss this and other matters relating
to national reconciliation with the Liberian authorities
in due course, including the establishment of an
11-26479
archive where all the documents of State are housed
and safeguarded.

Once a memory is established, the Palava Hut
mechanism will have greater meaning as an instrument
of national reconciliation, in that, hopefully, it will also
provide a forum for reckoning, the precursor to
reconciliation. With a well-designed youth employment
programme in place, surely the foundations for a
lasting peace would be more secure. I should add that
we are still awaiting a World Bank assessment of its
own youth employment programme before agreeing to
the pilot project, as provided for in the Statement of
Mutual Assessment.

When in Sanniquellie, I also visited a circuit
court that had recently been renovated by the United
Nations. In speaking to a thoughtful judge who was
that day presiding over a particular proceeding, it came
to my attention that while all cases before the circuit
court were jury trials - unless requested otherwise by
the Counsel for Defence - funds did not exist for the
sequestration or the isolation of the jury, and most, if
not virtually all, trials at that level in Liberia suffer
from this shortcoming. The upshot is clear, therefore:
the justice system remains very prone to potential
contamination. The Liberian authorities, of course, are
well aware of this, and the Law Reform Commission,
whose commissioners appear to be exceedingly able,
will by now have begun drafting, together with the
Ministry of Justice, a new jury law.

I raise this point to underscore the fragility of the
judiciary following the many years of conflict and
instability. The Government is very much committed to
providing judicial services to areas beyond Monrovia,
but it must be careful not to export a system which is,
in many ways, broken. The authorities must, for
example, as a matter of some urgency, put into place a
case-tracking system. In my meetings with the very
capable Minister of Justice, I was informed that there
were also plans to draft a witness protection law and a
law broadening the subject-matter jurisdiction of the
magistrate's courts, where possible. These steps need
to be supported, particularly as progress is now being
made on the creation of the first hub - of a total five
security and justice hubs - in Gbanga, for which an
initial disbursement of funds from the Peacebuilding
Fund has already been made available. I anticipate that
several buildings within the hub will have been
constructed by the time the configuration visits Liberia
this coming June.
11-26479

It remains a great concern of mine that efforts by
the Liberians to rebuild their court system will require
a considerable amount of time, and so the system itself
will likely remain weak and penetrable in the short
term. There is, however, an idea being promoted within
the Liberian Government - although I hasten to add
that it is still in its infancy - that has generated some
interest, focusing on the establishment of special courts
for serious economic crimes with, potentially, a
specialized police force. In View of the threat posed by
transnational organized crime to Liberia and other
countries of the subregion, I believe this to be an idea
worth investigating in greater detail with the Liberian
Government.

As a general rule, the approach I feel the
Peacebuilding Commission needs to adopt is for us to
take the excellent ideas generated by the Liberian
officials themselves, such as the creation of the hub,
the creation of a historical commission or the creation
of special courts for serious economic crimes, and to
explore with them the manner in which we could most
be helpful.

Finally, prior to my last visit to Liberia, I had
very useful discussions in Washington, DC, with
officials from the United States Department of Defense
and from the United States State Department, including
the United States Agency for International
Development. I also met with international civil
society actors engaged in Liberia and had very
interesting meetings with the World Bank. I also held
talks in Brussels with European Union officials who
are involved in Liberia and was very much impressed
by their insights. Here in New York, my meetings with
INTERPOL, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the International Centre for Transitional
Justice all were extremely beneficial. In all those
discussions, I was encouraged to find a convergence of
opinion: we all marvelled at how Liberia has achieved
so much since the end of the fighting in 2003, but all
realized fully just how breathtaking the challenges
confronting Liberia still are, and that, ultimately, we
take nothing for granted.

