Mr. Valle (Brazil): First, let me say that my
delegation highly appreciates your presence here today,
Mr. President. I thank you very much for convening
this timely and important meeting. I join previous
speakers in welcoming you and Ministers Phil Goff
and Michael Ambiihl and Deputy Secretary-General
Louise Frechette, as well as the statement by
Mr. Wolfensohn.

Brazil is a traditional supporter of peacebuilding
as an integral part of United Nations work, in particular
of its peacekeeping operations. President Lula has been
vocal in calling international attention to the fact that it
is not only wars and terrorism that represent a threat to
peace and security; poverty, hunger, infectious
diseases, undereducation and underdevelopment are all
equally threatening. The latter, in fact, threaten peace
in two ways: by themselves and by their role in feeding
or refuelling conflict. No set of sound policies can be
adopted in our Organization in the absence of concrete
advances in peacebuilding.

Due consideration should be given to transitional
processes, and hopefully it has now become clear to us
all that the international community cannot afford,
either morally or financially, to allow countries to
relapse into conflict. That is why post-conflict
peacebuilding is so crucial. Peace must be made
sustainable in the long term.

It is fascinating to note how our discussions in
different forums become increasingly intertwined. If,
for instance, we achieve the Millennium Development
Goals, including the reduction of hunger and poverty,
that will undoubtedly contribute to preventing conflict
and its resurgence in many countries in Latin America
and the Caribbean, Africa or Asia. All these issues,
together with the need to reshape the Security Council
in a way that better reflects the international realities,
will converge in the September summit.

Official assistance to countries fighting poverty
and resurfacing from conflict is much needed and must
be stepped up. Beyond such assistance, the
international community must also work together with
the countries hosting peacekeeping operations to
enhance their capacity to produce wealth and to
generate income and employment.

In that larger context, the exploitation of natural
resources is a crucial matter. Lately in this
Organization, the concept of building ownership in
areas such as security and the rule of law bas been in
vogue, and rightly so. It seems to my delegation that
we have to be equally devoted to building ownership
with regard to the exploitation of natural resources.
Countries struggling with intra-State conflict or
emerging from conflict are often rich in natural
resources and face difficulties exploiting and managing
those resources in the best interest of the people. That
dimension should become a major part of
peacebuilding efforts. Though it does not strictly fall
within the purview of the Council, the Council's active
support will certainly be needed.

As we recall the idea that all our discussions on
peace and security are intertwined with the
development agenda, it is never too much to stress that
the international system should reflect the same
principles that are domestically applauded. It must be
democratic, from an economic standpoint. What we
urgently need is a development-oriented international
trade system, free of barriers, so that countries
emerging from conflict are given fair opportunity to
compete, especially in the area of agriculture.
In the more immediate areas of Security Council
action, our vision for peacekeeping operations must be
expanded to include certain aspects of reconstruction
and of the reintegration of ex-combatants. We must
increase our interest in and efforts for the development
of quick-impact projects that can provide economic
occupations, in particular to ex-combatants and, within
that group, to the youth and the women. Those
measures are either to be taken simultaneously with
other peacekeeping activities or should start even
before peacekeeping as such, as was the case in Darfur.
As you stated in your paper - for which we are
thankful, Mr. President - there is no "one size fits all"
solution.

Promoting economic occupation is a key element
of peacebuilding. But that does not exclusively mean
creating jobs in labour-intensive enterprises; it may
also be achieved through building capacity for self-
employment, small businesses or craftsmanship. I
would also like to reiterate, in that context, that special
attention should be given to women - not only
because of the horrifying crimes committed against
them in conflict situations, but also because they are a
powerful instrument of change, being the ones
primarily able to pass on to their children morals and
ethical notions and better practical education, including
basic health practices. Assistance, support and
capacity-building targeted at women are likely to make
for enduring results.

To conclude, I would like to refer to the
Secretary-General's report entitled "In larger freedom"
(A/59/2005). It has provided the basis for many
fundamental changes in the way we deal with crucial
matters such as peace, security, poverty, armed threats
and human rights from a conceptual as well as from an
institutional perspective. It is for us to seize the
moment and not shy away from our historical
responsibilities.

Brazil believes that the Peacebuilding
Commission proposed by the Secretary-General is one
of the many important topics in that reform agenda.
With adequate balance between the involvement of the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
in its composition, as well as in its operation, and with
active participation of the country concerned, it will be
possible for such a Peacebuilding Commission to
achieve meaningful results in a short time. Appropriate
coordination among United Nations actors and the
involvement of the international financial institutions
are equally essential, and we welcome the important
remarks just made by Mr. Wolfensohn in this regard.
Brazil will work towards this objective and trusts the
General Assembly will approve the much-needed
reforms for this Organization.

