Mr. Jenea: I thank the Security Council for this
opportunity to brief it on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.

As detailed last month by the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov (see S/PV.8011), the recent crisis in Jerusalem
once again highlighted the unsustainable nature
of the current situation and the need for a political
horizon and a clear recommitment by the international
community and both parties to ending the occupation
and to realizing a two-State solution that meets the
legitimate national aspirations and security needs of
both Palestinians and Israelis.

Following the deadly 14 July attack in which two
policemen were killed by three assailants in the Old
City, three Israelis were stabbed to death in a terror
attack and six Palestinians were killed during primarily
peaceful protests, as a result oflive ammunition, which
raises concerns about the use of force by Israeli security
forces. I join the Secretary-General in commending
the State of Israel and the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan, in line with the latter's special and historic
role, for bringing that crisis to a conclusion. I also
note positively the calls for de-escalation by prominent
religious leaders on both sides. We encourage continued
discussion among all parties concerned to ensure the
safety and security of all worshippers and visitors while
upholding the historic status quo in the holy sites. In
that context, continued security coordination between
Israel and the Palestinian Authority is paramount, and
the official resumption of contact between the parties
is vital.

In other incidents in recent weeks, two Palestinians
were killed and more than 150 injured were by
Israeli security forces. Four Israelis were injured by
Palestinians, including one civilian. On 28 July, a
Palestinian man was shot dead by Israeli security forces
for reportedly attempting to stab a soldier at the Gush
Etzion Junction of the West Bank. On 2 August, an
Israeli civilian was seriously wounded during a stabbing
attack by a Palestinian in the Israeli town of Yavneh. On
8 August, militants in Gaza fired a rocket that landed
in an open area in southern Israel. The following day,
the Israeli Air Force retaliated with missile fire at two
Hamas installations in Gaza, injuring three people. On
17 August, an alleged suicide bombing killed one and
injured five others in the southern Gaza strip.

Over the past month, developments occurred that
further undermined trust between the parties. On
26 July, the Israeli Knesset approved the first reading
of an amendment to the Basic Law: Jerusalem, Capital
of Israel. If approved, that law would further cement
Israeli control of occupied East Jerusalem and would
limit the ability of both sides to reach a negotiated
solution that is in line with General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions and prior agreements.
Jerusalem is the final status issue that must be resolved
through negotiations between the parties. Any move
that could have an impact on demographics in the city
is extremely worrisome and could spark violence.

On 25 July, 15 Israeli settler families illegally
occupied the so-called Machpela House, in the divided
city of Hebron, despite an ongoing Israeli legal
process regarding ownership of the House. We urge
Israeli authorities to resolve the situation quickly to
avoid further tensions in that already highly charged
town. Settlers reportedly also placed mobile homes
near the settlement of Halamish in response to last
month's deadly attack there, as well as within the
Shvut Rachel neighbourhood of the Shilo settlement.
On 3 August, the Israeli Prime Minister delivered an
inaugural speech at the launch of the construction of
1,000 new housing units in the Beitar Ilit settlement.
In the speech, he praised the achievement of his
Government in promoting settlements. Such actions
only fuel perceptions that those working to obstruct the
two-State solution are gaining the upper hand. I must
reiterate that settlements are illegal under international
law and an obstacle to peace.

In a few days' time, we will mark the third
anniversary of the ceasefire that ended the most recent
round of hostilities between Hamas and Israel in the
Gaza Strip in 2014, in which close to 1,500 civilians
were killed. Since then, the overall humanitarian
conditions in Gaza have worsened. That was clearly
documented in a recent United Nations country team
report that looked at the state of Gaza's population since
Hamas' takeover of the Strip in 2007, thereby increasing
concerns that the Strip could become unlivable by
2020. The punishing measures taken against Gaza by
the Palestinian Authority since April only add to the
crippling humanitarian effect of Israel's closures on the
population. Whatever the political differences between
the Palestinian factions, it is not the people of Gaza
who should pay the price.

Despite reconstruction efforts over the past three
years, approximately 29,000 people remain displaced,
while living in temporary shelters and in poor
conditions. Completing our collective reconstruction
effort in Gaza is within sight, but Member States
need to fulfil their funding commitments. The Gaza
Reconstruction Mechanism, established by Israel and
the Palestinian Authority with support from the United
Nations in the aftermath of the conflict, has enabled
much of the reconstruction. I encourage Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to intensify their engagement
towards improving the Mechanism to reach its full
potential. It is also time for the parties to discuss the
future of that provisional instrument with the goal of
fully lifting all closures.

Despite the import of fuel from Egypt to run the

Gaza power plant, most residents are experiencing the
sweltering summer heat with only four to five hours of
electricity per day. The impact of the ongoing energy
crisis is far-reaching, while affecting the availability
of clean water, health care and sanitation services.
The United Nations continues to provide a lifeline
through its provision of emergency fuel in support
of a number of critical facilities. I call on Palestinian
leaders to address the destructive consequences of the
divisions. I encourage them to reach an agreement that
would allow the legitimate Palestinian authorities to
take up their responsibilities in Gaza, as a step towards
the formation of a united and democratically elected
Palestinian Government based on the principles of the
Palestinian Liberation Organization. Hamas must also
ensure that calm is maintained by stopping the militant
buildup against Israel and by doing its utmost to sustain
security at the border with Egypt. Israel should step-up
measures to lift the closures and facilitate development
in Gaza as overall calm persists in the Strip in line with
resolution 1860 (2009). I also call on donors to respond
urgently to the $25 million humanitarian appeal made
in July in the wake of the electricity crisis so as to fill
the current 70 per cent funding gap.
Briefly with regard to Lebanon, the situation in the
area of operations of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) has generally remained quiet.
On 31 July, Major General Beary chaired a tripartite
meeting with the parties, during which both sides
discussed violations of resolution 1701 (2006), Blue
Line marking and ongoing liaison and coordination
matters. UNIFIL protested the presence of unauthorized
weapons and uniformed personnel in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006) during a commemoration of
the 2006 war, organized by Hizbullah on 13 August.
Military operations against militants continue on the
eastern border with Syria. As a result of local deals,
a number of militants and refugees were evacuated
from the area of Arsal to areas in Syria. Support for the
Lebanese Armed Forces and other security institutions
of the State as the sole protectors of the security and
stability of Lebanon remains important.

In the Syrian Golan, the ceasefire between Israel
and the Syrian Arab Republic has been maintained,
albeit in a volatile environment attributable to the
ongoing conflict in Syria. Both Israel and the Syrian
Arab Republic have stated their continued commitment
to the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli
and Syrian Forces and support for the full return of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force to the
area of separation, conditions permitting.

With regard once again to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, last month's crisis in the Old City ofJerusalem,
which is home to sites holy to all three monotheistic
religions, demonstrated that tensions can ignite, thereby
threatening to transform the nature of the conflict and
spread across borders. It is therefore essential that
international and regional partners remain engaged in
ending the occupation and resolving all final-status
issues, in upholding and implementing the vision of two
States living side-by-side in peace and security based
of all the relevant United Nations resolutions and in
supporting both Israeli and Palestinian leaders to take
the necessary steps towards ensuring an enduring peace.

