Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Ambassadors Peter Wittig of
Germany, Hardeep Singh Puri of India and Baso
Sangqu of South Africa for their detailed reports on the
work of the counter-terrorism Committees and for their
dynamic leadership of them. The recommendations and
analyses they have presented to the Council all deserve
careful analysis.

The Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
(CTC) and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) contribute to
strengthening all capacities of Member States related to
implementation of their obligations pursuant to the
various international instruments and to promoting
international cooperation to counter terrorism. It is
therefore crucial to strengthen coordination activities,
continuously assess the working methods and
strengthen the tools available in order to promote
assistance and cooperation among Member States.

Colombia wishes to underscore the importance of
the work being carried out, pursuant to their mandates,
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), the Monitoring Team of the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and Entities and the Expert
Group of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). There is a need for
greater information-sharing, for more coordination of
visits to countries under their respective mandates, for
more efficient delivery and follow-up of technical
assistance, and for closer relations with regional and
international organizations and organs.

I should like to refer to the 1267 and 1989
Committee. Strict compliance with the provisions of
resolution 1989 (2011) is essential. The effective
implementation of sanctions depends on keeping the
list current and on the quality of information provided
by Member States to update it, adding, keeping or
removing individuals or entities. The sanctions regime
reforms introduced in resolution 1989 (2011) have
promoted due process, transparency and the quality of
the list. The new procedure for updating the list
represents real progress, especially as regards
individuals no longer living or entities that either no
longer exist or about which there is so little identifying
information that effective action is impossible. It is
essential to comply with the procedures and timetables
provided for in the resolution provides.

Bolstering the Office of the Ombudsperson and
its mandate continue to be critical to the legitimacy of
the sanction regime. The number of de-listing requests
processed by the Office, its reports to the Committee
and the decisions taken to date as a result show that the
Office effectively promotes transparency and
safeguards rights. We strongly believe that such a
mechanism should be established for all sanctions
committees.

I now turn to the CTC and the recent CTED
global survey of the implementation by Member States
of Security Council resolution 1624 (2005) (see S/2012/16), outlining the significant achievements of
Member States' efforts to fight terrorism. The report
focuses in particular on respect for human rights and
the growing awareness that listening to victims is an
important strategic element in preventing terrorism and
incitement to terrorist acts. The Directorate should
focus on that aspect even more. We must concentrate
on protecting and defending the rights of victims and
their families. They must be listened to, and Member
States must be provided with the necessary
mechanisms to offer assistance, heal their pain and take
concrete measures to protect and promote their rights.
My delegation underlines the Committee's recent work
to review the procedure for preliminary evaluations for
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), so as to
improve its value as an information-gathering tool. We
hope that the new procedure will facilitate dialogue
with the Member States.

The proliferation of all types of weapons of mass
destruction and related materials, along with the risk
that they fall into the hands of non-State armed groups
and terrorists, is a serious threat to international peace
and security. It is therefore crucial to maintain close
cooperation and effective coordination among the
relevant anti-terrorism committees and their respective
groups of experts.

Colombia recognizes and commends the work
being done at the regional, subregional and
international levels to bolster implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). We have therefore convened
several meetings and workshops on strengthening
national capacities through cooperation and aid. The
first seminar for the Andean region on resolution 1540
(2004), held last March in Bogota, helped to identify
areas of cooperation among members and ways of
improving relations between Andean States and
regional and international organizations.

Resolution 1977 (2011), extending the mandate
of the 1540 Committee for 10 years, established a
group of experts to support the Committee in fulfilling
its functions, based on the expertise and wide regional
representation of its members. My delegation reiterates
the importance of honouring those criteria in the
selection process in which the Committee is currently
engaged.

We believe that the Secretary-General's
recommendation to designate a United Nations
counter-terrorism coordinator should be seriously
discussed by the General Assembly in its review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In
order to avoid duplicating existing structures, the
Assembly should bear in mind that the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force was established
to ensure coordination and coherence in the United
Nations efforts to confront the international scourge of
terrorism, as it carries out the principles and purposes
of the Charter.

To facilitate the full implementation and
fulfilment of obligations under Security Council
resolutions on terrorism, we believe it essential to
increase technical assistance to Member States in
building their national capacities and to provide the
tools they need to pursue their fight against terrorism.
