Mr. Kono (Japan): I would first like to extend my
sincere gratitude to you, Secretary Pompeo, for your
tireless efforts on North Korean issues. You have not
only brought this meeting together to reaffirm our
collective determination to tackle these pressing issues,
but you have also been selflessly dedicated to achieving
the complete denuclearization of North Korea for the
good of us all. I would also like to pay tribute to my
counterpart from the Republic of Korea, Minister
Kang, for her leadership and hard work.

Japan welcomes and supports the ongoing
diplomatic efforts, including the historic United States-
North Korea summit held in Singapore in June, as well
as the three inter-Korean summits held this year, as
a step towards reaching a comprehensive resolution
of outstanding issues involving North Korea. It is
my greatest hope that those efforts will lead to the
complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantling of all
weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles of
all ranges by North Korea, which is a common goal that
we all share in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Japan will spare no effort to realize
that goal.

Nevertheless, we are acutely aware that the most
recent report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency expressed grave concern that North Korea is
continuing its nuclear programme. What we seek is for
North Korea to seize this unprecedented opportunity
and take decisive and irreversible steps towards
complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantlement.
The international community should come together
to assist the diplomatic efforts that are under way and
encourage North Korea to make a strategic decision to
fulfil its international obligations and commitments.
In doing so, it is critical for us to remain united so
as to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
resolutions that the Council has unanimously adopted.
I am convinced that there is no better way for us to
support the current diplomatic process.

We should also be aware of several important
incidents. The Government of Japan shares the view of
the United States Government and some other partner
countries that the 2018 annual cap for petroleum
products has already been breached. It is important
that all Member States immediately stop supplying
those products to North Korea, pursuant to the relevant
Security Council resolutions. There are also continued
reports of increasingly sophisticated efforts to evade
and circumvent measures based on the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including through what
are known as ship-to-ship transfers and the selling of
fishing rights. The very authority of the decisions made
by the Council is at stake. It is our obligation to stop
sanction-evasion activities.

Last but not least, between Japan and North Korea
lie issues that must be resolved immediately. Japan is
determined to directly engage with North Korea and use
every possible means at our disposal towards achieving
the immediate resolution of the issues. North Korea is
blessed with great potential and is well placed to shape
a brighter future for itself if it takes the right path.
North Korea enjoys an abundance of resources and a
hardworking labour force. This is an important moment,
and I strongly urge North Korea to seize this unique
opportunity. Only North Korea that can make that
happen. In order to achieve lasting peace and stability
in North-East Asia and beyond, while protecting the
current international non-proliferation regime, it is
absolutely imperative to realize the complete, verifiable
and irreversible dismantling of all weapons of mass
destruction and ballistic missiles of all ranges by North
Korea. To that end, let us unite in renewing our clear
and unwavering commitment to the full implementation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions.

