Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to commend Pakistan for organizing this
debate on the question of a multidimensional approach
to United Nations peacekeeping operations. Your
presence with us here in the Chamber, Secretary Jilani,
to conduct today's debate illustrates the interest that your
country has always had in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. I am also grateful to the Secretary-General
for the very detailed presentation that he has just given
to us on the item under consideration.

One of the major challenges that our world has
always faced pertains to its ability to find speedy and
sustainable solutions to crisis and conflict situations
that emerge to threaten the stability of States and the
well-being of their populations. Initially designed and,
until recently, operating to maintain peace in countries
in conflict, peacekeeping operations have gradually
evolved in order to adapt to the political, social and
economic environment of our time.

Now the evolution of United Nations peacekeeping
missions is such that the organization, planning and
execution of related operations are transcending the
primary normative framework mentioned in Chapters
VI, VII and VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Peacekeeping missions, in their multidimensional
design, now rely on a normative framework that brings
together the relative provisions of the Charter and the
international legal instruments for human rights and
international humanitarian law, as well as of regional
and subregional organizations.

The issue is no longer just peacekeeping, but also
peacebuilding. The mandate of peacekeeping missions
has thus evolved to include the development component,
thereby making Blue Helmets artisans of peace and
reconstruction.

The merit of today's debate is that it highlights the
multidimensional approach of peacekeeping operations
and provides an opportunity to evaluate its effectiveness

and to propose improvements. Rebuilding a country
after conflict requires a number of competencies to act
in areas as varied as those having to do with security,
the rule of law, good governance, the restoration of
institutions and infrastructure, justice reform and
national capacity-building of the countries concerned.

The multidimensional approach of peacekeeping
operations therefore shows the will of the United
Nations to not limit its missions to achieving only
security space, but also to achieving space for political,
economic and human rights.

We are pleased to note that for a number of years
now the multidimensional approach has been well
integrated into peacekeeping missions, since the
United Nations and its external partners have agreed
to identifiy the activities that are part of peacebuilding.
In countries emerging from armed conflict, the
array of actions to be carried out is quite vast, but the
financial and logistical resources are often lacking.
External support is therefore the sole hope for the
country concerned, not only to re-establish security
and build institutions, but also to resume political and
economic activities, which are the very foundation of
any State.

While recognizing the merits ofa multidimensional
approach in peacekeeping operations, my country
believes that, given the specificity of causes and of
the nature of conflicts, it would be desirable not to
lose sight of the fact that there is not just one model
for peacebuilding. Therefore, each mission will need
to take into consideration the specific needs of the
countries concerned through ongoing consultations
with national authorities.

Given that the multidimensional approach involves
simultaneously implementing a number of activities
by different stakeholders intervening in their areas of
specialization, the success of such activities requires
integrated preparation of missions, the establishment of
a strategic framework and mechanisms that will assist
in coordinating them and in setting priorities. That
type of work is primarily up to the United Nations,
in collaboration with regional stakeholders and the
countries concerned.

We are therefore pleased to see that missions have
been given coordinating frameworks and coherence,
which now will need to be regularly assessed and from
which could come relevant recommendations. Along
the same lines, we must strengthen partnerships, not
only among bodies of the United Nations but also
between regional and subregional organizations and
the international financial institutions. In that respect,
Togo believes that the Peacebuilding Commission,
given its importance, like the Peacebuilding Support
Office and United Nations bodies, must be able to
establish a partnership to avoid duplication of activities,
achieve complementarity on the ground and provide
an opportunity for the establishment of a model of
sustained and sustainable development.

That is why my country has always supported the
recommendations contained in the report of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and believes
that their implementation will help make more visible
and more permanent the action of the United Nations
by all partners on the ground. Also, we must note the
increasingly important role to be played by political
stakeholders, civil society and defence and security
agencies, whose coordinated action will contribute
to the success of a peacekeeping mission. To make a
peacekeeping operation efficient, we need to focus on
the involvement of all concerned stakeholders from the
outset of the mission in order to keep them all equally
informed and to make sure that the information is
always shared.

Togo appreciate the efforts already made in terms
of training and expertise before deployment on the
ground, both for civilians and security forces. To assist
those efforts and meet international standards in that
area, a training centre for military and police was set up
in Lome in order to ensure their efficient deployment
in peacekeeping operations. We would also like to note
that, in order to optimize the chances for success in
those actions on the ground, it is important to avoid
any policy of exclusion in the implementation of
those projects. We therefore particularly welcome the
increasingly important place that the United Nations
is granting to women as key stakeholders for the
implementation of projects that assist in re-establishing
peace and security. We believe that it is also vital to
promote the role of ethnic minorities and the media in
promoting sustainable peace.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate the urgent need
to adopt clear mandates for peacekeeping operations
that coherently highlight the goals to be achieved in the
post-conflict period in order to ensure that the country
emerging from a crisis or conflict will not relapse for
lack of substantial international support.
The protection of civilians and human rights, as
well as security sector reform and building the rule of
law and good governance, should also be given pride
of place in the reconstruction programmes identified
by and with the participation of national political
stakeholders.

However, it is undeniable that the mandates of
peacekeeping operations can be executed only if
missions have considerable means. In spite of the efforts
made, financing remains today the Achilles heel of
peacekeeping operations. The international community
must therefore spare no effort to make the contributions
necessary for ensuring the harmonious implementation
of United Nations peacekeeping operations.

