Mr. Cohen (United States of America): The United
States welcomes Eritrea's rapprochement with its
neighbours. We are encouraged by its stated commitment
to re-engaging in an effort to establish enduring peace
and regional cooperation and to opening the door to
its reintegration. This is a historic moment and a great
opportunity for the Horn of Africa. But there is much
more to do, particularly in addressing the questions
regarding the disposition of missing Djiboutian troops
and the final status of the Djibouti-Eritrea border.

We believe that the recent engagement between

the two countries strongly suggests that their political
will and intent are strong enough to reach a solution
with the support of the international community.
We are satisfied with the Council's agreement on
resolution 2444 (2018), which pays particular attention
to the importance of ensuring that Eritrea and Djibouti
follow through on their commitments to resolving
these matters, and we continue to call on all parties
to cooperate in order to reach a satisfactory outcome.
The United States predicates its support for lifting
the United Nations sanctions on Eritrea on the current
lack of evidence connecting Eritrea to Al-Shabaab.
We appreciate the efforts of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea, and of the Monitoring Group on
Somalia and Eritrea, to carry out their mandates in
that regard.

We strongly support the renewal of the Sanctions
Committee's mandate to focus on Somalia. There is no
doubt that Somalia has made significant progress over
the past decade, due in large part to the support of its
regional partners and the international community as a
whole. However, Somali capacity, including regarding
the implementation of the remaining arms restrictions
and the ban on the trade of Somali charcoal, remains
limited owing to the country's security conditions,
corruption and uneven progress in governance. We are
confident that the Panel of Experts on Somalia will
remain diligent in faithfully fulfilling its mandate,
especially as it relates to comprehensive investigations
and reporting.

The United States will continue to support Somalia
in its efforts to stabilize the country for its people,
including by ensuring that the international community
takes all appropriate measures to maintain the integrity
of the sanctions regime.

