Mr. McLay (New Zealand): 1, too, thank Deputy
Prime Minister Jose' Luis Guterres and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ameerah Haq
for their statements, as well as the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive and valuable report on Timor-
Leste (S/2010/85).

That report outlines the progress made across all
areas of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) over the past year
and the considerable distance travelled by the
Government and people of Timor-Leste since the dark
days of the 2006 crisis. It describes a country no longer
in a state of crisis, and one that enjoys greater levels of
security and stability. It describes the steady progress
in developing the capacity of Timor-Leste's nascent
political and bureaucratic institutions, as demonstrated
by the smooth conduct of the suco elections in October.
It also describes the steps taken to strengthen the rule
of law and the process by which primary responsibility
for policing has been progressively transferred from
UNMIT to the National Police of Timor-Leste (PNTL)
since May of last year.

In assessing that progress, it is important to
recognize just how far Timor-Leste has come in the
few short years since its independence, but it is equally
important to acknowledge the significant challenges

10-2486]
that remain to be faced. Elections scheduled for later
this year and for 2012 will test the capacity and the
resilience of Timor-Leste's electoral and security
institutions and the progress that has been made in
embedding a stable and democratic political culture.
We are also well aware of the profound social and
economic problems still faced by that young country in
terms of lifting its people out of poverty, building an
economy that extends beyond oil, and ensuring that its
young people have the skills, training and opportunities
that they need to take charge of their futures. New
Zealand is currently reshaping its $9-million Timor-
Leste aid programme to reflect better those key
concerns.

Timor-Leste's international guarantors of
security, the International Stabilisation Force (ISF) and
UNMIT, no longer face the same challenges they faced
two or three years ago. Nevertheless, their presence as
a deterrent to disorder and as a support for the
Government remains vital to maintaining internal
security and stability - a fact acknowledged by the
Government itself.

As a long-term friend of the people and
Government of Timor-Leste, New Zealand remains
committed to playing its part in that international
presence, as it has in every United Nations mission and
in both international security operations since the 1999
referendum. Today, New Zealand maintains 150
military personnel - an infantry company - within
the ISF and holds the Force Deputy Commander role.
It has a 25-strong police deployment within UNMIT,
with a particular focus on community policing training
for the PNTL. A New Zealand military liaison officer
also serves with UNMIT. Bilaterally, too, we are a
committed partner, providing both our development
assistance programme, which has been particularly
active in the areas of education, justice and police
support, and a five-person military technical assistance
team.
Given those challenges, New Zealand supports
the Secretary-General's recommendation for an
extension of UNMIT's existing mandate at currently
authorized levels. However, as the Secretary-General's
report also makes clear, it is important to ensure that
the size, shape and nature of international assistance
evolve in accordance with Timor-Leste's changing
needs. We are entering a phase in which the direct
provision of institutional capacity by Timor-Leste's
international partners must increasingly give way to
efforts to support its legitimate and understandable
desire increasingly to run its own affairs.

That transition has been reflected over the past
few months in the gradual downsizing of the ISF, in
consultation with the Timorese Government, as the
situation on the ground has become more stable. The
ISF is also increasingly complementing its core
security role with assistance in building the capacity of
the Timorese armed forces and on related development
assistance.

That transition can also be seen in Timor-Leste's
evolving needs and expectations with regard to
UNMIT, including its police component. The
Government has expressed its desire to resume primary
responsibility for policing throughout the country as
soon as is feasible and its hope to achieve that goal by
the end of this year. We welcome the Secretary-
General's commitment to work towards that objective.
We also welcome the careful consideration being given
as to how it can responsibly be achieved in accordance
with the benchmarks for the transfer of policing
authority agreed in the 2008 medium-term strategy.

To meet those objectives, it will be vital to ensure
that UNMIT personnel are equipped with the profile,
skills and experience required for the difficult and
specialized task of institutional capacity-building. We
therefore also welcome the Secretary-General's
determination to ensure that United Nations police are
suitably skilled and equipped to effectively implement
that aspect of their mandate, including through
recruitment of relevant civilian expertise, as
appropriate.

Equally, we encourage UNMIT and the
Government of Timor-Leste to intensify their efforts to
ensure that sufficient investments are made in the
PNTL to overcome the shortcomings that remain in its
logistical and organizational capacities. Such
investments must be planned and implemented as a
matter of urgency if the handover of policing
responsibilities is to be implemented in a smooth,
responsible and timely manner.

We also share the Secretary-General's view that,
as UNMIT's role evolves in this manner, its policing
component will need to be progressively reconfigured
and reduced, while retaining sufficient capacity to
assist in dealing with any major security incidents and
to carry out its mentoring and capacity-building roles
effectively.

As those changes are implemented, the need for
careful coordination between all of Timor-Leste's
partners in the security sector assumes even greater
importance. As one of only two countries that belong
to both the ISF and UNMIT, New Zealand is
committed to maintaining the close cooperation and
coordination that exists between those forces as their
respective structures and roles continue to evolve.

New Zealand thanks the Security Council for its
ongoing support for Timor-Leste, assures Ms. Haq and
the UNMIT team of its own support for their efforts
and, above all, reiterates its continuing commitment to
the people and the Government of Timor-Leste.

