Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, my delegation would like to thank you
for holding this thematic debate, the Secretary-General
for his report on small arms and light weapons and
particularly Ms. Hoppe for presenting the report.

The United Nations plays a fundamental role
when it comes to disarmament and the prevention of
conflict. There can be no doubt that we need to
strengthen its action in this area, and to improve its
internal coordination in order for it to have a greater
impact in its work.

My delegation considers that it is a matter of
urgency to bring about greater cooperation between the
various organs of the United Nations, bearing in mind
that the General Assembly is the deliberative forum
and that it is the only body that can provide a
normative framework to guide the decisions of all
States with regard to the subject we are discussing
today.

In this respect, my delegation would like to
highlight the importance of referring in this debate to
the negative effect that illicit small arms have on
security, particularly in countries experiencing a crisis
or in a post-conflict situation, and of stressing the work
done by the Security Council in these cases.

The efforts undertaken by States and the
international community in order to meet the
Millennium Development Goals are a matter of priority
in order to help reduce sources of tension in countries
which are most vulnerable to conflicts. It is for this
reason that we reaffirm our belief that in countries in
conflict or post-conflict situations we must provide a
minimum set of living conditions for the population.
Likewise, we also feel it necessary that these efforts be
supported by decisive and robust action in order to deal
with those that benefit directly from the industry of
war and facilitate arms trafficking. However, having
said this, we must be clear with regard to the direct
link that we wish to attribute to underdevelopment and
armed conflict, for, while violence can be exacerbated
by poverty, in no circumstances can it be said to be
caused by poverty. Urban violence in certain sectors of
developing countries does not obey the various norms
of social, political and economic inequality and is not
related directly to poverty. Instead, it stems from
external factors, such as drug trafficking and other
transnational crimes. Furthermore, we have seen how
the use and abuse of small arms and light weapons in
developed countries has led to the loss of innocent
lives on a daily basis and caused public massacres.

My delegation takes note of the recommendations
provided by the Secretary-General in his report, and we
are heartened to learn of the initiatives approved by the
Security Council and its sanctions monitoring groups
in the work with post-conflict States. We hope that in
the future, design and vigilance will be optimized and
that the recent progress in disarmament practice,
demobilization and reintegration and the security
sector reform will continue. In this respect, we must
stress that these initiatives should be confined to the
current specific cases and should not become general
practice or be included as a matter of course in the
work of the rest of the United Nations system.

My delegation agrees with the urgency of
strengthening practical measures to combat the
trafficking in small arms and light weapons and to give
the Programme of Action on Small Arms and the
International Tracing Instrument the necessary support
and the teeth to be successful in achieving its
objectives. We are sure that this process will end in the
consideration of the recommendations of the Group of
Governmental Experts on small arms and light
weapons, leading to cooperation between States in the
implementation of this legislation.

For Ecuador, this is particularly important,
because over the past few years we have experienced
the effects of an armed conflict beyond our borders,
which has brought in its wake a huge demand for
refuge in our country and much immigration. For this
reason, my delegation attaches importance to the
multilateral discussion of small arms and light weapons
and views with concern the proliferation of these kinds
of weapons, given their links to violence, terrorism and
social disintegration.

In this context, Ecuador is meeting its
international obligations, particularly with regard to the
Inter-American Convention Against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related Materials,
via the national arms control computer system
designed by Ecuadorian military engineers. Moreover,
as a demonstration of its commitment to the small arms
biennial meeting next July, Ecuador will present its
report under General Assembly resolution 62/45,
adopted in December 2007.

Finally, allow me to reiterate the importance of
working together and being able to continue to rely on
international cooperation to achieve our disarmament
objectives. The national efforts of developing countries
in this area can only be successful if the international
community continues to provide its support.

