Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting. We
also would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Minister Janabi and Ms. Ibrahim for their important
and compelling briefings this morning.

The task of addressing challenges to peace and
security is complex and is influenced by many factors.
The United States remains committed to strengthening
international security in a comprehensive manner,
and we recognize the efforts of the United Nations
in helping to advance our understanding of emerging
issues related to human security, including this one.

The Council most often is focused on armed conflict
as the most conventional threat to international peace
and security, but it is right that we also consider natural
phenomena and disasters such as droughts, monsoons,
tsunamis, earthquakes, hurricanes, desertification,
volcanic eruptions and other such events. They have
taken lives, destroyed homes, impacted resources
and caused widespread displacement both within and
beyond national borders. Unlike conflicts, where there
are sides to be taken, in response to these crises we
are all on the same side: the side of survival, recovery
and resilience.
In many parts of the world where vulnerable
populations suffer from natural disasters, displacement
and food and water scarcity, the United States
is partnering with Governments and regional
organizations to bring relief to those who need it
most. We are applying innovative solutions to help
communities better prepare for and respond to
climate-related pressures. One example of United
States assistance is in Iraq, where high temperatures
and drought conditions present a particularly daunting
challenge. We are the single largest donor to Iraqi-led
stabilization programming supported by the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), which
includes projects to restore access to household water
and electricity in areas formerly under the control of
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.

The United States has provided $265 million to the
UNDP Funding Facility for Immediate Stabilization
since 2014. Those stabilization activities have helped
set the conditions for more than 3 million Iraqis to
return to their homes. That funding from the United
States has enabled UNDP to fix water treatment plants
and water networks, as well as to repair bridges across
the Tigris and allow for greater freedom of movement.

At the request of the Government of Iraq, the United
States has also played an essential role in maintaining
Iraq's critical water infrastructure, especially at the
Mosul Dam, the structural integrity of which was in
question and which is vital to water management for
millions of Iraqis living downstream. At significant
expense, the United States deployed the United States
Army Corps of Engineers to oversee the contracts
awarded by Iraq to an Italian firm for emergency grouting
and dam maintenance. The ongoing stabilization of the
dam's foundation will allow the Iraqi Government to
store more water to mitigate scarcity resulting from
severe drought.

More broadly, the United States is also working
closely with Sweden, Norway and the Netherlands to
address specific challenges associated with shared
waters through the Shared Waters Partnership managed
by the Stockholm International Water Institute. We
have been working together to promote the cooperative
management of shared waters around the world where
water is, or may become, a source of tension.

As the Lake Chad region grapples with its own
water management issues, the United States is listening
carefully to learn more about the challenges citizens
there face and welcomes further dialogue on efforts to
promote sustainable development there.

The United States acknowledges the special
challenges that small island developing States face in
achieving sustainable development, challenges related
to their size, geographic isolation from markets and
limited infrastructure and institutional capacity. We
have heard from our friends in the Pacific that they
consider climate change to be an existential threat to
their populations, and we understand the priority they
place on the United Nations system and the international
community supporting their unique needs.

Our support for small island developing States
takes many forms. We are taking concrete action to
address priorities identified in the Samoa Pathway,
the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation
of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States
and other bilateral and multilateral initiatives. We
participate in the Small Island Developing States
Action Platform, and, in addition, the United States is
seeking new ways to improve cooperation and align our
programmes more closely with the priorities of small
island developing States.

Disaster risk reduction and building resilience to
cope with natural disasters are important elements of
promoting sustainable development and eradicating
extreme poverty. As appropriate, that should be
integrated into policies, plans programmes and budgets
at all levels.

As a global leader in innovation, the United
States continues to support access to cleaner and
more efficient energy sources; the promotion of
effective and sustainable land use practices and other
activities aimed at improving resilience, particularly
where such support benefits broader mutual economic
development, and foreign policy and national security
objectives. The United States wants to work with other
countries to continue advancing the development and
deployment of a broad array of technologies that will
ultimately enable us to achieve greater resilience in
the face of these daunting challenges. Once again, we
appreciate this opportunity to reflect on these issues.

