Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank our briefers.

We will hear from the representative of Turkey
later, but I want to start by welcoming Turkey's efforts
to agree to agree the Sochi ceasefire in September. As
we welcomed that then, so we welcome now its efforts to
restore that ceasefire and de-escalate. I think we heard
very clearly from both Under-Secretaries-General why
that is a matter of urgency. I also thank Kuwait for
calling for this meeting, which is clearly needed.

The situation in Idlib is so dire that I will not repeat
our well-known position on the political process, which
has not changed, nor indeed on chemical weapons. I
want to use this meeting to focus purely on Idlib, the
nightmare that is in Idlib and the slaughter that is
happening in Idlib. Mr. Lowcock asked a number of
questions; as he said, there are more questions than
answers. It will be good to get some answers for the
people of Idlib from this meeting today.

As we have heard, the regime offensive in north-
western Syria has left 180,000 people displaced since
28 April alone and many killed and wounded. Since
that date, at least 18 health facilities, including nine
primary health-care centres and nine hospitals, and
17 schools have been hit by air strikes. That is a clear
violation of resolution 2286 (2016) and of international
humanitarian law. As the Belgian Ambassador asked,
what has happened to the principles of proportionality,
distinction and necessity? What is necessary? What is
proportionate about bombing 18 health facilities, with
a devastating effect on the local population that the
Under-Secretary-General outlined?

I was interested in Mr. Lowcock's confirmation
that the United Nations provides details of the locations
of hospitals to the parties to the conflict, and I note
with grave concern the international humanitarian law
obligations that he cited, which should not be taken
lightly. He asked the question: Who is bombing these
hospitals? Whoever it is has a modern air force and
precision weapons. Are the hospitals and other facilities
being deliberately targeted despite the deconfliction
mechanisms? It would be absolutely grotesque if
non-governmental organizations and health workers
providing coordinates to a mechanism which they
believe is there to ensure their safety were finding
themselves being the authors of their own destruction
because of deliberate targeting by the regime.

But since we know that Russia and Syria are the
only countries that fly airplanes in the area, I would
like to know whether the answer to Mr. Lowcock's
question is the Russian and Syrian air forces. I think
we need answers today, and ifthe answer is the Russian
and Syrian air forces, I would call on both Ambassadors
here today to give us an assurance that the attack will
stop and that there will be no more deliberate targeting
of civilians in this manner in facilities that every single
member of the international community has a duty
to protect.
The Belgian Ambassador also referred to the fact
that counter-terrorist operations are not a license for
indiscriminate attacks on civilians. I want to underscore
that point as well. It is in the Geneva Conventions. It is
a central doctrine of international humanitarian law.
Proportionality, distinction and necessity really matter,
and they do not seem to be in evidence in Idlib.

Russia has claimed that its so-called retaliatory
strikes, in support ofthe regime, were "surgical" in their
precision. I hope that I never need medical treatment in
Moscow, if surgical accuracy means what we have seen
on the ground in Idlib. Either those statements or the
strikes are therefore wildly inaccurate.

Russia must ensure that its own forces and those
of its ally in Damascus strictly abide by international
humanitarian law and the agreements and resolutions to
which, as a member of the international community and
as one of the permanent five members of the Security
Council, it has agreed.

There is one other question that struck me from the
Under-Secretary-General, which is why the resolutions
are not being complied with. I think that is a very good
question. I believe that every parent in Idlib has the
right to know the answer to that question. It is not a
$64,000 question - to use the vernacular phrase. It is
a question that is costing 160 lives in Idlib, and has cost
400,000 lives since the conflict in Syria began.

