Guatemala would like to thank the Federal Republic of Germany, as President of the Security Council during the month of July 2020, for convening this high-level open video-teleconference on climate and security, as well as the Secretary-General and all the panellists for their presentations. Our delegation believes this topic is very relevant in the context of peace and security and needs to be addressed in a timely and comprehensive manner. Guatemala is a naturally megadiverse country, with an exceptional nature; however, owing to its geographical location, it is one of the countries most vulnerable to the effects of climate change worldwide. During the past three decades, Guatemala has suffered continually from extreme weather events that directly impact agriculture and food security, affecting human life, child development, economic growth and health; causing an increase in migration and a loss of biodiversity; and affecting the cultural identity of indigenous peoples. Therefore, we understand and share the belief that there is an urgent need to intensify efforts at the international level for a more sustainable and climate-resilient development, which would contribute to the advent of more peaceful societies. We must keep in mind that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change has the fundamental mandate in this area and that it is essential that all countries fulfil their commitments, especially regarding climate financing for adaptation and resilience, reduction of losses and damage, reduction of greenhouse- gas emissions, good governance and technology transfer. The Paris Agreement on Climate Change represents a milestone in that regard and, jointly with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, must guide the response and recovery from the coronavirus disease, pushing for more ambitious climate action. Despite the success of the various efforts made, the impact of climate change is real, and in that context the Security Council must also consider its negative effects within the framework of international peace and security mandates. I also want to highlight the importance of paying attention to the alarming message that the planet is sending us. The confinement to which most of us have been subjected has given a breath of life to our common home, the Earth. Climate change is a reality to which we cannot close our eyes. Climate change is one of the factors that intensify existing threats, tensions and instability. It is a challenge that threatens to overburden the most vulnerable countries and regions with fragile and conflict-affected environments. The risks that this entails are not only humanitarian in nature but also political and security-related. This requires re-evaluating and reinforcing cooperation and political dialogue and paying greater attention to the impact of climate change on security, which can be a key element in international relations, giving rise to a positive trend of improving global governance. Violent conflict is increasingly recognized as one of the main impediments to reaching the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030. Its dramatic resurgence over the past few years has caused immense human suffering and has had an enormous global impact. Violent conflicts have become more complex and protracted, involving more non-State groups and regional and international actors that are increasingly linked to global challenges such as climate change, natural disasters, cybersecurity and transnational organized crime. An effective management of natural resources will also have benefits in terms of environmental stewardship. In Guatemala, the management of protected areas was recognized by our Peace Accords of 1996 and is a successful example worldwide because it complies with international standards for the reduction of carbon emissions and the protection of forests while contributing also to the development of communities. There is an intrinsically symbiotic relationship between climate change and security: each threat exacerbates the other. As a peaceful country committed to nuclear disarmament and a defender of the total elimination of nuclear weapons, we are concerned that nuclear testing and nuclear-waste dumping might have destroyed some of our planet's ecosystems beyond repair, displacing entire communities of animals and people in the process. The pollution of water and land around the world with this kind of waste will last far longer than we could imagine, with lasting negative consequences, including for our grandchildren's lifetimes. This year we commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation regime, and it is in our hands to work together with the common goal of leaving future generations a better world. Climate change is a global challenge that is still viewed mostly through the lens of development and environment, but it also represents an existing threat to international security and peace. In that regard, Guatemala welcomes the Secretary- General's approach of addressing climate change as a system-wide priority in the Organization. The Security Council has the primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security. The magnitude of the challenge of climate change is becoming more evident and requires thorough consideration by all members, permanent and non-permanent, of this body. Guatemala deems it important to promote policies and technical and scientific platforms to improve international governance so as to strengthen the capacity for risk analysis and contribute to early- warning mechanisms, which will benefit populations by increasing their resilience to the effects of climate change while respecting human rights and preventing conflicts. The Security Council should continue exploring ways to strengthen prevention, early-detection systems and operational actions to avert conflicts resulting from climate change, extreme weather events and natural resources management, taking into account community tensions and governance. Climate change requires specific actions, particularly in terms of cooperation among States to boost new capacities, focusing especially on developing countries to improve monitoring, reporting and verification systems, with a view to reducing disaster risk. Finally, Guatemala reiterates the importance of considering the interdependence of climate change efforts with the pillars of peace and security, development and human rights as a comprehensive approach to sustainable peace.
