Ms. Viotti: I am pleased to introduce the report
of the Secretary-General on options for authorization
and support to African Union peace support operations
(S/2017/454). The report is submitted pursuant to
resolution 2320 (2016) of 18 November 2016, in which
the Security Council also requested the Secretary-
General to continue working closely with the African
Union (AU) to refine options for further cooperation on
relevant AU proposals, including joint planning and the
process for mandating AU peace support operations,
subject to authorization by the Council, as well as on
United Nations financing and support.

The international community must be positioned
to adequately respond creatively to dynamic security
contexts around the world, and regional organizations
are central to this effort. Building on sustained efforts
to strengthen the United Nations-African Union
partnership, our organizations are deeply engaged in the
development of innovative, forward-leaning and lasting
collaborative systems. We must move away from ad hoc
arrangements. The report before the Council presents
proposals for institutionalized approaches to joint
planning and mandating, financing and supporting
African Union peace support operations.

The report, along with the accompanying update
from the African Union, is the result of six months of
coordination and cooperation between the Secretariat
and the AU Commission. Since the African Union
Mission in Burundi in 2003, the United Nations has
provided many types of support to African Union
operations. These include planning, logistical support
and a variety of financing mechanisms. Some types of
support have been more effective than others.

The earlier joint United Nations-African Union
review of mechanisms to finance and support African
Union peace support operations examined over a decade
of cooperation in support for African Union operations.
The present report builds on this effort and proposes
more predictable approaches to supporting African
Union operations in future. Our aim is not to replicate
earlier arrangements but to develop new approaches that
reflect lessons learned and to develop the capacities of
the African Union and the roles of other partners.

Predictable approaches are required, as the United
Nations-African Union partnership is, has been and
will be the preferred modality of pursuing peace and
security in Africa. To this end, the Secretary-General
and African Union Chairperson recently convened the
first United Nations-African Union Annual Conference
at United Nations Headquarters. During that meeting,
they signed the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security, further underscoring the commitment
to working closely together based on mutual respect,
recognition of complementarity, interdependence
and solidarity.

The report also highlights the importance of
compliance and oversight, particularly in the areas of
human rights and conduct and discipline. These are
critical concerns in all peace operations, including
those mandated or authorized by the African Union.
We are encouraged that the African Union is rigorously
working to address these issues, including by further
developing its compliance mechanisms. The United
Nations will continue to provide any technical
assistance to the African Union's implementation of
relevant compliance frameworks.
The African Union is an invaluable partner to the
United Nations and we are enormously grateful for
Africa's contributions to building a better future for
all. As the Secretary-General has often said, the world
can greatly benefit from African wisdom, African ideas
and African solutions. As noted in the update provided
by the African Union, AU operations undertake a wide
variety of tasks in a wide variety of circumstances.
These include deploying troops rapidly to tackle
dynamic security challenges, addressing asymmetric
threats and ensuing robust peace enforcement.

Different situations will require different planning,
financing and support arrangements, but these can
be underpinned by jointly agreed principles and
decision-making processes. Effective cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
deploying and supporting peace support operations
requires not only engagement between the Secretariat
and the Commission, but also between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council in mandating and reporting.

A common approach among Member States is also
required to address the perennial issue of securing
predictable and sustainable financial support for
African Union operations. Where United Nations
assessed contributions are authorized, the General
Assembly will also play a critical oversight role. The
concepts, process, conditions and options presented in
the report should be considered as a framework that can
be flexibly adapted for new operations. Some additional
work is required before this framework can be fully
utilized, including the development of joint planning
and budgeting methodologies. Some of the bureaucratic
processes of the two Organizations may also need to
be reconciled.

I can assure Council members that the Secretary-
General is fully committed to Africa and the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union.
His report shows that there are no technical challenges
that our organizations cannot overcome together. We
count on the Council's support to help translate words
into action. Together, we can create more efficient
and effective solutions to better respond to the needs
of the African people and advance international peace
and security.

