Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I would
like to thank Mr. Koenigs, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, for his
comprehensive report and for his continued dedication
to the Mission. I would also like to extend the thanks
of the United States to all the staff of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
who have worked so hard over the course of the United
Nations mandate to help the Afghan people build a
democratic State that protects fundamental human
rights, provides security and other services and offers
economic opportunity.

As in the case of past reports, the Special
Representative has brought us up to date on the
progress that Afghanistan has made with the support of
the international community. He has also kept us up to
date on the significant challenges and threats that
Afghanistan still faces.

This report highlights that the international
community must continue to stand united in support of
the Afghan Government and of the Afghan people for
success in Afghanistan. We must continue our
productive efforts to reaccelerate State-building and
capacity-building, help create a robust agriculture
sector that will reduce the incentives to grow opium
and will strengthen the rule of law, security, and human
rights.

We must also support the Afghan Government in
exerting its authority throughout the country. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
plays a critical role in that area, whether it is helping
the Afghan Government to fight the threats of
corruption and narcotics, coordinating humanitarian
and reconstruction assistance, or helping to build
capacity and integrity at the local level, Where the
Afghan people most often interact with the State.

Afghanistan has made significant progress, but it
is going through a critically important and difficult
transition. We applaud the strong leadership and
dedication of the Secretary-General and Mr. Koenigs in
their support of Afghanistan's emergence as a stable,
peaceful, prosperous and democratic member of the
family of nations.

We also take great satisfaction that the Special
Representative reports that 6 million Afghan children
are now in school - the highest number in the
country's history - and over two million of them are
girls; that there has been steady improvement in
economic conditions with preliminary estimates
showing economic growth at eight per cent and a
bumper wheat harvest of 4.5 million tons; and that
there has been additional progress in the areas of
health, road building, and rural development.

Nevertheless, security is still an enormous
concern and the Taliban has recently resorted to vicious
measures, increasingly relying on suicide bombings
and improvised explosive devices, in an effort to
terrorize the population and undermine the Afghan
Government. As Secretary Rice explained in Brussels
earlier this year,

"The violence we are seeing is not evidence that
our strategy has failed, nor that the situation will
improve in our absence; rather, it is evidence of
how much we are needed. It is evidence that we
must do more - and do it better, faster".

It is vitally important that Afghanistan succeed.
Afghanistan was the safe haven of today's global
terrorist threat, and enabling Afghans to eliminate that
threat within their borders will be a strategic victory
for Afghans, for the friends of Afghanistan in the
international community, and for the United Nations.

Afghans are eager to take on a greater role in
their own security. As we speak, the Afghan National
Army and its civilian command structure are taking on
increasing responsibility in securing their borders and
their people. The Afghan National Army is a respected
institution in Afghanistan and it is now more than
35,000 strong, with a target size of 70,000. The Special
Representative's report points out that, "increased
training and mentoring has improved the army's
capacity to plan and conduct joint operations with
coalition forces and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO)/ISAF," (S/2007/555, para. 30)
and that is good news. But we must increase these joint
efforts to train, mentor and equip the Afghan National
Army and Police and we must provide every measure
of support to the United Nations-mandated, NATO-led
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). In
particular, we owe it to the people of Afghanistan to
give commanders the forces and flexibility they need
to bring stability, reconstruction and good governance
to all of Afghanistan. Stability in Afghanistan is vital
not only to Afghans, but to the security and well-being
of all free peoples who stand opposed to terror and
injustice.

The Afghan people have come a long way in
recovering from the tyranny of the Taliban. It is
essential that we maintain the unity and commitment of
the international community to help the Afghan people
complete the transition from tyranny to liberty, and I
am gratified that the Special Representative's report
indicates that international support to Afghanistan has
intensified.

While the international community's assistance to
Afghanistan has been great, the needs are greater still.
We must not slacken in our resolve to provide the
Afghan people with the tools to rebuild. The
Afghanistan Compact showed us the way, but progress
is only possible if the entire international community
digs deep to provide funds for reconstruction and
experts to mentor on governance, justice, agriculture,
and commerce.

And with the need for more assistance, comes the
need for better coordination. In this regard, it is
important that we find a strong United Nations envoy
who, in support of the Government of Afghanistan, will
coordinate international civilian efforts in Afghanistan
and donor capitals.

With great challenges still ahead of us, we must
maintain our resolve. The United States sees long-term
assistance to Afghanistan as a strategic imperative, and
we look forward to continuing to work together with
other members of the Council as we engage in assisting
the government and the people of Afghanistan.

