Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Before I proceed, the
recent events in Japan must find a place in my speech.
We not only commiserate with the people of that noble
country, but recognize their great contributions to the

1 1-26621
United Nations. We would like to express solidarity
with them at this stage.

I would also like to recognize the briefing by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Staffan de Mistura. We greatly value the work of the
United Nations in all areas of the world, and
specifically Afghanistan.

The problem we seem to face here on a fairly
regular basis, without denigrating the great work being
done by this Council or its members - all honourable
members, who I find are absolutely on the dot f is that,
nevertheless, very often, sitting here, we somehow,
without quite realizing it, start reinventing the wheel. I
am not terribly sure that this is something that is
necessarily beneficial. When we start reinventing the
wheel, I believe that we should recognize the fact that
we have a diplomat who implements the work of the
Council and the Secretary-General.

However, at the same time, it must be realized
that with a State that is as old as, if not beyond the age
of, known history, there is a certain requirement for it
to fulfil its sovereignty. The fact that it has survived so
long and that it wants to have some say in its destiny
creates some distance between what is happening here
and what is felt necessary and beneficial there. That,
my friends, creates some sort of a divide of which,
unfortunately, we are not aware when we sit here and
talk about such issues, inasmuch as we have the
noblest intentions, beliefs, concepts, paradigms and
ideology.

However, that country has its own beliefs and
traditions, which may indeed have led to war, not so
much of its own doing, but through the expansion of
empires. It is like the continental plates under the
oceans that, as they rub against each other and want to
move from one point to another, create an earthquake,
a tsunami. That country has been caught is such a
tsunami, such an earthquake. It is not of its doing, or
that it wants that. I think that we also have to respect
that. If we really wish to have a comprehensive and
cohesive policy, we must understand the requirements
of both sides, some of which may at times seem at
cross purposes with the very noble design of the
Council.

The Secretary-General's quarterly reports are an
important yardstick. Regarding some aspects of the
latest report (S/2011/120), I think that the personnel
enhancement of the Afghan National Army and it

11-2662]
reaching the targeted figure by 2012 are issues that
most people readily support. I think that the question of
governance and institution-building is a very important
aspect, but I believe that we must recognize that there
will often be changes in the noble designs suggested in
the very Council itself.

It is a great pleasure to note that the Afghan
National Development Strategy is supported by both
sides in most areas. That is an important aspect
because aid must be disbursed with the cohesion,
connivance and interest of the national Government. As
raised in the report, Afghan ownership is important for
all these points to succeed. That is only possible when
there is such cohesion.

The report documents the challenges ahead for
the international community in Afghanistan. It
envisages the transfer of full responsibilities to Afghan
institutions, specifically through the Kabul process,
and the aspect of commitment to economic
development, good governance and a comprehensive
vision of security. I feel that that might occasionally be
at odds with what is being advocated here.

While security has an important contribution to
make, we must realize that the challenges are myriad
and very extensive. I feel that incidents that have taken
place within Afghanistan are reprehensible and that we
should understand what is happening from the Afghan
perspective and point of view.

We have no hesitation in extending the fullest
security and intelligence cooperation to Afghanistan,
including through the Tripartite Commission, which
includes the United States and the International
Security Assistance Force. The number of our military
and paramilitary personnel deployed along the border
is more than all international troops present in the
whole of Afghanistan. Our efforts and financial costs
should not be downplayed or denigrated. Pakistan's
commitment to peace in the region is unwavering. We
do not want Afghanistan to remain a theatre of proxy
wars.

We must understand that there is a specific area
from west of the Indus roughly to the Oxus, even
beyond in places, that the British accepted as part of
their imperial design and commitment. Today, that is
where the theatre of war is most evident.

The London and Kabul processes emphasize the
Afghan Reintegration Programme, which needs
international support for the Government's efforts. We
support an Afghan-led inclusive reconciliation process.
The visit of Burhanuddin Rabbani, Chair of the High
Peace Council, to my country in January and the
International Contact Group meeting in Jeddah were
landmark events. We are supportive of such
engagements, including the High Peace Council's
interaction with the United Nations and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.

Pakistan wants durable peace in Afghanistan. I
would take this opportunity to highlight that the safe
return of over 1.5 million registered Afghan refugees,
the smooth implementation of the Afghanistan-Pakistan
Transit and Trade Agreement and the completion of
transregional economic projects are conceivable only
in a secure and stable Afghanistan.

The quest for peace and stability in Afghanistan
dovetails with a long-term Pakistan-Afghanistan
cooperative partnership. Despite our own woes, we are
continuing our assistance, the largest that we have in
any country.

I will conclude by reiterating our support for the
objectives and efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan. I hope that the draft resolution
to extend its mandate for another 12 months will be
adopted by consensus and implemented with the
complete support of the international community, to the
satisfaction of Afghanistan.

