Mr. Fulci (Italy): I should like, first of all, to join
other representatives in expressing my warmest
congratulations to you, Sir, and my thanks for presiding
over our work today. Your authority, your prestige and
your experience are certainly helping to bring to a
successful conclusion a most important debate on an
African country - Angola.

I should like to take this opportunity also to express
my good wishes to our dear friend Ambassador Legwaila,
who is chairing the Security Council during the month of
February. We all know that, in view of all his professional
and human qualities, the work of the Council will be
greatly enhanced.

May I also express sincere thanks to the President of
the Security Council last month, the Ambassador of
Argentina, whose presidency was really exemplary to many
of us - not only because it was brilliant, but also because
it was most productive, and in a timely manner. That is
something that the Security Council greatly needs.

The draft resolution which the Security Council is
about to adopt authorizes full deployment of the United
Nations peace-keeping operation in Angola in support of
the agreement reached at Lusaka. This agreement ends the
civil war that has afflicted Angola in the 20 years following
its independence. Divisions and hatred became so deeply
rooted during this period that restoring mutual trust is
probably the most difficult challenge of the current phase.
Thus, in the view of my Government, the deployment of a
peace-keeping mission with broad dimensions and a
detailed mandate, as envisaged in the draft resolution, is
both necessary and fully justified.

A prerequisite to the operation's success, however, is
full adherence by the parties to their commitments. In this
sense, the exchange of letters between the President of
Angola, His Excellency Mr. Jose Eduardo dos Santos, and
the President of UNITA, Jonas Savimbi - which was
brought to the Council's attention yesterday - represents
an encouraging development indeed, since it marks the
opening of a direct dialogue at the highest political level.
We hope that a meeting between the two leaders can take
place soon so as to symbolize the beginning of a new era
in the life of Angola.

We believe that the time has come for the Angolan
parties to redirect their many resources towards fulfilling
the needs of the people. As the late President of the
Italian Republic, Sandro Pertini, said in his inaugural
speech several years ago,

"Now is the time to empty the arsenals and to
fill the granaries!" May I add that, with its latest
allocation, my country has committed a total of
about $60 million in humanitarian assistance to
Angola over the past three years alone, and it
intends to continue to do its part.

Among the most bitter fruits of long years of civil
war and hatred is the unprecedented proliferation of
land-mines in Angola. The figures given by the
Secretary-General in his report - 10 million mines
buried throughout the country - are simply appalling.
The Italian Government strongly supports the coordinated
and comprehensive programme outlined by the Secretary-
General with regard to the de-mining action. When one
considers that land-mines kill or maim some 500 people
every week in the world, one realizes that the need for
de-mining becomes even more urgent in order to save the
lives of thousands upon thousands of innocent civilians,
especially women and children.

In the final analysis, this is a problem with broad
regional implications - let us think of Mozambique -
and potential global repercussions. Beyond the initial
emergency phase, de-mining training will take on
enormous importance in giving countries afflicted by this
phenomenon autonomous means to combat it. The Italian
Government has consolidated experience in this sector
and has already intervened in various crisis areas.
Needless to say, our knowledge and expertise are at the
disposal of the Angolan people, as they were for the
people of Mozambique.

In his report, the Secretary-General foresees the
establishment of a de-mining school to be established by
the Central Mine Action Office. In time, this school could
acquire a regional dimension and become a point of
reference for countries in need. This proposal, we believe,
deserves careful consideration in the framework of the
numerous initiatives being examined by the United
Nations. I wish to repeat here that the Italian Government
and the Italian mission here in New York are at the full
disposal of the Foreign Minister of Angola, Mr. Venancio
de Moura, of the Permanent Representative of Angola,
Ambassador Van Dunem "Mbinda", and of course of the

 

Secretariat, in order to establish useful links to provide
more help and expertise.

Finally, among the confidence-building measures for
Angola, the Secretary-Generals proposal, which is taken up
in the draft resolution, to establish a radio transmitter within
the framework of UNAVEM. III seems particularly
important. Previous experience has taught us that radio
communications have a fundamental importance, both in the
negative sense, when they amplify distorted news and
provocations, and in the positive sense, when, under
responsible management, they help disseminate correct
information. We thus invite the Secretary-General to pursue
the direction indicated in his report.

To conclude, I would like to salute the African
Foreign Minsters who have been with us at the United
Nations yesterday and today. Their presence in New York
at this stage is physical proof not only of the unity of
African countries, but also of the fact that a consensus is
emerging on the need for a coordinated approach in which
the United Nations, the Organization of African Unity,
subregional organizations and national Governments all
have a crucial role to play in peace-keeping in Africa.

This said, I am glad to inform the Council that Italy
will vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.

