Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General's
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Process,
Mr. De Soto, for the briefing he has given us on the
current state of the peace process.

We were very alarmed to hear of the acute flare-
up of tensions in the Gaza area. This happened as a
result of attempts by extremist forces in that area to stir
up the military and political situation and to cause the
situation to deteriorate in the run-up to Israel's planned
withdrawal, in mid-August, from Gaza and a portion of
the West Bank of the Jordan River. The radicals also
obviously are attempting to undermine the policy of
peace agreements with Israel, which have been
implemented by the head of the Palestinian Authority,
Mr. Abbas.

We believe that the best response to those forces
that oppose progress in the Palestinian-Israeli
settlement process is a responsible and restrained
position by the parties and coordinated steps in the area
of security that are designed to prevent anarchy and
uncontrolled violence.

It is important now for the Israelis and the
Palestinians strictly to abide by the Sharm el-Sheikh
agreements and to move forward, in a coordinated
manner, with efforts to resolve those issues, in order to
ensure Israel's withdrawal from Gaza, which must be
an organic part of the process set out in the road map.

Russia, together with other members of the
Quartet and other interested parties, remains fully
prepared to provide all necessary assistance to advance
the Israeli-Palestinian negotiating process and actively
to facilitate practical efforts to establish a
comprehensive and just peace in the Middle East.

In that regard, we call on the parties to refrain
from any steps that could predetermine the results of
final status talks, first and foremost as regards Israel's
continuing construction of the separation wall, whose
path, particularly in the area of Jerusalem, affects the
interests of the Palestinians. We would also fully affirm
the legitimate right of Israel to self-defence against
terrorist attacks.

We are concerned about the settlement issue. We
have already said that we expected the Government of
Israel to keep its promise to deal with the settlements
upon completion of the relocation process. We
continue to expect this.

At present, all efforts of the international
community are focussed on promoting Palestinian-
Israeli cooperation in the run-up to implementation of
the relocation plan. However, the Russian side has
called for, and will continue to call for, the
achievement of a comprehensive Middle East
settlement - meaning the achievement of peace also
on the Israeli-Syrian and Israeli-Lebanese tracks.
Failing that, there can be no stability in the Middle
East.

We view the relocation plan as only the start of
renewed movement, in the context of the road map,
towards implementation by both the Israeli and
Palestinian parties of their obligations under that
document which, we are firmly convinced, is the only
alternative and whose implementation is the most
certain way to achieve a settlement for the Israelis and
the Palestinians.

Given the complexity of the problems which face
the participants in the settlement process, we would
like to remind the Council once again of our proposal
to hold, in the fall of this year, a high-level expert
meeting to discuss the results of the relocation and to
determine longer-term strategies for the international
community in the context of the peace process.

