Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): Mr. President, I should
like to thank you, on behalf on the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM), for convening this open debate on a
question that is very important to all States Members of
the United Nations and to the international community
at large. The position of NAM. on the question of the
acquisition of weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
and their means of delivery by non-State actors, in
particular terrorists, is encapsulated in paragraph 100 of
the Final Document of the thirteenth Conference of
Heads of State or Government of NAM, held in Kuala
Lumpur in February 2003. That paragraph reads as
follows:

"The Heads of State or Government
expressed their satisfaction with the consensus
among States on measures to prevent terrorists
from acquiring WMD. They welcomed the
adoption by consensus of General Assembly
resolution 57/83 entitled, 'Measures to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction', and underlined the need for this
threat to humanity to be addressed within the
United Nations framework and through
international law. While stressing that the most
effective way of preventing terrorists from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction is through
the total elimination of such weapons, they
emphasized that progress was urgently needed in
the area of disarmament and non-proliferation in
order to help maintain international peace and
security and to contribute to global efforts against
terrorism. They called upon all member States to
support international efforts to prevent terrorists
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery. They also urged all
member States to take and strengthen national
measures, as appropriate, to prevent terrorists
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction, their
means of delivery and materials and technologies
related to their manufacture."

It is clear from that statement that the NAM
member countries welcome international efforts to
prevent terrorists and other non-State actors from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery. The draft resolution currently under discussion
in the Council is one of those efforts. While we do not
dispute its intent, we still have questions, doubts and
our own views and comments regarding its content.

I should like to convey the sincere appreciation of
NAM. to the sponsors of the draft resolution for their
initiative as well as for their preparedness to engage the
larger membership of the United Nations in
consultations on this very important question, not just
confining discussion to members of the Security
Council. We found the informal consultations between
NAM. members and the sponsors held on 6 April to be
a very useful effort. We would welcome further
consultations on this issue before the Council takes a
decision on it. We would also welcome consultations
between Council members and NAM. on other issues of
global concern and interest in the future, in the spirit of
promoting dialogue, transparency and accountability in
the work of the Security Council.

The Non-Aligned Movement sincerely hopes that
the sponsors and other Council members will continue
to take into consideration the views and concerns
expressed by NAM. member countries. We believe that
it is important to ensure that the final product is
realistic, generally acceptable and implementable.
After all, in this regard, Governments, national
legislatures and, for that matter, the private sector in all
Member countries are expected to cooperate and take
appropriate measures, including the enactment of new
legislation and the streamlining or amending of
existing legislation where applicable. The Council must
give ample time and opportunity for Governments to
cooperate fully in ensuring the implementation of the
draft resolution.

While fully recognizing the importance and
urgency of dealing with the issue of the threat of the
use of WMD by non-State actors, NAM. also feels that
the manner in which the international community
responds to this threat should be equally important.
Therefore, we would counsel the need for further
consultations and would request that the Security
Council not rush into making a decision.

I now wish to highlight some specific points.
First, the Non-Aligned Movement firmly believes that
non-proliferation should be addressed together with
disarmament and the continued possession of weapons
of mass destruction of any type, which is in fact a
threat to international peace and security. That should
be adequately reflected in the draft resolution, not only in
the preambular section but also in other parts, to provide
the necessary balance. There could also be references to
the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East, in line with relevant
resolutions already adopted by the Council.

Secondly, NAM. hopes that the definition of terms
could be made clearer, such as, but not confined to
"means of delivery" and "related materials". There may
be other important terms identified as appropriate that
require defining. A clearer definition of terms could
help avoid unnecessary difficulty for Member States in
implementing the provisions of the draft resolution
once it is adopted.

Thirdly, lack of clarity and vague definitions
could result in time-consuming and painstaking
interpretation at the national level, especially when
legislation and national action are required.

Fourthly, the text of the draft resolution should
conform to Article 25 of the Charter of the United
Nations. While NAM. agrees that preventing non-State
actors from acquiring weapons of mass destruction is
an issue of paramount importance and is in keeping
with efforts to address threats to international peace
and security, NAM. believes that this objective can still
be achieved without resorting to Chapter VII of the
Charter.

Fifthly, in view of the importance of all
provisions stipulated in the draft resolution, the
proposed follow-up mechanism to monitor the
implementation of the resolution should be provided
with a clearly-defined mandate and terms of reference,
including a time frame.
Finally, we are of the view that the substance of
the resolution, once adopted by the Council, should
form a useful basis for Member States of the United
Nations to consider formulating in due course a
comprehensive, multilaterally-negotiated legal
instrument to address the specific question of
preventing the acquisition of WMD by non-State actors
in all its aspects.

The Non-Aligned Movement is convinced that
the draft resolution could, as intended, help to fill the
lacunae currently existing in international non-
proliferation regimes concerning the actions of non-
State actors relating to WMD. We urge the Security
Council to take into consideration our concerns in view
of the far-reaching and wide-ranging implications of
the decision the Council proposes to take.

