Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): It is very nice to
have the Afghan Ambassador with us.

As a number of people said earlier, this is a very
significant time for Afghanistan, a country in which I
had the honour to serve, on which I have worked many
times in my diplomatic career and which I know well.

Others referenced the horrific suicide attack in
Parwan province targeting President Ghani's election
rally, which has reportedly killed 26 people and has
been claimed by the Taliban. The United Kingdomjoins
others in condemning this unacceptable act of violence.
We offer our condolences to the victims, their families
and the Government and the people of Afghanistan.

Let me reiterate whatI said last week (see S/PV.8613).
The leaders of the Taliban have a choice: they should
condemn violence when it occurs and undertake to do
everything in their power to stop the rest of their groups
from carrying out violence. They should take sincere
steps for peace and to protect Afghan civilians. They
do not speak for Afghanistan, and their claims to do
otherwise are hollow.

We join others in being pleased that the Council
has been able to agree on resolution 2489 (2019),
which gives the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) a renewed mandate for 12
months. That means we have substantively strengthened
our ability to offer support to Afghanistan and its
people. We welcome UNAMA's ability to support the
Afghan elections, including the presidential elections
scheduled for 28 September. We are pleased that ability
has been strengthened through the resolution. We were
pleased that consensus was possible. We pay tribute
to the co-penholders, our partners from Germany and
Indonesia, who did a good job at managing a difficult
process and, in particular, in managing to strengthen
the language on human rights and women.

The United Kingdom has a long interest and history
in Afghanistan. We are one of 39 countries providing
troops to Afghanistan. And, sadly, we have seen our
own troops die in Helmand province and elsewhere.
When I was Ambassador we did a lot of work to
foster economic progress for all the Afghan people in
Kabul and many of the provinces. Hence the future of
Afghanistan is something that I and my Government
take extremely seriously. The Afghan Ambassador can
rely on our commitment. She and I together chair the
friends of women in the Afghan peace process.

However, I did want to join the representatives
of the United States and Belgium in expressing my
regret that the negotiations were made more difficult
because of the position of one Council member,
based on extraneous issues and exacerbated by initial
non-engagement. That position prevented the Council
from adopting an even stronger text, which was
available yesterday. I am afraid that it also means that
part of the text is, frankly, not comprehensible in the
English language, which we regret because, pursuant to
presidential note S/2017/507, we ought to be striving for
focus and clarity in all texts of the Security Council. It
means, in turn, that paragraphs of the resolution lack
the clarity that UNAMA needs and requests in order to
deliver its mandate at such a difficult time.

We therefore believe that the Council should strive
for concision and clarity in its resolutions so that all
stakeholders, including the missions mandated by
the Council, are clear about the Council's intent. I
nonetheless wish to reassure the Ambassador of our
strong message of commitment and support at a critical
time. I hope that all Council members will reflect
carefully on the result we have been able to achieve
today and focus in future on what really matters: what
the Council can achieve to the benefit of Afghanistan
and its people, and not bilateral national initiatives.

