Mr. Sandhu (India): Before I begin, I should
inform the Council that Ambassador Sen is indisposed
and has asked me to represent him at this debate today.
Thank you very much, Mr. President, for arranging this
debate on a critical and very visible aspect of the work
of the United Nations.

Peacekeeping is a subject that involves the larger
membership of this world body, and it is entirely
appropriate to consider how this crucial activity can be
improved, especially at the current juncture. Today,
over 140,000 personnel have been authorized to serve
as peacekeepers in 18 operations, which are deployed
across five continents, at a total budgeted cost of $7.2
billion. These statistics illustrate the size and scale of
the task that peacekeeping involves. The thoughtful
briefings provided separately by the Under-Secretaries-
General for Peacekeeping and for Field Support
illustrate several of the challenges in this regard. The
suggestions made by them merit greater consideration
by all stakeholders, within and outside this Council.

We associate ourselves with the statement to be
made on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement by the
representative of Morocco.

While the number of peacekeeping operations
may not have increased greatly in the past decade,
there has been an unprecedented surge in the number of
peacekeepers deployed. This surge has generated
enormous challenges, not merely because of the
numbers involved, but also because of the manner in
which some of the missions have been established, the
mandate provided to them and, not least, the tools they
have been provided with. From this standpoint, it is a
very welcome step that this Council has scheduled
today's discussion on peacekeeping at this juncture,
and India congratulates France for doing so under its
presidency of the Council this month.

Article 24 of the Charter defines the functions
and powers of the Security Council in the maintenance
of international peace and security. That Article begins
by underscoring that these powers were being
conferred on the Council in order to ensure prompt and
effective actions by the United Nations. However,
when the Council is neither prompt nor effective in its
consideration of such challenges, it ceases to discharge
its primary responsibility. There are a number of
examples of this, which are perhaps best not elaborated
upon at this juncture, although some of them have been
mentioned by previous speakers.

It is in this context that the powers of the
Council, in the context of its operational efforts in the
maintenance of peace and security, need to be read in
consonance with Article 44 of the Charter. In the
current international context, that Article should be
read as implying that the Council should invite non-
Council members to participate in the decisions of the
Council concerning the employment of contingents of
the member's armed forces. Clearly, therefore, the
Charter visualized peacekeeping as a tool jointly
invented and honed by the Council and the General
Assembly. It was not intended to be an attribute of the
power accorded to the Council by the Charter.
Regrettably, in reality, the Security Council has
completely monopolized its hold on United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The corollary of this is, of
course, the fact that the Council bears major
responsibility for the situation as it exists. It is
therefore timely for the Council to seriously undertake
an in-depth review of the situation as it obtains today,
including the question of whether it should continue to
have an exclusive monopoly in establishing and
running peacekeeping operations.

India has been a leading proponent of the view
that the mechanism of triangular consultation between
troop-contributing countries, the Council and the
Secretariat must be energized. In this context, we note
the holding of private meetings under the format
established by resolution 1353 (2001) and the increase
in the frequency of briefings by the Secretariat for
troop-contributing countries.

However, such briefings continue to be held,
quite literally, on the eve of the renewal of mission
mandates, making them pro forma exercises, as there is
little real scope for serious or meaningful discussion.
We reiterate the imperative of involving troop-
contributing countries both early and fully in all
aspects and stages of mission planning. This should
include the stage of preparation and planning of the
operation, the monitoring and conduct of an operation
and, finally, the evaluation of an operation, including
the identification of lessons learned. Their views, if
found reasonable, must be reflected in mission
mandates. It must be borne in mind that, today, many
of those who have the final say in Council resolutions
often do not participate in their implementation and are
therefore not called upon to bear the brunt of criticism
when missions face difficulties if their mandate is
unrealistic or the means authorized are inadequate.

In this context, the draft concept paper circulated
in the context of today's debate - the start of a
collaborative process - does not appear to envision
substantive collaboration in the context of the
involvement of troop-contributing countries. I must
reiterate that the experience of participating in an
operation gives troop-contributing countries a unique
ability to contribute to the planning process. Troop-
contributing countries can assist the Council in making
appropriate, effective and timely decisions on
operations. The 2008 report of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations acknowledged this and
called for substantive consultations with troop-
contributing countries during all stages of
peacekeeping operations.

It is time that these recommendations are
implemented in letter and spirit in order to achieve
meaningful outcomes. Those should include moving
towards an integrated approach and establishing
effective strategic oversight by those Members both
inside and outside the Council with stakes in a
particular peacekeeping operation.

There are a few more specific points that I should
like to underscore. First, it must be reiterated that there
can be no peacekeeping operation when there is no
peace to keep. That is to say, peacekeeping must be
built upon a peace agreement that is credible, not the
other way around. Secondly, troops are contributed by
countries contributing to a larger cause: that of peace
in far-off lands. The safety and security of United
Nations peacekeepers must be of paramount concern to
the Organization, in whose name they serve. The tally
of sacrifice by peacekeepers in years past underscores
this concerns.

Furthermore, India fully supports implementation
of a policy of zero tolerance with regard to the conduct
and discipline of troops, including with regard to
sexual exploitation and abuse. There is a need to raise
the awareness of those entrusted with managerial and
command responsibilities and to establish standards of
conduct, training and investigation. Careful preparatory
training, in terms of a multicultural, pluralistic and
tolerant outlook, is as important as swift punitive
action once culpability is established.

It is also desirable to develop professional
training programmes for peacekeepers in consultation
with Member States. Here, too, the experience of troop
contributors with a long history of assisting in peace
operations should be fully drawn upon by an integrated
training service.

We support greater cooperation by the United
Nations in peacekeeping efforts. However, such
programmes must be in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the United Nations Charter. The United Nations
cannot absolve itself of its responsibility under the
Charter for the maintenance of international peace and
security. The real challenge before the Organization is
to strengthen peacekeeping without regionalizing it.

India stands committed to continuing to assist the
United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. India has a proud history of
contributing to United Nations peacekeeping that dates
back to the inception of that activity in the 19505. Over
the decades, India has contributed nearly 100,000
troops and participated in over 40 missions, including
in some of the most challenging operations. We salute
the 118 personnel of the Indian forces, as well as
peacekeepers from other countries, who have made the
supreme sacrifice in the interests of world peace while
serving in various United Nations missions.

India looks forward to constructive and
meaningful engagement with the Security Council to
carry the debate forward and to ensure fruition of our
joint efforts in this very visible activity of the United
Nations. We hope that through our collective efforts we
can evolve greater coherence and integration in the
process of identifying solutions to the challenges
facing international peacekeeping.

