Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I have
the honour to speak also on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and the countries that have aligned
themselves with this statement.

The European Union warmly welcomes
Mr. Arnault's briefing and today's debate, on the eve of
a crucial period for Afghanistan. It provides us with the
opportunity to reaffirm the long-term commitment of
the European Union and the rest of the international
community to Afghanistan's regeneration.

We congratulate the Government and the people
of Afghanistan on the huge strides that they have made
since the Bonn Agreement of December 2001. We
share their vision of a stable, peaceful and democratic
Afghanistan taking its rightful place in the community
of nations. As the Bonn process nears completion, the
European Union affirms its commitment to continue
supporting the efforts, already under way, of the
Government of Afghanistan to take forward progress
on good governance; the rule of law; human rights,
including women's rights; institutional capacity-
building; economic development; poverty reduction;
and counter-narcotics efforts. As the Secretary-General
noted in his very helpful report (S/2005/525) of
12 August, significant challenges remain in all those
areas, which, if left unchecked, threaten to undermine
the progress made to date in Afghanistan.

In close cooperation with the Government of
Afghanistan, EU member States have taken the lead in
a number of key areas. Germany coordinates
international support for the efforts of the Government
of Afghanistan to develop an impartial and effective
national police force, Italy coordinates international
assistance to help establish a justice-based system
founded on the rule of law; the United Kingdom
coordinates counter-narcotics efforts and France leads
efforts aimed at providing support to the new National
Assembly. In addition, EU member States have
contributed both funds and expert assistance to the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
and are supporting the programme aimed at the
disbandment of illegal armed groups.

The European Union welcomes the prospect of
the parliamentary and provincial elections that, as we
have heard, are due to take place on 18 September
2005. Those elections, following on from the
presidential election in October 2004, mark a further
step towards the entrenchment of democracy in
Afghanistan. The European Union is contributing to
the success of the elections in several ways. An EU
electoral observer mission will monitor all aspects of
the elections. In terms of financial assistance, the EU
collectively - that is to say, its member States plus the
European Union budget - is providing a contribution
of $60 million towards the cost of organizing the
elections. That contribution represents just one element
of a larger $3.8 billion collective EU package over five
years, all of which supports the reconstruction of
Afghanistan.
Many EU member States are also deploying
security resources, as part of the NATO-led
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), to help
the Government of Afghanistan ensure a secure
environment throughout the country, particularly for
the elections.

In that connection, I would also like to pay my
respects to the 17 Spanish peacekeepers who lost their
lives in a helicopter crash in the province of Herat last
week. We offer our condolences to their families and to
the Government and the people of Spain.

Several European Union member States are today
leading provincial reconstruction teams throughout the
country. Some EU member States are also participating
in the United States-led coalition Operation Enduring
Freedom, which provides a security presence in the
south and the east of the country. The EU supports the
efforts of the Government of Afghanistan and of the
international community to create a secure
environment in which the people of Afghanistan can
live without fear of terrorism or violence, and
condemns those elements that seek to undermine the
country's progress. The EU supports a continued
security presence of the international community until
such time as Afghan security forces are fully
operational.

It is right that we should acknowledge the
excellent work of UNAMA and Special Representative
Arnault and their constructive relationship with the
Government of Afghanistan. We look forward to
contributing to discussions about an agreed framework
for the next phase of international engagement in
Afghanistan, and we hope that the United Nations will
continue to play a significant and leading role.

The EU wishes to inform its partners that the
Council of Foreign Ministers has invited Mr. Javier
Solana, the High Representative, and the European
Commission to prepare proposals for a long-term
comprehensive framework for EU-Afghanistan
relations following the September 2005 parliamentary
elections.

I should now like to make a few brief points in
my national capacity.

The United Kingdom welcomes the determination
of the Government of Afghanistan - including the
personal commitment of President Karzai - to tackle
the drug trade. There have been a number of significant
successes this year. The United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime is expected to confirm later this
month that cultivation levels in some of the traditional
poppy-growing provinces are down. At the same time,
the tempo of interdiction operations against the opium
trade is on the rise, and the first convictions of drug
traffickers were secured in May this year.

Nevertheless, sustainable drug-elimination
strategies - including the creation of alternative
livelihoods - take time, particularly when the

challenges are as severe as they are in Afghanistan.
They also require the cooperation of neighbouring
States and better control of borders. Furthermore, the
cultivation of and trafficking in narcotics is not an
isolated challenge, but one that threatens to undermine
all aspects of the reconstruction effort. Unless we
increase our shared commitment to countering
narcotics in Afghanistan, we face a real risk of
strategic failure in the long term.

The United Kingdom notes in this respect the
establishment of the Counter-Narcotics Trust Fund
referred to in paragraph 38 of the Secretary-General's
report (S/2005/525). As the lead nation for counter-
narcotics, the United Kingdom would urge
international partners to contribute to the Trust Fund
and to consider seconding international mentors to
support law enforcement and criminal justice training
in Afghanistan. Channeling funding through the
Counter-Narcotics Trust Fund will ensure that
resources are allocated transparently and effectively,
while at the same time giving the Government of
Afghanistan greater ownership of and the ability to
manage and tackle the narcotics problem.

Finally, the United Kingdom is a significant
contributor to the International Security Assistance
Force, and we are looking forward to succeeding Italy
in assuming the leadership of that Force in April 2006,
when the allied rapid reaction corps will deploy to
Afghanistan.

Like other colleagues, I am very content with the
proposed draft presidential statement.

