Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): On behalf of the
Philippine delegation, I warmly congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August. Let me assure you of
my delegation's full support and cooperation during
your term as President of this body. I also wish to
express my appreciation to the Security Council for
this opportunity to address it on this important issue.
The Philippine delegation also conveys its appreciation
for the briefing by the Under-Secretary General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Alain Le Roy, and
commends the men and women in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations both here at United Nations
Headquarters and in the various field missions
overseas.

I also wish to acknowledge the contributions
made by the force commanders: Lieutenant General

Sikander Afzal of Pakistan for the United Nations
Mission in Liberia; Major General Luiz Guilherme
Paul Cruz of Brazil for the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti; Lieutenant General
Babacar Gaye for the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; Major General Moses Bisang Obi of
Nigeria for the United Nations Mission in the Sudan;
Major General Robert Mood of Norway for the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization; and our very
own Major General Natalio Ecarma III for the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force. Their
initiatives and efforts have certainly made a difference
in their respective missions and operations.

At the risk of sounding nostalgic, if not mellow, in
the face of the very serious issue before us, allow me to
recall that it has been 47 years since the Philippines first
engaged in and contributed to the maintenance of
international peace with the deployment of a 40-member
air force squadron to the Congo. Since that time, the
Philippines has endeavoured to fulfil its international
commitment to contribute to the preservation of peace
and security in the world. Despite our limited resources,
the Philippines strives to find ways to help shoulder the
peacekeeping burden by addressing the need of the
United Nations for troops and police officers for
existing and emerging missions.

I am pleased to share with Council members and
all other delegations present that, at present, there are
about 1,057 Filipino military and police personnel
serving with peacekeepers from other Member States
in nine mission areas around the world. Just last year,
the Philippines expanded its participation in United
Nations peacekeeping operations with the deployment
of a 336-man infantry battalion to the Golan Heights.
The Philippines has also been given the honour of
leading United Nations operations in the Golan, with,
as I have already mentioned, the appointment by the
Secretary-General of Major General Ecarma as Head of
Mission and Force Commander.

I also wish to inform the Council that the
Philippines is now in the process of strengthening its
own peacekeeping mechanisms to allow it to respond
more effectively to United Nations requests for troop
contributions. We are now working on a new road map
that takes into account recent developments in the field
of peacekeeping and which, we hope, will lead to the
expansion of our participation in United Nations
operations in the near future, wherever they may be.

The Philippines has been closely monitoring
developments in how we help keep the peace in conflict
areas abroad. We remain satisfied with the
achievements made by the United Nations thus far and
would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
courageous and dedicated men and women serving
under the blue and white flag of our United Nations.
The Philippines is especially aware of the sacrifices
that our peacekeepers make - especially those who are
deployed in harsh and hostile areas - and salutes all
those who have given their lives in the cause of peace.

For the past several years, we have seen how the
United Nations has struggled to meet the increase in
the demand for peacekeepers worldwide. As an active
troop-contributing country, the Philippines is aware of
the deep operational demands of peacekeeping and
how these demands continue to grow and evolve.
Certainly, the extension and, in some cases, the
expansion of mandates are among the manifestations
that we can see. We continue to note that often this
surge or increase in the demand has not always been
matched with the capabilities and resources required to
meet our peacekeeping commitments. However, the
Philippines acknowledges the continued efforts made
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) and the Department of Field Support (DFS) to
fully address these increased demands, despite other
challenges and difficulties.

With regard to the protection of civilians in
conflict areas, especially women and children, it is well
known that the Philippines supports the three-tiered
framework proposed by DPKO and DFS in
conceptualizing the role of United Nations
peacekeeping operations in protecting civilians. To
reiterate, these are providing protection through the
political process, providing protection from physical
violence and establishing a protective environment.
The Philippines agrees that the elements of this
framework must be implemented simultaneously in
order to achieve concrete results in the most efficient,
expeditious and proper manner.

With regard to peacebuilding, our position is also
well known. The Philippines believes that United
Nations peacekeepers should not be considered long-
term peace builders, as peacebuilding is a national
challenge that entails national ownership and
responsibility. We have said before that only national
actors can address in a sustainable manner the needs and
goals of their respective societies. Hence, national
ownership of the process is the ultimate goal and must
be emphasized to both our peacekeepers and the
national actors and stakeholders. The handover of tasks
and responsibilities from peacekeepers to national
partners in the post-conflict period must be given
priority in the early stages of the peacebuilding process.
However, the Philippines acknowledges that in an
immediate post-conflict scenario, United Nations
peacekeepers are more often than not tasked to carry out
initial peacebuilding responsibilities such as providing
basic security, delivering peace dividends, shoring up
and building confidence in the political process and
strengthening core national capacity - all intended to
lay the foundation for sustainable development.

In closing, allow me to reiterate our full
cooperation with the Security Council as well as our
continuing commitment to help keep the peace and
security and to prevent the escalation of conflict in
various regions across the globe.

