The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Cote
d'Ivoire.

I would like to express my condolences and extend
those of Mr. Alassane Ouattara, President of the
Republic of Cote d'Ivoire - who will be sitting here in
the Chamber tomorrow for the high-level debate - on
behalf of the Ivorian Government and its people, on the
death of George Herbert Walker Bush, the forty-first
President of the United States ofAmerica, who was one
of the most eminent members of the Security Council.
My delegation is grateful to Mr. Karim Asad
Ahmad Khan for the introduction of his report (see S/2018/1031). The report provides information on the
arrangements that the Investigative Team intends to put
in place for the effective implementation of resolution
2379 (2017), of 21 September 2017. As this is the first
report submitted by Mr. Khan to the Council, Cote
d'Ivoire would like to take this opportunity to sincerely
congratulate him on his appointment to that post and
wish him every success in carrying out the duties
entrusted to him by the Secretary-General.

The recent discovery of 202 mass graves with
more than 12,000 bodies in the northern and western
provinces of Iraq, previously under the control of the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, testifies to the
cruelty of that terrorist group and calls on our Council
to consider the urgent need to operationalize the
Investigation Team. To that end, my country calls on
all Member States to show unfailing solidarity with the
Team so that it can effectively carry out its mission.

Despite the recent military setbacks in Iraq, Da'esh
continues to pose a serious threat to the country's
stability and to international peace and security,
with more than 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters from
approximately 100 countries, its new modus operandi
through the diversification of its financial resources,
the use of social media and the manipulation of local
tribes. Hence the urgent need to mobilize all efforts to
put an end to the activities of that terrorist group as soon
as possible, particularly through the implementation of
the relevant Council resolutions.

Cote d'Ivoire would like to commend the efforts
made by the United Nations and the international
community to strengthen the means of combating
terrorism, which undermines the development efforts
of many States and affects the lives of thousands of
individuals. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
the reforms undertaken to restructure and improve
the United Nations counter-terrorism architecture,
in particular through the establishment of the Office
of Counter-Terrorism and the adoption of resolution
2354 (2017), on the document entitled "Comprehensive
International Framework to Counter Terrorist
Narratives" (S/2017/375), together with guiding
principles and good practices to effectively combat the
means used by Da'esh and Al-Qaida to spread terrorism
throughout the world. My delegation would note the
Council's responsibility in that regard and the need
for regional and international cooperation in the fight
against Da'esh and its associated groups. Cote d'Ivoire
is determined, for its part, to work with all bilateral and
multilateral partners to eradicate that scourge.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire would like to pay
tribute once again to the courage of the Iraqi security
and defence forces, which defeated Da'esh in 2017, and
congratulate the Iraqi authorities on the successful
holding of parliamentary elections on 12 May, which
resulted in the appointment of Mr. Barham Salih and
Mr. Adil Abdul-Mahdi, President of the Republic and
Prime Minister, respectively. In my country's view,
those actions will enable Iraq to regain lasting peace
and stability in order to contribute to spreading peace
in the region and to better utilize its immense wealth.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.

