Mr. Logar (Slovenia): Slovenia welcomes the
organization of this debate and the opportunity to
address the complex topic of the linkages between
water, peace and security at the highest level. I commend
Senegal for convening this meeting and for preparing
the comprehensive concept note (S/2016/969, annex). I
thank the Secretary-General and all three briefers for
their relevant and instructive contributions today.

Water is our life support, and its impact on human
development is undeniable. Yet the value and the
strategic place of water in international politics have
long been underestimated, as have the dangers of water
scarcity for peace and security. Especially in the light
of climate change, which directly impacts water cycles,
we must adopt a different attitude and a more coherent
approach to water management and the protection of
that indispensable natural resource, which is key for
the survival of our civilization and, indeed, our planet.
The Paris Agreement on Climate Change represents an
important landmark in the process, and I am pleased to
announce that Slovenia recently ratified the Agreement.

Mobilizing political will is crucial for the protection
of water resources, and we must act quickly. For that
reason, Slovenia is one of the countries co-hosting the
Global High-Level Panel on Water and Peace, chaired
by former Slovenian President, Mr. Danilo Turk, and
Slovenia was pleased to co-host a side event on the
topic during the recent general debate of the General
Assembly. Moreover, we participate in Geneva at the
Group of Friends of Water and Peace, where we look
forward to new members joining the Group as a result
of today's discussions. We would also like to encourage
more extensive cooperation between the two Groups
of Friends in Geneva and in New York, as well as
cooperation with the various high-level panels working
on water-related issues.

The Security Council has an important role to play
in raising awareness of the importance of water for
peace and security, and in preventing possible water-
related conflicts. We therefore hope that this debate
will contribute to further actions on water management,
while reinforcing structural aspects of the connection
between water and security.

Furthermore, I would like to stress the important
role of regional organizations in contributing to
peaceful and sustainable water management across
national borders. In addition, we must create inclusive
water partnerships. Those partnerships should involve
a range of actors, not just Governments but also civil
society and the private sector. They should be fair and
appropriately financed, with a View to leaving no one
behind, and should encourage all those involved to
choose cooperation instead of conflict.

There is no doubt that the sustainable management
ofwater resources will become a major global challenge.
But I would also like to highlight its potential to be
transformed from a source of potential conflict into
an instrument of peaceful cooperation. Slovenia has
had very positive experience in that regard with the
International Sava River Basin Commission, established
by the four former Yugoslav States, as a result of one
of the first international agreements concluded among
the former Yugoslav States after peace was achieved
following the Balkan wars. As a result, the Sava River
became a symbol of regional cooperation, and the
agreement has had an important regional stabilizing
effect. I am also proud to inform the Council that just
a week ago the Slovenian National Assembly enshrined
the right to safe drinking water in our Constitution.
Furthermore, the sector-specific priorities of Slovenia's
development cooperation include a special focus on
sustainable water management and access to safe
drinking water.

Safeguarding water means safeguarding our
planet for ourselves and for generations to come. We
must spare no effort to find comprehensive solutions
to water-related challenges, while taking into account
the close links with climate change, food security,
energy and other issues. The higher our awareness of
the importance of water cooperation, the easier it will
be to achieve the goal ofthe sustainable use ofwater for
all, which will, in turn, contribute to the maintenance
of peace and security.
Slovenia remains committed to supporting the
nexus between water, peace and security. In that light,
our country is eagerly looking forward to the final
report of the Global High-Level Panel on Water and
Peace and its recommendations.

