Austria has the honour of delivering this statement on behalf of the following members of the Group of Friends of the Rule of Law: Argentina, Belgium, Cabo Verde, Canada, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Guatemala, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Mexico, the Philippines, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, the European Union, and my own country, Austria. In addition, Cyprus aligns itself with this statement. As we reflect on the 75 years that have passed since the founding of the United Nations and the establishment of the International Court of Justice, it is very timely to reaffirm our commitment to international law and the rule of law as well as to seeking ways to strengthen cooperation between the Court and the Security Council in this field. We very much welcome today's open debate, organized by South Africa. We also thank the President of the Court for his briefing. We reaffirm our commitment to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter, which set out the three pillars on which the United Nations is built: peace and security, development and human rights. Firmly based on the universal values of equality, justice, freedom and the dignity and worth of the human person, the Charter gives the same importance to universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms as it does to such fundamental principles of international law as the prohibition of the threat or use of force, the territorial integrity of States and the peaceful settlement of disputes. The Security Council has often confirmed that the rule of law and justice are fundamental building blocks of conflict prevention and resolution as well as for sustainable peace. As we reflect on the lessons from our past full of wars, conflict and human suffering, we recognize that peace and security and respect for human rights and the rule of law are intrinsically linked. And as we face new and more complex threats and challenges to international peace and security, atrocities, brutality and suffering, we would do well to recall the foundations and principles embodied in the Charter. Our collective response to threats to international peace and security must be guided by the rule of law both at the national and international levels. Both are inherently linked and intertwined, for, as set forth in the report of the Secretary-General entitled "In larger freedom: towards development, security and human rights for all", "every nation that proclaims the rule of law at home must respect it abroad and ... every nation that insists on it abroad must enforce it at home." (4/59/2005, para. 133) We call on all States to abide by all their obligations under international law, including human rights law and international humanitarian law. We firmly believe that respect for and compliance with international law is the very foundation of a functioning, just rules-based international system. We reiterate the call on States to ratify and implement multilateral treaties and to settle their disputes peacefully, in particular through the International Court of Justice. Respect for the Court's decisions, judgments and advisory opinions is crucial to upholding the Charter and international law and to consolidating the success of the international justice system. The increasing number of submissions by Member States from around the world demonstrates their trust in the Court. All the Court's activities are aimed at promoting and strengthening the rule of law. Through its judgments and advisory opinions, the Court contributes to clarifying international law as well as its further development. We would like to emphasize our appreciation for the Court's work and its important role as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations. We encourage all Member States to consider accepting, without reservations, the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice in accordance with Article 36 of the Charter. In the same vein, we encourage the Security Council to make more use of the Court's expertise and use all the tools provided by the Charter in that regard. Where appropriate, the Council should encourage States to refer legal disputes to the International Court of Justice in its resolutions. When considering situations that constitute a threat to international peace and security, the Council should always examine whether the International Court of Justice should be seized of the matter. As members of the Group of Friends of the Rule of Law, we reaffirm the fundamental importance of the rule of law at the national and international levels to the maintenance of international peace and security.
