Mr. Danon (Israel): Imagine a crisp fall morning in
northern Israel, in Metulla, where farmers are working
in their fields, boys and girls are walking to school,
neighbours are wishing each other a good morning and
everyone is going about their day. Metulla is surrounded
by the Lebanese border, but the town lives in calm and
quiet, until the terror starts.

Suddenly, a force of 250 Hizbullah terrorists, from
the elite Radwan Unit, emerge from the end of a cross-
border terror tunnel. That tunnel spans from Kafr Kila,
Lebanon, directly into Metulla, Israel. It was built to
enable that large group of Hizbullah terrorists to move
swiftly across the border underground. The tunnels
are wide enough for Radwan terrorists to march two
by two into Israel. Hizbullah Radwan forces will use
that tunnel to invade Israel and take over Metulla. Its
terrorists will kill civilians, including children and
the elderly. Then it will close the Route 90, which is
the highway that connects Metulla with the rest of the
Galilee, and hold Metulla under siege.

But now imagine that tragic scenario multiplied
five times over. Imagine Hizbullah's Radwan
terrorists using five different tunnels to five other
towns in Israel - Kiryat Shmona, Avivim, Adamit,
Zar'it and Menara - and killing innocent Israeli
civilians, kidnapping them and taking over parts of
the Galilee. Hizbullah calls that strategic operational
plan "Conquering the Galilee". It is a ground attack,
but Hizbullah does not stop there. It shoots thousands
of rockets and missiles into northern Israel. It launches
anti-tank missiles that could easily hit a bus full of
children. It seizes control of northern Israel's major
roads and highways. It uses Shiite militias together with
the Radwan forces to cross the Blue Line into Israel,
overcome obstacles Israel that has set in their way and
launch terror attacks against Israel by sea.

What I just described is not just a figment of the
imagination. But we will never allow that to happen.
Through an extensive intelligence operation, Israel
monitored Hizbullah's widespread terror tunnel project,
which spans from Lebanon into Israel's sovereign
territory, underneath the Blue Line.

On 4 December, Israel initiated Operation Northern
Shield. That operation is a protective measure to prevent
the possibility of such a grave reality from ever taking
place. It is a pre-emptive logistical operation on our side
of the Blue Line. The goal remains to neutralize and
destroy Hizbullah's terror tunnels. The Israeli Defense
Forces (IDF) has reported the existence so far of four
terror tunnels in four separate geographical locations
that begin in Lebanon and infiltrate Israel. Israel has
informed its partners about the extensive operation and
provided the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIF IL) with full information about the tunnels.
Throughout it all, Hassan Nasrallah, the Secretary-
General of Hizbullah, has remained silent.

UNIFIL confirmed the existence of those terror
tunnels two days ago. UNIFIL stated clearly that
Hizbullah's activities constitute a violation of resolution
1701 (2006) and are a matter of serious concern. Israel
transferred all of the information to UNIFIL. We even
provided the exact coordinates of the opening of the
tunnels on the Lebanese side. What did we expect
UNIFIL to do with that information? We expected it
would, perhaps, take control of the area, destroy the
tunnels and follow its mandate. But what did UNIFIL
do? It passed all of the information to the Lebanese
army. The Lebanese army could have worked with
UNIFIL to remove Hizbullah completely from the area
or, perhaps, destroy the tunnels and done its job to keep
its people safe. But, what did the Lebanese army do? It
sent the information directly to Hizbullah, which then
sealed the tunnels and tried to cover up the evidence.
Here is a picture we took inside one of the Hizbullah
terror-attack tunnels on our side. As Council members
can see, Hizbullah placed a fence and bricks inside the
tunnel in an attempt to hide it. We do not expect that
Hizbullah would receive information and immediately
send terrorists to block the tunnel.

UNIFIL has one primary responsibility and,
according to its mandate, that is

"to ensure that its area of operations it not utilized
for hostile activities of any kind" (resolution 1701 (2006), para. 12).

Israel has revealed to UNIFIL that Mayor Yahya
Husseini, a high-ranking member of the Lebanese
army, is using his position to advance the interests of
Hizbullah. That is not the first instance of cooperation
between the terrorist group and the Lebanese army.
Husseini is part of a liaison network between the
Lebanese army and Hizbullah. The Lebanese army has
even promoted him.

The Lebanese Armed Forces, the so-called official
military of Lebanon, is supposed to ensure calm and
stability in the region. In southern Lebanon there are
10,000 soldiers of the Lebanese Armed Forces. They,
along with more than 11,000 UNIFIL peacekeepers,
have one objective: to prevent Hizbullah from
terrorizing the area. Yet, somehow, Hizbullah, with
fewer than 10,000 terrorists, has full control ofthe area.
The Lebanese army has chosen to walk with Hizbullah
in two ways - by giving Hizbullah information that
helps the terror group's efforts and by preventing
UNIFIL from carrying out its mandate in the region.
We are very concerned, but not surprised, to hear that
the Lebanese army does not give UNIFIL full access
to the coordinates provided by Israel or stop Hizbullah
from confronting UNIF IL forces on the ground.

Let me be abundantly clear. Hizbullah's activities
are a flagrant and unacceptable violation of resolution
1701 (2006) and the Blue Line. They also violate the
Charter of the United Nations and international law. In
order for the new UNIFIL Force Commander, Major
General Del Col, to succeed - and we want him to
succeed in his role - UNIFIL cannot make the same
mistakes made under the previous Commander. Israel
has informed UNIFIL time and again of Hizbullah's
terror activities, but they have never appeared in the 38
reports on resolution 1701 (2006). I repeat, 38 reports.

I have exposed Hizbullah's violations here in the
Security Council. In June 2017, I visited the northern
border with Major General Beary, the former UNIFIL
Force Commander, together with IDF officials. On that
day he said,

"The region is calm. The situation is good. There is
no need for change."

Today no one can deny the facts. In this picture Council
members can see the tunnel crossing the Blue Line,
almost directly under a UNIFIL observation point.
There is a UNIFIL observation point just metres from
the tunnel. When a terror-attack tunnel runs from a
private property and under the Blue Line, the region
is not calm. The situation is not good. There must be a
change.

UNIFIL could not even enter certain sections of its
own mandated area of operations. It must be granted
full access to its entire area of operations, including the
private properties and nature reserves that Hizbullah
is exploiting for terror. We know that it is a game. For
example, Hizbullah has conducted operations under the
guise of a mock non-governmental organization, known
as Green without Borders. Those present here today
have seen those operations with their own eyes. Israel
calls on UNIFIL to carry out its full mandate under
resolution 2433 (2017) and maintain regional security.
The world has expectations ofUNIFIL that it must meet.
The Security Council must designate Hizbullah as a
terrorist organization, just as it designated the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and the Taliban.
The international community must condemn Hizbullah
in the strongest terms and stand by Israel's self-defence
measures. It is the expectation that Lebanon will
eliminate the terror tunnels and prevent the building
of future attack tunnels that threaten Israel. Israel will
continue Operation Northern Shield to neutralize the
threat of the tunnels. We have the full right, like any
other nation in the world, to defend ourselves, our
sovereignty and our people.

Hizbullah's severe violations of resolution 1701
(2006) do not end with its terror-tunnel project.
Unfortunately, the terror tunnels reflect just a small
part of Hizbullah's illegal activities in southern
Lebanon. Hizbullah is building military capabilities
and infrastructure with the ultimate goal of using
them to attack Israel. Let us take one village, for
example - Kfar Kila, a Lebanese town of close to
15,000 people next to our border. Houses have been
turned into bunkers and schools have become weapons-
storage facilities. I told the Ambassador of Lebanon to
look at what he has allowed Hizbullah to do in southern
Lebanon. Why is he putting his own people in danger?
Not only is Hizbullah violating resolution 1701 (2006);
it is also exploiting the innocent civilians of southern
Lebanon by using them as human shields.

I will share evidence of that with the Council. We
are revealing this information for the first time. This
is Kafr Kile. In this aerial photo the Council can see
the complete transformation of this village into a terror
terminal. All the dots are bunkers storing weapons.
Here we can see where the tunnels start in the village.
These are private properties. Hizbullah has built a
terror terminal from Kafr Kile into Israel, which stores
weaponry and builds command-and-control centres.
That is the reality. Imagine what will happen to the
village in case we have to defend ourselves.

Hizbullah has also established the foundation
for launching attacks against Israel, using homes as
command-and-control centres, turning civilian and
private infrastructure into weapons armouries and
building elaborate operational capabilities inside
villages and forests. Those violations reflect just the
backdrop of Hizbullah's illegal activities in southern
Lebanon. Hizbullah has stockpiled thousands ofrockets
and missiles within those areas. That is the reality on
the ground. What does the international community
honestly expect Israel to do in the face of that grave
danger?

The Lebanese Ambassador called for condemning
Israel. We appreciate her concern for the Lebanese
people, especially in Kafr Kile. As she mentioned in
her letter to the Council on 6 December, she represents
a Government that allows Iran and its proxies to turn
Lebanon into a launching pad for terror. The Lebanese
Government is endangering its own people by simply
doing nothing. How have they allowed Hizbullah to
build an underground city of tunnels that places the
citizens of Lebanon in constant danger? There are
no expectations from a terrorist organization to act
appropriately. But what has the Lebanese Government
done to prevent Hizbullah from triggering a regional
war? Hizbullah is hijacking the entire State of Lebanon
to attack Israel, and the Government of Lebanon has
surrendered. By closing its eyes as its people live
inside a ticking time bomb of terror tunnels, missiles
and rockets, the Government of Lebanon has failed its
people.

Israel's Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu,
revealed that Hizbullah has placed at least three
precision missile conversion sites directly beside
Beirut's international airport. Hizbullah is building
its own precision missile production capabilities.
Hizbullah is now holding over 100,000 rockets and
missiles across Lebanon. One may wonder how
Hizbullah, a terrorist organization, could get away
with that. The answer is simple. First, Hizbullah is now
more than ever paralysing and eroding the pillars of the
State of Lebanon with its ever-growing grip on power.
Secondly, there is Iran. Nasrallah said himself:

"We are open about the fact that Hizbullah's
budget, its income, its expenses, everything it eats
and drinks, its weapons and rockets, come from the
Islamic Republic of Iran."

Iran is the lifeblood of Hizbullah, ideologically,
financially, militarily and even culturally. Based
on growing evidence and reports, Iran is not only
transferring game-changing weapons through
Lebanon's border with Syria but, in flagrant violation
of numerous Security Council resolutions, Iran is now
transporting those weapons on commercial planes
landing in Beirut's international airport. After the joint
campaign of killing in Syria, Iranian fighters, Shiite
militias and Hizbullah terrorists - specifically the
Radwan Unit - are joining forces once again - this
time against Israel.

Letme be crystal clearbefore I conclude: iinzbullah
makes the mistake of attacking Israel, opposing
our actions or violating our sovereignty - make no
mistake- Israel will act. We will act swiftly. We will
act by land, by air and by sea. We will act with our full
force and might.
If there is a war that must be fought for Israel to
defend itself against Hizbullah's terrorism the world
would say, as it always does, how could this have been
prevented? Well, today even that future war could have
been prevented with this body acting as it is charged to
do: by calling out the flagrant violations of international
law and acting finally and decisively.

Israel is protecting itself. Operation Northern
Shield ensures the safety of our people. Israel has no
intention to escalate the situation, but we are not naive.
As the famous playwright Anton Chekhov once said, if
you place a gun in the first act, it must fire in the last.
Hizbullah's terror tunnels and missiles were not created
without purpose. They were created for Hizbullah to
use against us. If Hizbullah will have the arrogance to
attack Israel, we will bury it in the rubble of Lebanon.
We will never let terror win.

The meeting rose at 11.45 am.
