Mr. Van Den Bogaard (Netherlands): The
Netherlands thanks you, Sir, for the opportunity to
speak today at this meeting of the Security Council on
the International Tribunals for Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia.

We align ourselves with the statements made by the
observer of the European Union and the representative
of Liechtenstein.

The great interest of States in the debate is
an unmistakable sign of the importance that the
international community attaches to both Tribunals and
their goals. Twenty years ago, the Council recognized
that mass slaughter and ethnic cleansing amount to a
threat to international peace and security. By creating
both Tribunals, the Council courageously undertook
to address the most serious international crimes. The
result has profoundly changed the international debate.
Impunity is no longer acceptable, and the international
community has entered into an age of accountability.
The work of the two Tribunals has almost come to an
end.

The Netherlands today wishes to pay tribute to the
Council for having adopted the two relevant resolutions;
to the international community for its support; and
to those at the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their work in
making the vision of the Tribunals come true.

The ICTR has significantly broadened international
criminal jurisprudence by being the first court to
prosecute suspects for the crime of genocide, by
demonstrating that rape may be an act of genocide and
by considering the criminal responsibility ofthe media.
It contributed significantly to developing the law
regarding criminal responsibility in non-international
armed conflict.
The ICTY has been equally successful. All of
the indicted have been brought before the Tribunal,
including several long-term fugitives. It has contributed
substantially to the penalization of grave breaches
of international humanitarian law and the further
development of customary laws of war.

The Netherlands is proud to host the ICTY and the
Appeals Chamber of both Tribunals, and has always
been a staunch political supporter of both Tribunals.
At the celebration of ICTY's twentieth anniversary
held in The Hague last month, in the presence of King
Willem-Alexander, various speakers emphasized how
crucial the continued political pressure on all parties
concerned to cooperate with the Tribunal has been in
enabling it to carry out its mandate effectively.

Allow me therefore to seize this opportunity to
stress the importance of political, diplomatic and
financial support to those and other tribunals. The
Council, by being instrumental in establishing them,
has a solemn responsibility to ensure that they can do
their work. International justice cannot and should not
be limited because of lack of political backing from the
international community, nor should it be hampered
by financial constraints resulting from a system of
voluntary financing that threatens the delivery of
justice to the communities concerned. There must be
a solid financial basis for international criminal justice
mechanisms and their residual mechanisms.

The establishment of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals is essential to ensure
that there will be no impunity for remaining fugitives
and that appeals will be completed and witnesses
protected, well after the closure of the Tribunals.

The historical importance of those two United
Nations Tribunals cannot be underestimated. Their
legitimacy and their legacy are beyond dispute and will
continue to shape international relations for many years
to come. The Tribunals have confirmed the principle of
accountability for the most serious international crimes
by imposing punishment on those responsible and
giving victims unprecedented access to justice. They
have demonstrated the prevalence of the rule of law in
communities affected by such heinous crimes.

The Netherlands remains firmly committed to the
fight against impunity for the most serious international
crimes, both domestically and internationally. We count
on the Security Council to do the same.

