Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): I thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) for her briefing.

Civilian-led protests in April led to the removal
of President Omar Al-Bashir, whose regime was
synonymous with genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and human rights violations and abuses. For
months, protesters have gathered together, united by a
vision for a peaceful, democratic Sudan. But rather than
welcoming dialogue and discussion, those in power
have responded violently.

The Transitional Military Council's reprehensible
attacks on demonstrators in Khartoum have led to
more than 100 deaths and hundreds injured. Reports of
security forces beating and sexually assaulting protesters
and throwing victims into the Nile must be fully and
fairly investigated. The Military Council's grotesque
display of violence against peaceful demonstrators in
Khartoum was not an isolated incident.

The Government has also used excessive violence
against internally displaced persons (IDPs) in Darfur
to stop peaceful rallies. We are all too familiar with
the unthinkable violence to which Darfuris have been
subjected since 2003. Ongoing armed clashes in the
Jebel Marra region between the Sudan Liberation
Movement/Abdul Wahid rebel group and the Sudan
armed forces, along with intercommunal violence in
other parts of Darfur, serve as reminders of the ongoing
security challenges that plague the region.

Darfur's security situation has become further
challenged following delays in the transition to a
civilian-led Government in Khartoum. Those delays
have had a negative impact on human rights throughout
the Sudan and obstructed the implementation of
policies to support the return of internally displaced
persons, including to Darfur. We are concerned by
increasing violence in IDP camps. Sexual violence,
rape, harassment and other intimidation against women,
girls and boys in Darfur remains prevalent. It is for that
reason that the mission of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
continues to be important.

We support the African Union (AU) Peace and
Security Council's 6 June communique, which
announced the immediate suspension of the Sudan from
all AU activities until the establishment of a civilian-
led transitional authority. We call on the Sudan's
interim military authorities to cease attacks against
civilians, withdraw all undue restrictions on media and
civil society, restore access to the Internet and ensure
unhindered access for medical-care providers. We
also urge them to respect human rights, including the
freedom of expression and fair trial guarantees.

In that vein, we urge the Transitional Military
Council to agree to the request of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
for the rapid deployment of a United Nations human
rights monitoring team. The United Nations should also
make promoting respect for human rights the heart of
its efforts in the Sudan, whether through UNAMID or
the United Nations country team.

Long-term stability in Darfur and throughout the
Sudan depends on resolving the underlying causes of
the protracted conflict. That includes strengthening the
Sudan's judicial system to ensure accountability at the
local and national levels. It includes the establishment of
a fully functional civilian-led national Government that
is committed to reform. And it includes a commitment
by Khartoum to pursue a durable peace agreement
in Darfur.

There will be no lasting peace in the Sudan until
there is genuine accountability for the crimes that have
been committed against the Sudanese people. The
United States has historically been, and will continue
to be, a strong supporter of meaningful accountability
and justice for victims of atrocities through appropriate
mechanisms. Perpetrators of atrocity crimes must face
justice, but we must also be careful to recognize the
right tool for each situation.

I must reiterate our long-standing and principled
objection to any assertion of ICC jurisdiction over
nationals of States that are not party to the Rome
Statute, absent a Security Council referral or the
consent of such States. The United States remains
concerned about illegitimate attempts by the ICC to
assert such jurisdiction.

We also note our disagreement with a number of
aspects of the recent decision of the Court's Appeals
Chambers in the Jordan appeal, including the analysis
and conclusions regarding customary international law
and the interpretation of Security Council resolutions.
But our concerns about that decision, and the Court
more generally, in no way diminish our commitment to
supporting accountability for atrocity crimes.

