Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I would like to welcome the presence in
the Council of Judge Jorda, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Pillay, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
and Ms. Del Ponte, Prosecutor for both Tribunals, and
to thank them all for having briefed us on the work of
the two Tribunals over the past year.

Both the ICTY and the ICTR were created with
two objectives. On the one hand, they are to conduct
fair trials of those responsible for serious violations of
international humanitarian law. On the other hand, the
Tribunals are to promote peace and reconciliation in
the regions concerned. The relevant Security Council
resolutions have all emphasized the role of the two
Tribunals in promoting national reconciliation and
restoring peace and security in the regions in question.
Both Tribunals should bear in mind this dual function
in carrying out their work, and should accomplish their
mission in an impartial and comprehensive manner.

Both Tribunals have made important headway in
their work in many respects. In particular, both have
made appropriate changes or adjustments to their rules
and procedures, which helped enhance their efficiency
and expedite their trial proceedings. Security Council
resolution 1329 (2000) amended the statutes of the two
Tribunals and created a pool of ad litem judges for the
ICTY. It is our hope that with the assistance of the ad
litem judges, the ICTY will basically be able to
complete all the trials by 2007, and to finish thereafter
the relevant appeals proceedings as soon as possible.

We have noted that the ICTR's efficiency is also
being gradually improved. However, the ICTR is still
overloaded with cases. We agree in principle on taking
the necessary measures to increase the trial capacity of
the ICTR. But such an increase in capacity is not for
handling endless new indictments to emerge in the
future; it is for expediting the trials of those already
being detained. We would like to express our concern
over the Prosecutor's intention to carry out
investigations that would bring about 136 new
indictments by 2005, and we hope that the Prosecutor
will provide the Security Council with more detailed
information on the cases she intends to pursue.

Finally, I would like to emphasize that the two
Tribunals were created by the Security Council as ad
hoc bodies. They cannot exist indefinitely. We hope
that the two Tribunals can enhance their efficiency. The
Security Council, at an appropriate time, should
carefully consider the question of what should
constitute a reasonable time frame for the two
Tribunals to accomplish their respective mandates.

