Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the American, British, French and
Japanese delegations for calling for today's emergency
meeting of the Security Council. I would also like to
take this opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, for
having agreed to convene it so swiftly. I also offer
thanks to the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Feltman, for having given us a clear and
factual briefing.

Once again, we find ourselves brought together
following the latest in a long line of acts of defiance
against the international community, in particular the
Security Council, carried out by the authorities of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, namely,
the nuclear test carried out yesterday, Sunday,
by Pyongyang, which stated publicly that it had
successfully tested a thermonuclear hydrogen bomb of
unprecedented power, which could be installed on its
new intercontinental missiles. This sixth nuclear test
by North Korea follows the two that were conducted
last year and the tenth ballistic missile launch, which
was carried out just last week. Together with the
international community, Senegal strongly condemns
in the strongest possible terms this attitude of defiance
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, which
are a yet another serious breach of its international
obligations, undermines international non-proliferation
and disarmament efforts and greatly heightens tensions
and strategic instability in the Korean peninsula and
even beyond.

Once again, the credibility of the Security Council
is put to the test. Despite all the Council's resolutions,
all sanctions and other measures taken against North
Korea, the country's authorities, far from having
relinquished their military nuclear ambitions, are now
going so far as to call into question the very authority
of the Security Council to take up the problem posed
by its illegal military nuclear programme. There is
indeed a problem. What more must we do to make that
country come to its senses and respect its international
obligations in this area in a clear, irreversible and
verifiable manner? But the Council must first remain
united and firm in its condemnation of those actions
and in its resolve to adopt the new necessary measures,
in accordance with its prior resolutions, including the
latest, resolution 2371 (2017).

Each and every State Member of the United
Nations must also implement the provisions of the
many resolutions and sanctions imposed on North
Korea, however complex they may be. In that regard,
the regular briefings and special informational
meetings convened by Italy, in its capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006), concerning the implementation of sanctions,
remain of great importance.

In conclusion, and as we all agree that there can be
no military solution, my country urges the authorities
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
respect the resolutions of the Security Council, end
its illegal military nuclear programme, refrain from
threatening to use weapons of mass destruction against
States Members of the United Nations, and return to
the negotiating table in the framework of the Six-Party
Talks, which it chose to abandon several years ago.

