Mr. Flynn (Ireland): Thank you for convening
today's important debate, Mr. President. At the outset,
I would like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Archbishop of Canterbury and Ms. Qadeem for their
insightful briefings.

Ireland also aligns itself with the statements
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union and
the Group of Friends of Mediation.

While we have collectively taken important steps
to strengthen our capacity since the last debate on
mediation in 2009 (see S/PV.6108), the changing global
context in which we now operate makes mediation
an ever more important tool. Ireland has been a
consistent advocate for the role that mediation can play
throughout the conflict cycle, from prevention to long-
term reconciliation. We welcome the strong focus that
the Secretary-General has placed on the importance
of mediation, something that the Council has also
acknowledged. With that in mind, today we will share
some brief reflections and suggestions based on our
own experiences in Ireland.

As others have said, inclusivity is a key element in
successful mediation. However, despite clear evidence
that involving women in negotiations can contribute to
more inclusive and comprehensive peace agreements,
women made up just 2 per cent of mediators in major
peace processes between 1990 and 2017. Ifwe are to be
more effective in our use of mediation, that simply must
change. In June Ireland hosted a Promoting Women
in Peace mediation seminar, followed by a round-
table discussion with international women mediators'
networks. The key discussion points included the
importance of gender mainstreaming and continued
dialogue in peacebuilding, better recognition and
resourcing of women mediators and meaningfully
connecting grassroots-level mediation with national
high-level processes, and the benefits of women
mediators' networks as support systems that can help
women find an entry point into negotiations.

We would also like to highlight the growing
importance of the youth, peace and security agenda.
Young people can play a positive role in mediation and
their voices must be heard. Ireland provided financial
support to the recently published progress study on
youth and peace and security (see S/2018/86) and looks
forward to the implementation of its recommendations.

If we want to improve our capacity in mediation,
we must properly resource conflict-prevention and
peacebuilding programmes. Ireland has invested
$19.26 million in the Secretary-General's Peacebuilding
Fund since 2006. We have also contributed €2.2 million
in extrabudgetary support to the Mediation Support
Unit of the Department of Political Affairs since its
inception in 2008. Meanwhile, as a founding member
of the Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund and
one of its core donors, Ireland has seen the impact that
mediation can make on the ground through empowering
and resourcing women civil-society actors.

This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
Good Friday Agreement, the result of a long process
of negotiation, peacebuilding and - as Lord Ahmad
said earlier - mediation in Northern Ireland. In that
context, it is appropriate to recognize the critical work
of the Northern Ireland Women's Coalition in those
negotiations. The Coalition was particularly crucial
in drafting language on reconciliation and integrated
schooling. In April, addressing the General Assembly
during the high-level meeting on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace (see A/72/PV.83), President Michael
D. Higgins oflreland said that peace in Ireland could not
have been achieved without the steady and courageous
activism of civic organizations campaigning for a more
just and peaceful society, many of which were led by
the women of Ireland, north and south.

The Council has a particular responsibility to support
the Secretary-General and the wider Organization,
including the Peacebuilding Commission, in enhancing
the use of effective mediation to prevent, manage and
resolve conflicts. We strongly support the Secretary-
General's call for a quantum leap in the financing of
peacebuilding and conflict-prevention activities, and
we urge the Council to support activities aimed at
addressing the root causes of conflict.

