Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his briefing and Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovie for his statement. I also
thank Ukraine Ambassador Sergeyev.

As we know, five days ago, the Council sought
to adopt a draft resolution on Ukraine reaffirming
fundamental principles of international law, including
the Charter of the United Nations. The draft resolution
was opposed by only one State: Russia. The message
of Council members to Russia, reflecting the views
of the broader international community, nevertheless,
remains clear. It must comply with international law,
take active steps to de-escalate the crisis and engage in
dialogue towards a peaceful resolution of it.

But the fact is that Russia has steadfastly ignored
that message. It has moved to annex Crimea on the
basis ofa referendum that was manifestly unlawful and
illegitimate, not least because it was carried out while
Russian forces exercised effective control over Crimea.
President Putin's signature of a decree recognizing
Crimean independence and of a purported treaty with
Crimean leaders and the presidential approval of a
draft bill on the annexation of Crimea do not validate
the referendum, nor do they provide any legitimate
basis for Russia's acquisition of part of the territory of
Ukraine. Indeed, Russia's actions are a clear violation
of the fundamental principles of international law,
which were contained in the draft resolution it vetoed
on Saturday: respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, and the illegality of the acquisition of
territory by the threat or use of force. Those remain
the international community's touchstone, and the
international community will not recognize Russia's
annexation of Crimea.

Russia has further strengthened its military control
of Crimea in recent days, dramatically escalating
tensions. Incidents involving the use of armed force,
the occupation of military bases and the killing of
a Ukrainian soldier and the wounding of another
significantly increase the stakes and make a descent
into conflict more likely.
Ukrainian Prime Minister Yatsenyuk has sought
an immediate meeting of Ministers of Defence of the
parties to the 1994 Budapest Memorandum, which
provided security guarantees to Ukraine, in order to
prevent further escalation of the crisis, and we urge
Russia to respond positively to that request. He has sent
Ukraine's First Deputy Prime Minister and the Acting
Defence Minister to Crimea to de-escalate the crisis. It
is crucial that that direct dialogue take place.

The Secretary-General's travel to Moscow and
Kyiv over the next few days is clearly welcome, and
we urge all parties to engage in constructive dialogue
with him.

In pursuing its current course of action, Russia
has chosen a path towards isolation. In doing so, it
undermines its own standing, credibility and relations
with other States and increasingly poses a threat to
security and stability in the region. Inevitably, there
are consequences for its unlawful action. In addition
to measures put in place by others, the Australian
Government announced, on 19 March, that it would
impose targeted measures against individuals who
have been instrumental in the Russian threat to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine. We
have not taken those steps lightly and have done so
with regret, only after repeatedly urging Russia to
de-escalate and engage in diplomatic dialogue to
resolve the crisis.

An important first step for Russia will be to
recognize the need for and support the deployment
of monitors on the ground. We encourage Russia to
engage constructively in support of an Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) monitoring
mission to Ukraine. Such a mission should be deployed
as a matter of priority.

Given the allegations raised by Russia about
serious infringement of the human rights of Russian
speakers in Crimea and elsewhere in Ukraine, it is
obviously important that those allegations continue
to be independently assessed, especially as the OSCE
High Commissioner for National Minorities found no
evidence of violations or threats to Russian speakers
in Crimea during her recent visit. As Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovie has just reported to us,
the violations he has learned of are neither widespread
nor systematic. On the other hand, Crimea's Tatar
community clearly feel threatened. Mr. Simonovic' has
noted there are credible reports that a Tatar activist has
been tortured and murdered. There are also reports that
Ukrainian civil society activists have been abducted.
Those violations must cease. Ongoing human rights
monitoring is essential, and we welcome the work of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights team that is already being done and
their continued deployment, but such monitoring must
also take place in Crimea.

In conclusion, we are obviously at a critical point
for Ukraine and the region and for the integrity of the
rules-based international order itself. All Member
States have a direct interest in the preservation of that
order.

As the Deputy Secretary-General has underlined
again today, the crisis must be resolved peacefully
through diplomatic means and direct dialogue. Such a
resolution must respect Ukraine's unity and territorial
integrity. It is up to Russia to commit to finding such
a solution. It is not too late for it to turn from the
deliberate path of provocation and isolation that it has
taken.

