Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I join others in
thanking the briefers today for their very informative
presentations and welcome Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov, Mr. Billingslea and Ms. Buku to the Security
Council this morning.

As I said yesterday in this Chamber (see S/PV.8493),
the United Kingdom welcomes the territorial defeat of
Da'esh. However, as Da'esh transforms from a territorial
entity into a covert network, it remains capable of
directing or enabling attacks and perpetrating violent
extremist ideologies. It is as important as ever that
we work together collectively to deny them access to
resources, just as we must tackle the phenomenon of
far-right extremism and terrorism - an issue that my
country has warned about for some years and has been
acting against domestically. Again, we pay tribute to
the victims of the Christchurch attacks.

Across the globe and across a range of groups,
we have seen that terrorists can perpetrate horrific
attacks with small amounts of money, use new payment
technologies and move funds through different
channels, including legitimate enterprises. That is why
the United Kingdom supported and co-sponsored the
landmark resolution 2462 (2019), which we adopted
just now, and we thank France for its leadership on
that initiative, following the high-level International
Conference on Combating the Financing of Da'esh
and Al-Qaida, held in Paris last year on the theme "No
money for terror". The Security Council remains key
to international efforts on counter-terrorism, which
includes the financing of terrorist acts.

The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has the
essential role of setting global standards for preventing
and combating money-laundering, terrorist financing
and proliferation financing. To that end, the United
Kingdom strongly urges all States to implement the
comprehensive international standards embodied in
the revised 40 recommendations on combating money-
laundering and the financing of terrorism proliferation
and its interpretive notes.

I particularly highlight Mr. Billingslea's words on
effective information-sharing, well beyond financial
and banking sectors alone, and the vital importance
of implementation and prosecution. In that regard, I
thought Ms. Buku's comments about the importance
of balancing both financial inclusion and financial
integrity were very well judged.

The United Kingdom has taken a number of
measures to strengthen efforts to counter the financing
of terrorism. An important feature of our system is the
strong public-private partnership on terrorist financing
matters. We set up the Joint Money Laundering
Intelligence Taskforce in 2015 to create an environment
in which the financial sector, Government and law
enforcement can exchange and analyse information
and intelligence so as to better detect the movement of
terrorist funds.

Increasing collaboration between Government and
the private sector is a key part of the United Kingdom's
protection. Allow me to share a case study that
illustrates this.

The London Bridge attack took place on 3 June
2017. The Financial Intelligence Unit of the National
Crime Agency of the United Kingdom initiated an
immediate response, and the case was brought to the
Taskforce within 12 hours of the attack. A few hours
after that briefing, financial institutions were able to
provide assistance to identify the payments for van
hire and established other spending patterns, which
allowed further investigative strategies to be identified.
This assistance was crucial in allowing investigators to
conclude early on that the attack involved only three
attackers with no broader network.

A robust legislative framework to give law-
enforcement powers the tools they need to tackle the
threats we face is the cornerstone of any effective
terrorist finance regime. This was enhanced in the
United Kingdom by the Criminal Finances Act, which
adds to the ability of United Kingdom law enforcement
to identify, investigate and disrupt terrorist finance
activity and to work effectively with private-sector
partners. The United Kingdom welcomed the Financial
Action Task Force mutual evaluation visit of December
2018 and the positive report we received.

As we strengthen our measures to counter
terrorism and ensure that terrorist groups cannot
exploit vulnerabilities in various sectors, we must
also recognize the vital role played by humanitarian
actors and the roles they play in meeting urgent needs
under some of the most challenging circumstances.
The United Kingdom welcomes the fact that we have
addressed those issues for the first time in this Chapter
VII counter-terrorism resolution.

The effectiveness of counter-terrorism sanctions
also depends on their implementation across the globe.
The United Kingdom will continue to be an active and
global supporter of counter-terrorism sanctions as a key
tool to combat terrorism from Da'esh, Al-Qaida and
their affiliates within the high legal evidence threshold
set by our courts.

Soon after the attacks of 11 September, the Council
came together to adopt resolution 1373 (2001) and
decided that Member States should prevent and suppress
the financing of terrorist acts. Eighteen years later, we
have seen a dramatically evolving terrorist landscape
against an evolving financial and technological context.
We know that prevention, rehabilitation and whole-of-
society approaches are key to ensuring credible and
sustainable responses. But while we have adapted
our responses, so, too, have terrorist groups. We
therefore commend France for this initiative and thank
Council members for their constructive and proactive
engagement throughout this process, demonstrating
once again the strength of our collective resolve to
combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

We have today agreed an excellent resolution
under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter. We
must not sit back and admire it; we now need to see
effective implementation by all Member States. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
must support Member States in identifying how they
can strengthen their own response, and the Office of
Counter-Terrorism then needs to support Member
States in filling the gaps identified.

But above all, it requires all of us to stick to our
task and to press for continuous improvement. Our task
never stops.

