Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): For Russia, the central topic of the Security
Council's discussion in August was the situation in
Ukraine. Unfortunately, we are forced to conclude that
the Security Council, due to the destructive efforts of a
number of its members, was unable to play the kind of
role in resolving that crisis that is in line with its mandate
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. We
saw that once again in today's discussion on Ukraine
(see S/PV.7253). The draft statement proposed by the
Russian delegation on a ceasefire was blocked on the
basis of a frivolous pretext.

Despite that opposition, we have continued
throughout the month to draw the attention of
the international community to the catastrophic
humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine. In the
course of a briefing convened at the initiative of Russia
on 5 August (see S/PV.7234), representatives of United
Nations humanitarian agencies provided an assessment
of the situation that was closer to the reality. We
welcome that development. At last, information about
the real situation is beginning to seep through a wall of
silence and blatant denial.

We were shocked by the furious criticism and
distortion of facts with regard to the convoy of Russian
humanitarian assistance that was sent to Luhansk. We
have already discussed more than once the reasons
and purposes for our actions, and I do not wish repeat
them. However, I would like to stress that we will
continue efforts to provide humanitarian assistance to
the inhabitants of Luhansk and Donetsk, in cooperation
with the authorities in Kyiv and the International
Committee of Red Cross. We hope that our future
efforts will be met with a more constructive attitude.

The Security Council was unable to act with due
responsibility in the matter of international support
in the inquiry into the tragic crash of the Malaysian
airplane. Unfortunately, we continue to see attempts
to hinder the implementation of resolution 2166 (2014).
For more than 10 days, the Ukrainian authorities
disregarded the demand for a ceasefire in the region
of the disaster, and then they officially declared a
resumption of military activities. On two occasions
we introduced draft press statements in support of
resolution 2166 (2014). Both times they were blocked
by a number of Council members, who are evidently
not interested in the implementation of that resolution.
All we see here is an attempt to whitewash Kyiv under
any circumstances.

We would like once again to remind the Secretariat
that, in accordance with resolution 2166 (2014), the
United Nations must provide comprehensive assistance
in the inquiry, as well as identify possible options for
such assistance and report to the Council on relevant
developments. The United Nations and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe must play a more
active role, including as coordinators, in conducting a
comprehensive, thorough and independent international
inquiry.

With respect to the situation in Gaza, the Security
Council continued to act timidly. Discussions about
a product expressing the reactions of the Council
continued throughout the month. However, there is
no result. We came away quite disappointed from
yesterday's discussion of Libya (see S/PV.7251). That
country is essentially in free fall. The members of the
Council responsible for that situation - because they
are the ones that gravely violated resolutions 1970 (2011)
and 1973 (2011) - are acting as if they had nothing to
do with it. They are calling on the United Nations or
Libya's neighbours to do more. In that regard, we would
like to raise another point.

We sometimes hear that, if not for the right of veto,
the Security Council would be effective in preventing
or resolving conflicts. In the case of Libya, no veto was
used. I would like to ask those who were satisfied with
the result to raise their hands. The issue is not the veto,
but rather a policy of adventurism, which further stokes
conflicts.

In conclusion, we would like to note that the
current work of the Council is taking place against a
whole range of deteriorating regional crises. Given that
the Council has too much on its plate, we need to work
towards a more in-depth and effective consideration
of the issues on its agenda, related first and foremost
to specific situations and countries. Today's wrap-
up session seems artificial, especially since we will
continue our work tomorrow with discussions on two
important items. We would like to say that the British
presidency did not always act correctly, although it
worked a lot. We wish the United States delegation
every success in September.

