The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Croatia, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nobilo
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in the course of its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
on the situation of human rights in Croatia pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1019 (1995), document
S/1995/1051.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General of 21 December 1995
submitted pursuant to its resolution 1019 (1995) of

 

9 November 1995 on Croatia and in particular the
humanitarian situation and human rights violations
described therein.
"The Security Council strongly condemns the
violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights in the former sectors North and South in
the Republic of Croatia, as described in the report of
the Secretary-General, including killings of several
hundreds of civilians, systematic and widespread
looting and arson and other forms of destruction of
property. The Council expresses its deep concern that
there is a considerable discrepancy between the
number of perpetrators that have so far been brought
to justice and the number of reported violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights. The
Council urges the Government of the Republic of
Croatia to make every effort to arrest all perpetrators
and bring them promptly to trial.

"The Security Council is disturbed by the
humanitarian and security situation of the mostly
elderly Serb population who have remained in the
former sectors in the Republic of Croatia. The Council
is gravely concerned at the information contained in
the report on continuing extensive harassment and
intimidation, looting of property and other forms of
abuse. It reaffirms once again its demand that the
Government of the Republic of Croatia take urgent
measures to stop all such acts immediately and calls
on the Government of the Republic of Croatia to
provide urgently needed food, medical assistance and
proper shelter to the Serb population.

"The Security Council reaffirms that all those
who commit violations of international humanitarian
law will be held individually responsible in respect of
such acts. It recalls with dismay the failure to date of
the Government of the Republic of Croatia to transfer
to the custody of the International Tribunal established
pursuant to its resolution 827 (1993) persons indicted
by the Tribunal and expresses its concern at the recent
appointment of one of those indicted to a position in
the Croatian army. The Council reiterates that all
States must cooperate fully with the International
Tribunal and its organs.

"The Security Council expresses its deep concern
at the situation of the refugees from the Republic of
Croatia who wish to return. The Council shares the
Secretary-General's view that the rights of the
members of the Serb population who fled during the

military operation to return to their homes in safety
and dignity are being severely curtailed by the
absence of constructive measures to facilitate their
return. The Council reaffirms its demand that the
Government of the Republic of Croatia respect fully
the rights of the members of the local Serb
population, including their right to remain, leave or
return in safety, and demands that that Government
create conditions conducive to the return of those
persons and urgently establish procedures to
facilitate the processing of requests by persons
wishing to return. It also urges the Government of
the Republic of Croatia to refrain from any measure
which would adversely affect the exercise of the
right to return.

"The Security Council reaffirms its call on the
Republic of Croatia to lift any time-limits placed on
the return of refugees to reclaim their property. It
notes the decision of the Government of the
Republic of Croatia of 27 December 1995 to
suspend the deadline set in the relevant Croatian law
as a step in the right direction. The Council will
follow closely whether the Republic of Croatia will
lift any such time-limit in a definitive manner.

"The Security Council takes note with
appreciation of the decision of the Government of
the Republic of Croatia of 30 December 1995 to
suspend criminal proceedings against and release
455 local Serbs detained on suspicion of armed
rebellion. The Council calls on the Government of
the Republic of Croatia to take the appropriate
measures to ensure that the right to a fair trial of
those Serbs who remained and have been arrested
and accused of war crimes or armed rebellion is
safeguarded.

"The Security Council affirms that it is
necessary to ensure that the rights of persons
belonging to the Serb minority are adequately
safeguarded in the legal and constitutional
framework of the Republic of Croatia. It urges the
Government of Croatia to rescind its decision to
suspend several articles of the 'Constitutional Law
on Human Rights and Freedoms and the Rights of
National and Ethnic Communities in the Republic of
Croatia' as described in the report of the
Secretary-General. The Council stresses that strict
respect for the rights of persons belonging to the
Serb minority will also be of great importance to the
implementation of the Basic Agreement of 12
 

November 1995 on the Region of Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium (S/1995/951, annex).

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to keep the Council regularly
informed on the progress of measures taken by the
Government of the Republic of Croatia to implement
resolution 1019 (1995) and the demands set out in this
statement, requests the Secretary-General to report to
it no later than 15 February 1996 on this matter and
expresses its intention to act as appropriate.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1996/2.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 11.55 am.

