Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
today's briefers.
Clearly, Somalia continues to face significant
challenges on its path towards building a safe, stable
and prosperous State. We strongly condemn recent
attacks by Al-Shabaab and other terrorist elements and
express our full support for the Somali Government,
the African Union and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) in that fight. We are pleased that
progress is under way through political, security and
constitutional reform efforts with support from the
United Nations, the African Union and international
partners. Advancing the implementation of those
reforms offers the country the greatest hope for
sustainable stability and economic growth. We note
that none of those reforms would be possible without
the contributions and sacrifices of AMISOM. troop- and
police-contributing members, which have provided the
Federal Government of Somalia the necessary space
and stability for the Government to develop the national
security architecture and implement those reforms.

The transfer of security responsibilities from
the African Union Mission in Somalia to the Somali
national security forces is a top priority. We urge
the Federal Government of Somalia to continue the
efforts to generate and deploy security forces that will
allow for a timely and orderly implementation of the
transition plan. We underscore the need for all parties
to coordinate closely to avoid security coverage gaps
that could be exploited by malign actors.

With regard to Somalia's 2020-2021 elections, we
urge the Government to finalize its draft electoral law
to define a fair and transparent electoral system. We
also emphasize the need for close coordination among
the Government, AMISOM. and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia to ensure voter security
at each stage of the electoral preparation.

Concerning constitutional reform, we stress that
long-term political stability depends on defining the
relationships and divisions of power and responsibility
between the Federal Government of Somalia and federal
member states. As such, we urge all governmental
stakeholders to come together and finalize this
critical reform.

With regard to the arms embargo, we have
encouraged Somalia to engage productively with the
Panel of Experts on Somalia and will continue to do so.
Somalia appears to believe that the Security Council
will eventually lift the sanctions despite a lack of
engagement with the Panel. The United States will
not support that view, which does nothing to address
the problems that the sanction regime was designed
to address and, indeed, undermines the actions of the
Security Council.

Finally, as noted by Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller, the ongoing humanitarian crisis affecting
more than 5 million Somalis is an important backdrop
to the political and security reforms that we have
discussed. Since 2018, the United States has provided
more than $487 million in humanitarian assistance.
We are working with the United Nations and other
partners to provide critical food and nutrition
assistance for nearly 1.5 million people across Somalia.
We encourage continued international support on the
humanitarian front.

