Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: The Council meets
again amid continued regional unrest, with a volatile
situation in Egypt, a fragile Lebanon and ongoing
turmoil in Syria. The Secretary-General has issued
two statements in recent days regarding the situation
in Egypt, and the Deputy Secretary-General briefed
Council members last Thursday. The developments
in Egypt and their regional implications continue to
be of great concern and merit our close attention. In
the period under review, we also witnessed a small
but important opening for peace with the launch, last
month, of resumed direct talks between Israelis and
Palestinians. It has long been the belief of the United
Nations that progress on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
could have a positive impact on regional stability. That
has become all the more critical in recent weeks against
the backdrop of such troubling developments elsewhere
in the region.

Efforts led by the United States Secretary of
State over a four-month period culminated in a series
of preparatory meetings between the negotiators in
Washington, DC, on 29 and 30 July, where parties
agreed on an agenda that would cover all core final
status issues and to working towards a comprehensive
agreement within nine months. Those meetings were
followed by a first formal round of talks in Jerusalem
on 14 August, after the release of 26 pre-Oslo prisoners
from Gaza and the West Bank, based on an Israeli
Cabinet decision of 29 July. A second round took place
between negotiators today in Jericho. In its statement
of 30 July, the Quartet welcomed the resumption of
talks and reiterated its members' shared commitment
to helping the parties achieve a negotiated two-State
solution within the agreed time frame. Quartet envoys
intend to meet soon to discuss next steps.

It is against that background that the Secretary-
General travelled to the region - to Jordan, Palestine
and Israel - on 15 and 16 August to lend his personal
support to the leaders on both sides. He has been
encouraged by the seriousness of the efforts to bring
the parties to the negotiating table after a prolonged
political stalemate, and he has praised the determination
of United States Secretary of State Kerry in that regard.
He also welcomed the appointment of United States
special envoy for Israeli-Palestinian Negotiations,
Mr. Martin Indyk. He was particularly heartened
by the bold decision of President Abbas and Prime
Minister Netanyahu to embark on direct dialogue,
which remains the single most credible path to a
solution. The Secretary-General found both Palestinian
and Israeli leaderships recommitted to the vision of a
two-State solution, which is clearly in the best interest
of both peoples. His own message was that this is an
opportunity neither could afford to miss. It is his firm
belief that direct negotiations are the only way through
which Palestinians can realize their rightful aspirations
for an independent and viable Palestinian State, and
Israelis can meet their legitimate security needs and
finally become a crucial partner in the development of
a stable and prosperous Middle East.

The Secretary-General continues to believe
that a two-State solution can be achieved through
negotiations that resolve permanent status issues such
as borders, security, refugees and Jerusalem. For those
negotiations to have a chance at success, they need to
be meaningful, with a clear political horizon, and yield
early dividends in the immediate period ahead.

The Secretary-General recognizes that the road
ahead is fraught with obstacles. He has nevertheless
appealed to political leaders on both sides, as well
as to Palestinian and Israeli youth, to overcome their
deep scepticism and embolden their leaders in efforts
to shape the better future their peoples deserve. It is
incumbent opon regional and international stakeholders
to help the parties carry those efforts forward. Both
sides now need to sustain an environment conducive
to the peace process moving forward. The parties
must refrain from actions that would risk undermining
prospects during the negotiations, and there have to be
visible improvements in the situation on the ground.
The reporting period witnessed a decrease in search
and arrest operations conducted by Israeli security
forces; 229 such operations in the West Bank resulted
in 276 Palestinians arrested. A total of 88 Palestinian
civilians were injured by Israeli forces, including 20
children and 5 women. Two Israeli soldiers were injured
by Palestinians. However, in a worrisome development,
on 19 August, 39 Palestinians, including 18 children,
were forcibly evicted and their homes were destroyed in
what appears to be a significant increase in demolitions
in East Jerusalem during the reporting period. At least
six other structures were also demolished today in Area
C.

As reported last month, the Israeli authorities
implemented a number of measures aimed at easing
access for Palestinians from the rest of the West
Bank to East Jerusalem during the holy month of
Ramadan. Israeli authorities also partially opened the
historic access road into Hebron city from the south to
Palestinian traffic, which had been closed for the last
12 years, citing security concerns for nearby settlers.
Though limited, such measures represent important
steps forward at this crucial moment in the political
process. The Secretary-General was encouraged by
indications from the Israeli authorities of additional
measures in the planning to further ease restrictions on
Palestinian movement and access, whether of people or
goods.

At the same time, the Secretary-General remained
deeply troubled by Israel's continuing settlement
activity in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
referencing recent announcements of the approval of
some 2,000 housing units. The position of the United
Nations on settlements being against international law
remains firm. Furthermore, settlement activity deepens
mistrust, undermines efforts to advance peace and will
ultimately render a two-State solution impossible.

Continued settler violence is also disconcerting. On
25 July, Israeli settlers set fire to about 100 Palestinian-
owned olive trees in the village of Mikhmas, near
Ramallah. Such violent attacks undermine the
livelihoods of communities across the West Bank. I
urge the Israeli authorities to ensure that all measures
are taken ahead of the olive harvest later next month
to protect Palestinians and their property and enable
Palestinian access to their land to maintain their crops
year-round.

The Secretary-General has welcomed the Israeli
Cabinet's decision on the release of pre-Oslo prisoners.
He nevertheless remains concerned about the fate
of some 5,000 Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails,
especially those on hunger strike - of which there are
currently 10, after 4 Jordanians ended their strike - and
those in administrative detention, who should be either
tried or released.

In Ramallah, the Secretary-General met with
the newly reappointed Palestinian Prime Minister,
Rami Hamdallah, who was asked by President Abbas
on 15 August to form a new Government within five
weeks. He reiterated the United Nations commitment to
ensuring the development of Palestinian communities in
the West Bank and Gaza deserving of economic growth
and recovery, with access to land, sea and resources.
He further supported efforts to shore up the Palestinian
economy and safeguard the important State-building
achievements, issues that will be addressed in next
month's meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians.

On the occasion of his visit, the Palestinian
Authority and the United Nations signed the first-ever
United Nations development assistance framework for
the State of Palestine. Describing the collective United
Nations response to national development priorities,
the framework places the Palestinian people at the
centre of development programming and empowers
people to exercise human rights, enjoy access to basic
services and achieve their right to an adequate standard
of living.

The calm in Gaza has been tentative, with six
projectiles shot at Israel, acts that we strongly condemn.
Two Israeli incursions and one air strike were recorded
during the reporting period. One Palestinian was
killed while attempting to infiltrate Israel through
the fence in the north-east of Al-Bureij refugee camp
on 10 August, and six others were injured in similar
situations, including three at sea. Three Palestinians
were arrested on 17 August while attempting to swim
towards Israel west of Beit Lahia. We call on Israel to
show maximum restraint in such situations and make
every effort to protect Palestinian civilians.

Gaza remains a high priority for the United Nations
and must not be forgotten in the context of a resumed
peace process. Despite early negative reactions, we
express the hope that the Hamas de facto authorities
will not hamper efforts to achieve the two-State
solution, which is the only opportunity for achieving
lasting peace and ending the isolation ofthe Gaza Strip.

As a result of political developments in Egypt,
access through Rafah has been restricted for security
reasons. Combined with the long-standing restrictions
on the free movement of people and goods via Israel,
such measures have continued to have an adverse impact
on the civilian population, including by limiting access
to health care for some of the most vulnerable patients
in Gaza and resulting in shortages in key medical
supplies. The continued robust measures undertaken by
the Egyptian authorities against illegal activity through
tunnels into Gaza have also affected the availability of
key commodities, in particular construction materials.

Access through legal crossings has therefore
become all the more critical. The Secretary-General
has seriously engaged relevant partners, including the
Israeli authorities, at the request of the Palestinian
Government, on further increasing access through legal
crossings and in particular on liberalizing access of
construction materials into Gaza. We are hopeful that
positive steps in that regard will be taken soon. Such
steps would further solidify the November ceasefire
understanding, which calls for the lifting of closures
and addressing of Israel's security concerns.

In the latest incident in the Sinai peninsula,
yesterday we witnessed alarming news of an ambush on
two minibuses, which killed 25 Egyptian police officers.
The Secretary-General condemned the ambush, and
the United Nations hopes that the perpetrators will be
swiftly identified and brought to justice.

In a separate yet troubling development, three
missiles were shot on the night of 12 August at the
resort city of Eilat. Two missiles were intercepted by
the Iron Dome system and no damage was reported.
A terror group named Ansar Bayt Al-Maqdis claimed
responsibility for the attack. Such shootings are
unacceptable and condemned in the strongest terms.

Let me turn to the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, where bloodshed continues unabated. The
Government forces continue to use indiscriminate
shelling and air strikes against densely populated
civilian areas, with absolute disregard for the protection
of civilians. For their part, armed opposition groups
also continue to fail in their obligation to protect
civilians, and many continue to engage in military
operations within populated areas. Both warring sides
also continue to commit acts of torture, abduction and
kidnapping, at times along sectarian lines.
It is critical that both sides be reminded of their
obligations under international human rights and
humanitarian law. It is important that all efforts be
made to ensure that those committing international
crimes, regardless of their rank, position or affiliation,
will be held accountable.

Reports of military confrontations and displacement
throughout the country along sectarian lines threaten to
further unravel the social fabric of Syrian society. We
are very concerned about incidents of kidnappings of
clerics and of civilians in general. The continued influx
of foreign fighters exacerbates sectarian and ethnic
tensions and must be brought to an end.

Meanwhile, in the absence of a long-called-for
political solution, humanitarian needs are growing
by the minute, outpacing our efforts to respond. Well
above 6.8 million Syrians now depend on humanitarian
assistance. More than 4 million Syrians are estimated
to be displaced inside their own country, and nearly
2 million Syrians are now registered and/or assisted
as refugees in Syria's neighbouring countries. Over
the past few days, the world has watched with grave
concern the exodus of over 20,000 people from north-
eastern Syria into Iraq.

Access to those in need continues to be a challenge.
The United Nations and our humanitarian partners
count on the Security Council to assist in facilitating
access to all those in need inside Syria and neighbouring
countries.

The position of the Secretary-General remains
unchanged: there is no military solution to the conflict.
The legitimate demands of the Syrian people for
freedom and dignity will not be silenced by arms.
Recent military victories by Government forces should
not give the Government false confidence that it can
win militarily. Likewise, promises of arms should
not push the opposition towards different priorities or
expectations other than a political solution. What is
urgently needed is a political solution. In that regard,
we continue to do our best to endeavour that the Geneva
Conference takes place as soon as possible. Technical
preparations are almost complete. We hope that the
entire international community will remain committed
to the process and contribute to its success, in word and
in action.

The Secretary-General remains gravely concerned
at the reports of alleged use of chemical weapons in
Syria. The United Nations mission to investigate
allegations ofthe use of chemical weapons in the Syrian
Arab Republic, led by Mr. Ake Sellstrom, arrived in
Damascus on Sunday, 18 August and began its work
yesterday. As agreed with the Government, the team
will conduct its activities in the country for a period
of up to 14 days, extendable by mutual consent. The
mission will contemporaneously investigate the alleged
use of chemical weapons reported by the Government of
Syria in Khan Al-Asal and two other allegations of the
use of chemical weapons reported by Member States.
The names of those two sites have been conveyed to
the Syrian authorities following their acceptance of the
modalities of the conduct of the mission. In parallel,
the two parties will discuss other allegations and their
related sites.

On the Golan, the situation remains volatile, with
intense shelling and heavy clashes between the Syrian
armed forces and armed members of the opposition
occurring inside the area of separation. From
17 August, clashes intensified in the area of separation,
in particular, near United Nations positions 68 and 69,
which forced peacekeepers at those positions to take
shelter. No injuries to United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) personnel were reported,
although indirect fire caused damage to those United
Nations positions. On the same day, Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) fired at least two guided missiles from
the Alpha side across the ceasefire line, in response to
earlier fire from the Bravo side that crossed the ceasefire
line. UNDOF observed the continued presence of
roadblocks with improvised explosive devices (IEDs)
in the vicinity of two United Nations positions and a
United Nations observation post, which affects the
freedom of movement of UNDOF personnel. Incidents
of threatening behaviour against UNDOF personnel
from armed members of the opposition were also
reported. On 12 August, two UNDOF vehicles were
fired upon by an unidentified gunman. There were no
injuries to troops or damage to either vehicle.

In Lebanon, the relative calm during the reporting
period ended tragically with the devastating bomb
explosion on 15 August in the Beirut suburb of
Rouweiss, in which at least 24 people were killed and
more than 300 injured. The Secretary-General strongly
condemned the bombing - the deadliest such incident
since 2005 - stressing the international community's
continued support for Lebanon and urging all Lebanese
to remain united, rally around their State institutions
and safeguard their country's security and stability.
President Sleiman convened the Higher Defence
Council, which called for apprehending "those behind
terrorist attacks in Lebanon". A previously unknown
group, the Brigades of Aisha, claimed responsibility
and threatened further attacks.
Other security incidents included the firing on
1 August of two rockets in the Yarze suburb of Beirut,
where the Presidential Palace and Defense Ministry
are located. On 4 August, the explosion of an IED
uncovered at least 18 more ready-to-use IEDs, maps
and future targets. On 18 August, the discovery of a
vehicle containing 250 kilograms of explosives in
Naameh, south of Beirut, led to the arrest of four people
in connection with a car bombing ring.

The Syrian crisis continued to affect Lebanon's
stability, especially in the border areas. On 18 August,
five rockets struck Hermel without casualties. On
11 August, the mayor of Arsal was hurt when his
convoy came under fire in the town of Al-Labweh. On
8 August, the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) arrested
three gunmen attempting to cross the border via Arsal,
confiscating weapons and a suicide vest. On 9 August,
two Turkish pilots were kidnapped on the road from
Beirut International Airport in an incident believed
to be linked to the abduction of Lebanese pilgrims in
Syria.

Despite the efforts of Prime Minister-designate
Salam, progress in forming a Government has yet to be
seen. However, a 2 August decree to renew the term of
the LAF Commander and the Chief of Staff for two years
helped ensure institutional continuity in the Army. In a
speech on Army Day, President Sleiman stated that the
Army's duty will be difficult if one or more Lebanese
actors were involved in extraterritorial conflicts,
thereby causing external crises to be imported.

The area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) remained generally calm,
despite almost daily Israeli violations of Lebanese
airspace. UNIFIL, in coordination with the parties, is
investigating the circumstances of an explosion in the
Labouneh area, north of the Blue Line, on 7 August,
in which four Israel Defense Forces personnel were
reportedly injured. Preliminary findings confirm
the presence of the IDF at the location, in violation
of the Blue Line and in breach of the terms of the
cessation of hostilities and of resolution 1701 (2006).
In a letter dated 14 August, Lebanon protested the
incident. Determination is pending as to whether any
other violation, such as the presence of unauthorized
weapons or armed personnel, was involved. Hizbullah
chief Hassan Nasrallah publicly claimed responsibility
for the explosions, stating that Hizbullah fighters
planted and detonated bombs as part of a controlled and
deliberate operation.

In conclusion, despite an ever-challenging regional
environment, we are finally observing long-awaited
movement in the peace process in the form of direct
negotiations. Let me stress our hope that such efforts
mark a first opportunity to overcome the recent years
of shared frustration at the political deadlock. Last
week, we witnessed a promising opening in the efforts
under way to develop a meaningful political initiative
on the Israeli-Palestinian issue. We have now reached a
decisive point. The test will be for both sides to go the
distance and not disappoint their peoples. Now is also
the moment to translate our collective call for action
into a shared sense of urgency as leaders on both sides
must realize that they have an opening that they cannot
afford to lose. The Secretary-General and the United

Nations, together with the Quartet, will continue to
provide all possible support to their efforts.

