Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to thank Under-Secretary-General
Herve' Ladsous for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation in Afghanistan and the vital role played by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in supporting the Afghan national
authorities. I also thank Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime for his briefing on the impact of drug trafficking
and organized crime on the stability and development
of that country.

The national perspective outlined by Ambassador
Tanin was of very useful to us, and I thank him for his
statement.

Despite the major challenges that persist, the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/462) notes
positive and encouraging developments in the security
transition, human development and the building of
institutional frameworks in Afghanistan. At the political
level, the appointment of Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani as
Chair of the High Peace Council, the approval of the
Afghan Government by Parliament, the confirmation
of Mr. Abdul Malek Kamawi to the Supreme Court,
and efforts to strengthen the electoral framework are
all significant and welcome developments.

At the regional level, we note the ongoing dynamic
of cooperation and mutual confidence-building
that was launched at the Istanbul conference and
bolstered by such specific actions as the strategic
partnership agreement between India and Afghanistan;
the framework agreement between Turkmenistan,
Afghanistan, Pakistan and India on the transport of gas;
the establishment of two working groups responsible
for facilitating peace efforts; and, of course, agreed
confidence-building measures. We welcome efforts to
strengthen border security and the fight against drug
trafficking, organized crime and illegal migration.
These developments allow us to hope for a stable,
reconciled and democratic Afghanistan enjoying the
support of the international community.

Despite significant improvements in the security
situation thanks to the launching of the third
transition phase, ongoing targeted assassinations, the
use of improvised explosive devices, and attacks on
educational institutions by armed groups are a source
of concern. In particular, given the trend - stressed
earlier by Mr. Ladsous - of a fall in the number of
incidents and a rise in the number of victims, we hope
that an increase in the ranks of the national and local
police, including by adding women, will help to reduce
the number of innocent victims and lower the number
of internally displaced persons and refugees.

The humanitarian situation, which is a direct
consequence of the security situation, requires our
full attention as it affects an extremely vulnerable
and impoverished population. We regret the constant
rise in the number of displaced persons. The situation
requires the international community and humanitarian
actors working in that country - to whom we pay
tribute - to deploy sustained efforts to continue to
mitigate the suffering of the Afghan people.

Next month will see the holding of the Tokyo
conference on Afghanistan. That meeting gives rise
to great hope, not just for the Afghan people, but for
the entire region. It will offer the opportunity to the
international community as a whole to reaffirm its
multidimensional commitment to bringing peace,
stability and development to Afghanistan in order
to prepare it to stand on its own two feet. We must
ensure that the conference meets the expectations and
requirements of the situation, as well as the aspirations
of the Afghan people.

