Mr. Park In-Kook (Republic of Korea): I would
like to take this opportunity to strongly condemn the
indiscriminate violence that struck Mumbai through a
series of ugly and odious terrorist acts. On behalf of
the Government and people of the Republic of Korea, I
would also like to convey our deepest condolences to
the victims, their families, the Government of India
and its people. We wish the injured a speedy recovery.

Despite the strengthened efforts of the
international community, terrorism has continued to
plague countries across the globe and remains a great
concern to the international community. It hinders the
reconstruction and stabilization of war-torn countries
and the well-being of all people. Further, the increasing
links between terrorism and transnational crime are
also alarming. Strengthening law enforcement in
capturing and dismantling terrorist organizations and
improving the capacity of States to prevent and combat
terrorism are important elements in countering the
threat of terrorism.

Moreover, addressing the conditions conducive to
the spread of terrorism would contribute to
strengthening the international response to the scourge
of terrorism as underlined in the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In this regard, measures
such as the easing of socio-economic marginalization,
the promotion of dialogue among civilizations and the
integration of ethnic and religious minorities would
complement the efforts of the international community
to counter terrorism in a sustainable manner.

Strongly convinced that terrorism should be
eradicated regardless of its forms and motivations, the
Republic of Korea is fully committed to preventing and
combating acts of terrorism and its misguided
extremist ideology. To this end, the Government of the
Republic of Korea is actively participating in
international efforts by faithfully implementing
Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001), 1267 (1999)
and 1540 (2004). It also joins other efforts such as the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.

In order to effectively respond to terrorist threats,
comprehensive and systematic counter-terrorism efforts
are required at the global level. In this regard, the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
offers a solid basis for international counter-terrorism
cooperation. The Republic of Korea strongly supports
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the complete implementation of the four pillars of
the Strategy.

The Strategy also emphasizes coordinated joint
efforts by encouraging Member States and
international and regional organizations to support its
implementation through mobilizing resources and
expertise. The harmonization of counter-terrorism
measures and the exchange of best practices of various
regions and Member States is an important element in
the effort to cope with terrorism.

It is time now to make another serious attempt,
together with the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, to
adopt a comprehensive convention on international
terrorism that would reinforce the legal network to
prevent international terrorism. In an effort to
strengthen legal instruments, it is also essential for all
Member States to become party to the relevant
international conventions and protocols relating to
terrorism and to assist each other in doing so. In this
regard, the Republic of Korea has ratified 12 United
Nations counter-terrorism conventions and signed the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism.

The United Nations actions to counter terrorism
are continuously evolving to adapt to constantly
changing threats. The United Nations concentrates its
efforts on devising a harmonized international
framework that ensures effectiveness, efficiency and
continuous improvement. The United Nations should
keep playing a central role in these well established
mechanisms of international counter-terrorism
cooperation. Greater interaction and complementary
cooperation between the Security Council and the
General Assembly should be continuously promoted to
ensure synergy in the efforts of the United Nations to
counter the threat of terrorism.

The recent terrorist attacks in Mumbai and
frequent attacks elsewhere in the world have
demonstrated only too clearly that terrorism is an
indiscriminate affront to universal values and
civilizations. Terrorism cannot be linked to a particular
nationality, religion, civilization or culture. It is simply
a common threat we are facing, which requires
solidarity in the international community.

