Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for bringing yet another
critical issue to the attention of the Security Council.
Climate change is an existential challenge, and its
adverse and transboundary impacts on the economy,
health and the environment pose major threats for
future generations.

Climate change-related disasters have become
an underlying cause of social instability in recent
decades, by contributing to large-scale displacements.
Environmental degradation and competition over
resources continue to play a critical role in conflicts
in many regions. They also halt progress on security,
stability and development. The International
Organization for Migration estimates that the number
of people who might be forced to migrate due to
environmental degradation by 2050 could be as high
as 200 million. Climate-related disasters caused
thousands of deaths in 2017 and a loss of $320 billion.
There is no doubt that those figures will put further
pressure on host countries for the displaced and create
new challenges for the existing legal frameworks for
displacement and migration. Those facts oblige us to
reflect on the consequential economic and security
implications of climate change.

The Caribbean and Pacific regions are heavily and
increasingly affected by climate change and related
security consequences, despite having made almost no
contribution to global warming. Slow-onset hazards,
such as increasing sea levels and extreme weather-
related disasters, endanger the very existence of small
island developing States. Those circumstances also
have critical impacts on the sustenance of people who
are mostly engaged in fishing, forestry or agriculture.
There is an urgent need to establish and adapt
systematic and comprehensive resilience-building tools
for those countries. Those mechanisms must address
the risks of social and political instability and conflicts
that arise from the interaction of climate change and
sociopolitical factors. The transfer of technology and
know-how to those countries is an urgent necessity.
The capacities of local populations and national
Governments should be strengthened with policies
and strategies that will enable them to better cope with
the devastating effects of climate-related disasters.
Turkey is willing and ready to contribute to such
efforts. Through its humanitarian and development
agencies, Turkey prioritizes assisting countries that
have been critically affected by extreme weather events
and disasters, which cause a heavy toll on people's
livelihoods, by delivering mobile hospitals and aid
materials and deploying search-and-rescue teams.

Turkey, too, is located in a vulnerable region
with respect to climate change. The region is severely
affected by global warming, which has caused a
decrease in precipitation and a rise in drought and land
degradation - 2017 was the driest year in the past 44
years. Consequently, Turkey is expected to become a
water-stressed country by 2030. Turkey has pursued
a firm position on climate change. In an attempt
to provide its citizens with a low-carbon-intensity
environment, Turkey strives to integrate global climate
change-related objectives in its development policies,
disseminate energy efficiency, increase the use of clean
and renewable energy resources and actively participate
in the global efforts to tackle climate change.

As the Secretary-General has been strongly
warning, climate change is the defining issue of our
time and is running faster than we are. Combating
climate change and related disasters requires global
cooperation and equitable burden-sharing. The
entry into force of the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change and the approval of its rulebook are surely
significant achievements. Turkey actively contributed
to the negotiations with a View to reaching a successful
agreement. Nevertheless, the Paris Agreement can be
successfully implemented only if it is based on the
principles ofcommon but differentiated responsibilities,
respective capabilities and equity. Turkey, as a country
facing critical vulnerabilities related to climate change,
remains committed to implementing the necessary
measures to protect our planet and overcome those
challenges on equal terms with countries with similar
development levels.
Today's debate has reconfirmed the diverse linkages
between climate change, on the one hand, and peace
and security, on the other hand. No nation is immune
to the related challenges. Therefore, we need to work in
unity in facing them. We thank the Dominican Republic
presidency for focusing on this important issue.

