Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica): I have the honour to
address the Council on behalf of the informal group of
like-minded countries that has taken a specific interest
in the question of fair and clear procedures in targeted
sanctions. That group currently includes Austria,
Belgium, Costa Rica, Denmark, Finland, Germany,
Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and
Switzerland.

I will concentrate my remarks on the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, in particular the
question of improving fair and clear procedures and
thereby also strengthening the effectiveness of the
sanctions regime. I should underline that the group
fully supports and recognizes the application of
targeted sanctions as a useful and necessary tool to
effectively combat international terrorism.

11-3390]
The issue at hand is how to ensure that the
Council and its Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions
Committee can continue to take effective and decisive
action in the face of terrorism while at the same time
honouring fundamental rule-of-law and due process
guarantees. Our common obligation to implement
decisions made by the Council coexists with our
obligation to respect fundamental human rights. As is
well known, the current sanctions regime continues to
face legal challenges, including by proceedings in
national and regional courts. That not only poses
challenges for Member States, but also creates the risk
of diluting the perceived authority vested in the
Security Council.

Those challenges are not a phenomenon that is
specific to one particular region alone. Individuals are
pursuing their right to challenge their designation in
regional and national courts around the globe. The
efficiency of the sanctions regime and the protection of
human rights are of global concern. The strengthening
of the system has to be pursued on a global level.

The like-minded countries welcome the
successive improvements that have been made to the
1267 sanctions regime so far, notably the establishment
of the focal point, the introduction of narrative
summaries and the comprehensive review undertaken
and followed by detailed periodic reviews of the
consolidated list and the various categories of listings.
Most importantly, we see the establishment of the
Office of the Ombudsperson as a major step forward.
In this regard, we wish to commend the work that
Judge Kimberly Prost has already undertaken.
However, we believe that still more can and needs to
be done.

It is against this background, and with a view to
the adoption of the follow-up to resolution 1904 (2009)
in mid-June, that we sent a letter to the President of the
Council early in April outlining several proposals that
we believe would merit close consideration by the
Council in its continued efforts to improve and
strengthen the system. This letter has been distributed
as an annex to the written version of this statement. In
the interest of time, I will briefly highlight only some
of the proposals.

A key proposal is to introduce a time limit for all
listings. A set time limit would underline the
preventive and temporary nature of the sanctions
measures. It could also have implications for the level
of applicable due process requirements. We would like
to stress that the proposed sunset clause would not
result in automatic de-listings once the time limit has
expired. The Council and its sanctions committee
would retain the prerogative of maintaining a name on
the list upon review, but by affirmative decision. We
call on the Council to seriously consider introducing
such time limits for listings.

Secondly, a fundamental element of due process
is that the listed individual or entity be given access to
sufficient information to present an effective defence.
Much has already been achieved with the introduction
of narrative summaries of reasons for listings. Both the
narrative summaries and other information given to a
petitioner should be as detailed and comprehensive as
possible, which presupposes that States have provided
the Committee with such information. Upon request,
the Committee should, after consultation with the
designating State, inform the petitioner through the
Ombudsperson about the identity of the designating
State. We encourage the Council to look into every
possibility for improving its information base and the
petitioner's legitimate access to such information.

A third element that I would like to highlight is
the need for the enhanced cooperation of States with
the Ombudsperson, which is particularly relevant with
regard to access to information. Legal and practical
ways should be actively explored to allow the
Ombudsperson access to all relevant information
regarding a particular listing. We encourage the
Council to make express provisions in the upcoming
resolution for Member States' full cooperation with the
Ombudsperson.

The like-minded group also proposed a series of
improvements regarding the procedures for de-listing.
Important in themselves, these improvements would
also serve to further counter the argument that listing is
a one-way street. For instance, the Committee should
take its de-listing decisions by majority vote. In cases
where, in the view of the Ombudsperson, the retention
of a list entry is no longer founded, the Ombudsperson
should be competent to recommend de-listing.

Absent the Committee's decision within 30 days
to confirm the entry on the list, the entry should be de-
listed. The sanctions committee would retain its full
prerogative of deciding whether to maintain a name on
the list or not. In cases where a de-listing request has
been rejected, it is proposed that the Committee
provide reasons for its decision to be transmitted to the
petitioner through the Ombudsperson and the States
concerned.

Let me conclude by making some general
remarks. Our proposals are not intended to question the
legitimacy or prerogatives of the Security Council. On
the contrary, the proposals would serve to better
safeguard the credibility and efficiency of its work by
enabling the Council to continue to assert its powers
while advancing fundamental due process principles.
The overarching goal is to strengthen the current
system. Improving the fairness and clarity of the
procedures would be conducive to a more efficient
implementation of the sanctions regime by Member
States. Rendering the system more sustainable would
enhance the authority of the Council and that of the
Organization as whole.

The like-minded countries wish to continue a
constructive dialogue with the Council and are grateful
for the interest already expressed by so many of its
members. We look forward to fruitful negotiations in
June leading to significant improvements to enhance
fair and clear procedures in the 1267 sanctions regime.

I would now like to make some very brief
comments in my national capacity.

(spoke in Spanish)

Costa Rica supports the comprehensive approach
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy approved by the General Assembly in
September 2006, which explicitly acknowledges as part
of the Strategy the relevance of the protection of
human rights and the rule of law. Costa Rica believes
that one of the major institutional challenges to the
United Nation system is achieving a consistent policy
that does not seek to organize human rights and
counter-terrorism into a hierarchy.

With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), I would like to
focus on two additional aspects.

First, despite the major progress made, we still
believe that the final aim must be to establish an
independent review mechanism. Secondly, we believe
that it is appropriate to make public the identity of each
designating State. To the extent that there is
appropriate transparency in that regard, each
designating State will have additional reasons to justify
its requests for listing and bear responsibility for them.

11-3390]
Costa Rica reiterates its commitment to
implementing all resolutions of the Security Council
that seek to combat terrorism in all of its
manifestations. We trust that these regimes will be
strengthened by means of procedures that are
increasingly fair and just.

