Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Tanin for his briefing and for all
the good work that he and his team do on the ground.
I also want to thank Ambassador Citaku and Foreign
Minister Daeie for their participation today.

The United States strongly supports Kosovo, its
independence, its sovereignty and its integration with
Europe and the broader international community.
Given the reality of Kosovo's independence, which is
recognized by the majority of States Members of the
United Nations, we call on Serbia and Kosovo to work
with the utmost determination towards lasting peace
and reconciliation.

The United States underscores its support for the
Brussels dialogue. We greatly appreciate the European
Union (EU) for its leadership in that effort. The EU's
continuing engagement and guidance will ensure that
both countries make progress towards the normalization
of Kosovo-Serbian relations. We urge the leaders of
both sides to seize this opportunity to demonstrate true
political will and to work together to reach agreement

as soon as possible.

Normalization demands that both countries
follow through with the full implementation of their
commitments under the Brussels dialogue. We welcome
Kosovo's launch of the process to form the association
of Serb-majority municipalities, and we look forward
to continued work in cooperating on that important
and long-overdue task. We also look to Serbia to
fully cooperate and to engage in order to finalize the
implementation of the energy agreement. The long
delays with regard to the agreement have negative
effects not only for ordinary citizens in Kosovo but also
throughout the region and Europe.

The United States commends Kosovo's ratification
of the agreement on border demarcation with
Montenegro, which represents a political milestone
and a key step towards full visa liberalization with the
European Union for the benefit of all Kosovo citizens.
However, the United States joins the Secretary-General
in expressing concern over the increased tensions
between Belgrade and Pristina, which can undermine
efforts to maintain regional stability and the safety
of citizens in both Kosovo and Serbia. The 26 March
events surrounding the arrest of Marko Djurie in
Mitrovica are an example of that. We urge all parties to
avoid provocation and to focus on normalizing relations
through dialogue.

Additionally, we note with concern the increased
tension in the Kosovo Serb community following the
killing of the Kosovo Serb politician Oliver Ivanovie.
We continue to support a full and impartial investigation
by Kosovo's institutions and call on them to work with
urgency and with Serbia's full cooperation so as to
bring the perpetrators to justice. We also urge Serbian
institutions to investigate the threats against Kosovo
Serbs who have joined the Kosovo security forces and
are making an important public-service contribution.
Rhetorical threats and legal actions against the Kosovo
Serbs who have integrated into Kosovo's institutions
are contrary to the spirit of the dialogue and must cease.

As we have stated before, the Council must take
corrective action on its outdated approach to the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). The Mission is long overdue for
drawdown and closure. The upcoming negotiations in
the Fifth Committee on mission budgets will serve as
a reminder of the Security Council's critical need to
instil fiscal discipline, responsibility and leadership in
the United Nations. The nearly $38 million requested
for the UNMIK operations does not make sense. While
we appreciate the work of Special Representative Tanin
and his team, UNMIK continues to live past its purpose,
and we must wind it down. The reporting period for
UNMIK should be extended to 6 or 12 months, with
fewer meetings of the Council. The Council spends
as much, or more, time on UNMIK as it does on
missions operating in volatile security environments
that are crucial to maintaining stability and protecting
civilians. We must reorient the Security Council's
time and efforts to pressing peacekeeping concerns.
We welcome recent expressions of support for fewer
UNMIK briefings, and we ask for Council agreement
on that change.

Finally, we continue to support Kosovo's
membership is all relevant international organizations,
including the United Nations. We strongly encourage all
INTERPOL members to support Kosovo's membership
at that organization's general assembly in November.
Kosovo meets all the criteria for membership, which
will enhance the international law enforcement
community's collective ability to combat terrorism,
violent extremism, trafficking, cybercrime and other
criminal activity in the critical Balkan region. We
also call on United Nations States Members that have
not yet done so to join the more than 110 Member
States that have publicly recognized Kosovo as an
independent State.

