At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Dian Triansyah Dyjani, Permanent Representative of Indonesia and Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), and Ms. Shkula Zadran, Afghanistan's Youth Representative to the United Nations, for their briefings. Tunisia reiterates its full support for the peace process in Afghanistan and its solidarity with the Government and the people of Afghanistan. We welcome the start of the negotiations between the Government and the Taliban in Doha, on 12 September, as well as the agreement reached by the two parties, on 2 December, on rules of procedure for the negotiations. We hope that the discussions on substantive matters can begin soon. We would also like to renew our appreciation for the continuing support of all Afghanistan's neighbours and the international community, as a whole, in favour of the Afghan peace process. That support is crucial for achieving long-term peace and stability in Afghanistan and the region. We remain deeply concerned about the continuing high level of violence and the security situation in Afghanistan. While we sincerely hope that the current peace process will rapidly bring security, stability and prosperity to the Afghan people, we fear that the recent attacks attributed to the Taliban, which resulted in numerous casualties among Afghan forces - including 13 police officers just yesterday - and the civilian population could seriously complicate the negotiations. We reaffirm that there can be no military solution to the conflict in Afghanistan, and again stress the need for an immediate cessation of hostilities, in line with the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2543 (2020). At a time when priority should continue to be given to responding to the coronavirus disease pandemic, the very high number of civilian victims in Afghanistan, especially among women and children, continues to be a source of great concern. We stress the need for all parties to take the necessary measures to prevent civilian casualties. We underline the importance of investigating all allegations of violations in Afghanistan of international humanitarian law and international human rights law, and of holding perpetrators accountable. We are particularly troubled by the targeting of civil society and media organizations, which has killed many, including, most recently, the journalist and women and children's rights defender Malalai Maiwand, who was murdered earlier this month. Such despicable attacks further raise the concerns expressed by many in and outside Afghanistan - that peace might come at the cost of freedoms and rights. More efforts should therefore be made to combat all terrorist groups still active in Afghanistan by targeting their operational and financial capabilities. In that regard, we share the view that the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces should continue to be fully supported and that more efforts should be made to fight drug trafficking, which continues to fuel the illicit economy and finance terrorist groups. We also stress the need for the Government of Afghanistan, the countries of the region and the international community to continue their cooperation to counter all unlawful acts of violence and terrorist attacks. For its part, the Taliban should put an end to its attacks, honour its counter-terrorism commitments and negotiate in good faith with the Government of Afghanistan. Today we would like to underline again the importance of an inclusive Afghan-led and -owned peace process, with the meaningful participation of women and youth, in order to achieve sustainable peace. Accordingly, we believe that any future political agreement should include clear guarantees to protect and promote the fundamental rights and freedoms of all in Afghanistan, with a particular focus on women's rights. We also believe that the peace process should be accompanied by an ambitious international effort to assist Afghanistan at the economic and social levels. In that connection, we welcome the adoption of the Afghanistan Partnership Framework at the 2020 Afghanistan Conference, held in Geneva on 23 and 24 November. The conference confirmed the commitment of international partners to continue supporting Afghanistan. Lastly, we wish to acknowledge the important accomplishments of UNAMA. We believe it will have an even bigger role to play in the coming period. In that regard, we welcome the unanimous adoption, on 15 September, of resolution 2543 (2020), which extended the Mission's mandate until 17 September 2021.
