Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
welcome and pay tribute to you, Madam President. We
thank Mr. Stephen O'Brien, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his briefing. We also congratulate
him for the work he is doing as head of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We
also thank the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, for their briefings.

At the outset, allow me, on behalf of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, to express our deepest
condolences to the people and Government of France
for the recent brutal terrorist attacks on civilians. We
offer our sympathy to the families of the victims of
these criminal actions, which have shocked the world
with their brutality and cruelty. May the French people
hear our expressions of solidarity and support at this
dreadful moment.

We also repudiate the terrorist attacks in Lebanon
and Turkey, which caused great loss of human life, as
well as those taking place every day in Iraq and Syria,
which continue to suffer the brutal terrorist activities
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) and
other violent non-State actors. Venezuela condemns the
ongoing violence perpetrated by ISIS in Syria and Iraq,
in which civilians - and children in particular - are
the main victims of the cruelty of that terrorist group.
These sad events teach us that terrorism knows no
borders and remains a threat to international peace and
security.

If the international community fails to act
decisively to stop the financing, training and arming
of those groups, as well as their use and incitement to
undermine Governments, Europe and the rest of the
world will continue to suffer the consequences of these
entities' terrorist activities that have already struck the
Middle East and North Africa. In that regard, Venezuela
reiterates its categorical condemnation of terrorism in
all its manifestations and violent extremism, whatever
its motives and wherever it is perpetrated. Terrorists
cannot be divided into the categories of good and bad.

Any solution of the humanitarian crisis in the
Middle East must address the root causes of conflicts.
In this regard, so long as outside interference is
promoted through support for terrorist groups and the
maintenance of foreign occupation and its policies
repressive, we will continue to see the flow of refugees
and internally displaced people fleeing war to save
their own lives. The situations in Palestine, Iraq and
Syria are emblematic of this tragic reality in the
Middle East. In that context, our country expresses its
deepest concern about the humanitarian situation in the
conflict in Syria. Five years after the start of hostilities,
the Syrian people have paid a very high price for the
incursion of terrorism into their country, which has
unleashed a veritable humanitarian catastrophe.

We acknowledge the noble efforts deployed by
humanitarian agencies in Syria, working in adverse
conditions created by the same conflict that has
engulfed the country and its people in extremely dire
circumstances, in which the actions of the terrorist
entities ISIS, the Al-Nusra Front, the Army of Conquest
and associated groups have made their assistance work
even more dangerous. We therefore condemn the attacks
against humanitarian personnel and the facilities in
which they do their noble work. Humanitarian agencies
cannot be military targets in any circumstances.

We appreciate the level of cooperation achieved
between the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the Syrian authorities in resolving pending
issues on the humanitarian agenda, as reflected in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2015/862). We hope that
this relationship continues to be strengthened with
a View to facilitating the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to alleviate the pressing needs of the
population affected by war.

There are, however, some positive elements
contained in the report ofthe Secretary-General, such as
the agreements reached in Zabadani that have resulted
in a ceasefire thanks to effective United Nations action.
Another is the report that some 70 per cent of fighters
in Qudsaya, Rif Dimashq, have surrendered their
weapons in a clear attempt to launch reconciliation
talks, which offers a glimmer of hope in a process that
must be entrenched. Finally, the national vaccination
campaign, launched in cooperation with the Syrian
Ministry of Health to immunize over 2.3 million
children nationwide, with the exception of Raqqah, is
an encouraging sign within the overall tragedy.

The areas controlled by ISIS pose a real challenge
to humanitarian organizations, as reflected in the
report. The World Food Programme is unable to
deliver assistance to more than 700,000 people in need
of food. This constitutes an obstacle to humanitarian
organizations. Similarly, we remain alarmed by the
ongoing use of explosive devices and car bombs by
ISIS, with their high toll in civilian casualties. Such
attacks, together with the kidnappings and summary
executions perpetrated by that terrorist organization,
are only one part of its extensive record of violations of
international law.

We also reject the deliberate attacks on schools
carried out by that terrorist group in Syria, especially
in Aleppo, which violate international humanitarian
and international human rights law. These illegal
actions constitute a litany of war crimes and crimes
against humanity whose perpetrators must be brought
to justice. In this context, we are highly conscious of
the fact that the report does not refer directly to military
operations involving the Al-Nusra Front during the
reporting period. Regrettably, such lack of clarity in
the information provided does not cotnribute to a full
understanding of what is happening on the ground.

Moreover, we reject the use by militias associated
with the Jaish al-Islam, also known as the Army of
Conquest, of civilians from ethnic minorities as human
shields. These actions should be unequivocally rejected
by the international community because they violate
human dignity. In that regard, we hope that organizations
such as these will be added as soon as possible to the
list maintained by the Committee pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities. It is time to end
their activities as non-State actors.

We condemn the use by non-State actors and ISIS
of basic services as weapons of war. The withholding
of water and electricity to the civilian population must
cease. These actions violate international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. Likewise, we
condemn the continued destruction of the cultural
heritage of Syria, such as the razing of Palmyra, as
a result of the totalitarian vision of ISIS, which is
determined to eliminate all historical vestiges of the
past that do not jibe with its dogmatic and extremist
View of religion and history.

We wish to speak out in defence of Syrian children,
who have been subjected to bloody, premeditated
violence by terrorist groups and non-State actors. We
denounce the ongoing crimes committed against Syrian
children by terrorist organizations, and we urge the
international community to mobilize in their defence.

We highly appreciate the fact that, in the search
for a negotiated political solution to the conflict, the
Vienna consultations have considered the participation
of the Syrian Government, which is a major player in
the search for a settlement. It is foolish to claim and
insist otherwise and only condemns the Syrian people
to further suffering and a labyrinth of uncertainty that
foments violence and despair. Such a biased perspective
on the settlement of this conflict has only delayed a
solution and strengthened terrorism.

We reiterate our support for the efforts of the
Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura - who
enjoys our full support - to achieve a peaceful political
solution to the conflict, with the full participation
of all parties involved, including the Government
of President Bashar Al-Assad. We await the results
of the negotiations in Vienna and the immediate
implementation of a ceasefire to help alleviate the
humanitarian situation. As an elected member of the
Security Council, Venezuela expects to enjoy access
to all agreements and commitments undertaken by
the parties in Vienna so that it can contribute with the
required unanimity to the Council's actions.

In conclusion, we advocate a negotiated, peaceful
solution to this terrible crisis. Foreign interference
in Syria must cease. The Syrian people have paid the
highest price in defending their territorial integrity
and sovereignty from terrorism. The international
community must act to end the violence and re-establish
peace. Sadly, Syria has become a laboratory of horror
and death. History will judge the perpetrators of these
atrocities.

