The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ukraine.
I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his comprehensive
briefing on the developments in Kosovo. I would like
to reiterate Ukraine's full support to him as he carries
out his important functions. I am also grateful to His
Excellency Mr. Tomislav Nikolie, President of the
Republic of Serbia, and to Ms. Vlora Citaku.

We note that throughout the reporting period there
have been a series of regrettable events that caused a
significant increase in tension. Those tensions are a
matter of concern, as they could impede the process
of normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina, and negatively affect the lives of all of
Kosovo's residents.

Ukraine welcomes the role of the European
Union (EU) in diffusing tensions and commends the
resumption of high-level meetings between Belgrade
and Pristina in Brussels. We call upon the political
leaders in Belgrade and Pristina to actively work to
avoid provocation, confrontation and an escalation into
conflict. It is important that, in the spirit of restraint and
responsibility, they put aside their political abitions and
focus on further progress in the implementation of the
agreed commitments, which would benefit the people
in the region and enhance their European prospects.

We are encouraged by the tangible results in the
implementation of the agreements concluded in the
framework of the EU-led dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina, in particular on freedom of movement,
telecommunication and justice. Ukraine looks forward
to further progress in the fulfilment of outstanding
commitments, including on the establishment of
association/community ofSerb-maj ority municipalities.

Ukraine continues to support the important role
played by UNMIK, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force, in which
Ukrainian peacekeepers contribute to preserving peace
and stability in Kosovo.

At the same time, like other delegations, we believe
that it is time to reconsider the frequency of UNMIK
periodic reports. It might be appropriate to adopt a more
flexible approach. Resolution 1244 (1999) requests
the Secretary-General to report at regular intervals,
without specifying how often. We believe the Council
could agree to have regular reports twice a year, with
the option of spot reports as may be required by the
situation on the ground.
Finally, it is also time to review the role ofthe United
Nations in Kosovo, including vis-a-vis its regional
presence and possible steps towards its rationalization.
We believe that converting UNMIK into a special
political mission should be considered as an option, as
that would appropriately reflect its current role.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The meeting rose at 12.25 pm.
