Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to welcome you, Mr. President, to the
Security Council and to thank you for presiding over

this meeting. I also want to commend your delegation's
leadership in organizing this timely debate and for
preparing a comprehensive concept paper (S/2012/83, annex) for our deliberations today. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing on the
subject and for his several important initiatives to
address the problems of transnational organized crime
in West Africa and the Sahel region. I would also like
to thank Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
for his valuable statement.

While countries in West Africa and the Sahel are
more democratic today than in the past and have
achieved respectable rates of economic growth, they
continue to suffer from a number of problems that have
political, security and socio-economic dimensions. The
importance of enduring peace, security and stability in
West Africa and the Sahel region therefore cannot be
overemphasized. Addressing those problems will not
only help the region, but will also have a positive
effect on democracy and development in Africa as a
whole. A number of countries in the region, including
Mali, Senegal and Guinea-Bissau, face crucial
elections this year. We hope that elections will be held
in a peaceful manner and will further strengthen the
roots of democracy in those countries and in the larger
region.

Over the past year, several problems in the region
have been accentuated. Those problems transcend
national boundaries and may pose long-term threats.
Transnational organized crime, including illicit drug
trafficking, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and arms
trafficking, are undermining efforts of Governments
and international community to ensure peace and
stability.

Military operations carried out ostensibly for the
protection of civilians have clearly resulted in millions
of civilians being adversely affected in the Sahel,
Maghreb and West Africa regions. They have resulted
in a deterioration of the security, economic and
humanitarian situations in the entire region. In a
relatively short period of time, the countries in West
Africa and the Sahel have had to contend with the
influx of nearly half a million returnees and a large
inflow of arms and ammunition. The loss of
remittances and the high unemployment among youth
have exacerbated security problems, food insecurity
and the nutrition crisis. Those have put tremendous
burden on Governments in the region and strained their

limited capacity to deal with transnational organized
crime. Recovering from the after effects of those
conflicts will require concerted action by the
international community.

A number of problems, including the proliferation
of arms, terrorism, illicit drug trafficking, et cetera,
have a regional dimension and need to be tackled
through regional cooperation. Illicit drug trafficking
and its growing links to the financing of terrorism, the
proliferation of weapons as a result of conflicts in Cote
d'Ivoire and Libya, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and so
on, demand action at the national and regional levels,
with the constructive assistance of the international
community. The United Nations should lead the
international efforts and focus on institution- and
capacity-building and on the provision of adequate
resources to national authorities and regional and
subregional organizations.

A comprehensive strategy to deal with the
problems should include the creation of effective
Government institutions, particularly in the fields of
security, law enforcement, security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. The
countries concerned should implement all legal and
administrative measures to combat organized crime and
related issues in accordance with resolution 1373
(2001) and other relevant regional and international
instruments. The promotion of democracy and the rule
of law will not only help to establish peace and
security, but also help in socio-economic development.
Development and employment-generation programmes
should be undertaken so that youth can be weaned from
criminal activities, and their energies channelled

properly.

Simultaneously, the strategy should facilitate
regional cooperation under the auspices of the relevant
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). In that connection, we
welcome the efforts of the United Nations through the
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) and
UNODC to create synergies with Governments and
regional organizations to tackle transnational organized
crime.
It is necessary that regional initiatives by
ECOWAS and the Economic Community of Central
African States be implemented fully and that technical
support be extended to develop coherent action plans
for addressing transnational problems. Steps by
regional and subregional organizations, such as the AU
plan of action on drug control and crime prevention for
2007-12, the ECOWAS regional plan of action to
address illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and
drug abuse for 2008-2011, the ECOWAS counter-
terrorism strategy and the West Africa Coast Initiative,
are welcome and need to be fully implemented.

In conclusion, we think that the United Nations
should become a more effective partner of the AU in
the resolution of African conflicts. The relevant United
Nations agencies should support regional and
subregional organizations and assist in their capacity-
building and in facilitating their implementation. The
United Nations offices in the region, including
UNOWA, the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa and the United Nations Office to the
African Union, should look into practical and concrete
ways to strengthen the efforts of national Governments
and regional institutions, to bring greater coherence
and coordination.

