Mr. O'Brien: The Syrian conflict has entered its
seventh year, and we have all borne witness to one of the
largest man-made humanitarian and protection crises in
the world. Hundreds of thousands of people have been
killed and millions more injured. Almost 5 million
people have fled and are now living as refugees. Crimes
against humanity and war crimes have been committed
by all parties time and again, as the Commission of
Inquiry attested to earlier this month. In Syria, there is
not a man, woman or child from any walk of life who
has not felt the impact of the particular wretchedness
of this especially gruesome and protracted conflict.
Syrians have watched huge parts of their historic and
proud country reduced to rubble. The building blocks
of civilian life, including bakeries, water stations,
hospitals, schools, and places of worship, have been
gradually destroyed.

The parties gathering in Geneva this week - and
those around this table today - surely understand the
huge responsibility on their shoulders to bring this
Syrian nightmare to an end after years of political
intransigence. I cannot emphasize enough how high the
stakes are. The Syrian people need to see a tangible
improvement in their daily lives because, quite frankly,
it is they who have borne the brunt of this conflict. It
is my hope, and the hope of every humanitarian, to
see the current political process succeed, and we are
fully behind the Secretary-General, his Special Envoy,
Mr. De Mistura, and his team.

While we rightly acknowledge the current efforts
being made on the political track, we have to maintain
a laser focus on the fact that violence continues to rear
its ugly head in various parts of the country, even if
images of it have largely disappeared from the world's
television screens since the evacuation of eastern
Aleppo. Indeed, the last months have been some of the
worst yet for civilians inside Syria and, for Syria, that
is saying something. The continued use of explosive
weapons and ongoing military operations in populated
towns and villages in Hama, Damascus, Idlib, Aleppo,
Dar'a, Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor governorates have killed
and injured hundreds of civilians over the past weeks
and displaced tens of thousands more. Attacks on
civilian infrastructure such as medical facilities and
schools - a trademark of the war in Syria - continue
to be reported.

I remain deeply anxious for the safety and
protection of over 400,000 civilians due to ongoing
military operations in Raqqa governorate. We continue
to receive reports that fighting and air strikes continue
to result in death and injury for scores of civilians and
damage to civilian infrastructure, including schools,
bakeries, markets and water infrastructure. For example,
on 21 March, air strikes reportedly hit the Al-Badiya
school in Al-Mansoura town in western rural Raqqa
governorate, resulting in scores of deaths and injuries
among the internally displaced people who were living
at the school. On 22 March, air strikes reportedly hit a
bakery and a local market in the Al-Tabqa area ofRaqqa,
resulting in dozens of civilian deaths and injuries. And
on 27 March, an engineer and technicians, including
a Syrian Arab Red Crescent (SARC) volunteer, were
reportedly killed as a result of an aerial attack while
they were at the Tabqa Dam to assess the dam prior to
conducting repairs and stabilizing it. Meanwhile, tens
of thousands have reportedly been displaced as a result
ofthe offensive since November 2016, and humanitarian
partners have been responding to the displaced.

As the fighting moves to more civilian-populated
areas closer to Raqqa city, concerns about the fate
of civilians will only grow. I urge all parties to do
everything in their power to protect and spare civilians
from the effects of the hostilities, as required, not
just requested, under international humanitarian law.
The United Nations and partners stand ready to scale
up assistance through whichever modality is most
appropriate and have prepositioned stocks of relief
items in several locations to enable a rapid response in
Raqqa, access permitting. But that is the key phrase:
"access permitting".

Elsewhere, fighting in the northern countryside of
Hama governorate over the past week has had significant
safety and protection concerns for civilians. The
closure of key roads in Hama has restricted commercial
and civilian movement. A hospital in Latmana town
was reportedly attacked from the air, resulting in the
death of a doctor and a patient. Up to 40,000 people
have reportedly fled the affected areas of fighting
in northern rural Hama to locations in Hama, Idlib,
Horns, Tartous and Lattakia where the United Nations
and partners are responding. Some of those internally
displaced persons are at risk of further displacement
as fierce fighting continues and front lines continue to
shift.

In the capital, Damascus, the death and injury
of dozens of people by two explosions targeting
Bab al-Saghir, where many pilgrims were visiting
in mid-March, was an appalling reminder of the
willingness of extremist terrorist groups to wantonly
target civilians. Similar explosions targeted a court
house and a restaurant. The past fortnight has also
seen non-State armed groups increase their shelling
on populated areas of Damascus, including Bab
Touma, Rukn Al-Din and Abbasin Square, killing and
injuring many civilians over the past two weeks and
leading to the temporary closure of schools in some
neighbourhoods.

The hundreds of thousands of civilians trapped
in besieged areas continue to face severe and horrific
threats at every turn. I remain extremely concerned
about the deteriorating security and humanitarian
situation in the besieged parts of eastern Ghouta in rural
Damascus, where some 400,000 people are trapped
by Government forces. Over the past month, we have
continued to receive reports of civilian casualties and
injuries due to heavy aerial bombardment and artillery
shelling of the besieged enclave and adjacent areas of
Barzeh, Qaboun and West Harasta. Some 27,000 people
have been displaced due to the fighting, including some
17,000 people further into eastern Ghouta and 10,000

people to At-Tall in rural Damascus. More people are
likely to flee in the coming days if fighting continues.

According to the World Health Organization, all
three public hospitals and seventeen public health-
care centres in eastern Ghouta are non-functioning
and inaccessible to the population, with several of
them reportedly destroyed by airstrikes, although some
facilities are reportedly still operational elsewhere. The
number of children suffering from trauma injuries is
alarmingly high; 30 per cent of all patients with war-
related injuries are children under 15 years of age. It
bears repeating that 30 per cent of all patients with
war-related injuries are children under 15 years of age.
The deaths of patients due to lack of dialysis equipment
and a measles outbreak have also been reported.
Since 20 March, Government forces reportedly have
prevented commercial trucks from entering eastern
Ghouta, resulting in elevated price hikes for basic
staples, while informal trade has also been curtailed.

Put starkly, this tightening of the siege has started a
time bomb for the people of eastern Ghouta. It is critical
that the United Nations and our partners be facilitated
access to the enclave before conditions deteriorate
further. The last United Nations humanitarian delivery
to any of the besieged areas of eastern Ghouta was in
October 2016, nearly six months ago, with other areas
not accessed since June 2016. Recent approvals to reach
the area could not be acted upon due to the security
situation and lack of facilitation letters, although the
SARC was able to deliver a portion of the health supplies
planned for the convoy on 9 March - including 250
dialysis kits, vaccines and baby milk- to its sub-branch
in Duma. This partial delivery was welcome, of course,
but clearly wholly insufficient given the scale and
gravity of circumstances people are facing.

I have also been following the situation in the
besieged neighbourhood of Al-Wa'er, in Homs, with
great concern, a community of tens of thousands of
people that I visited cross-line in 2015. From November
last year until this month, sporadic fighting, limited
access to commercial supplies and a growing scarcity of
basic supplies have resulted in an insufferable situation
for trapped civilians. There has been no United Nations
inter-agency humanitarian delivery to the besieged
neighbourhood since 26 October 2016, and as I reported
last month, a convoy planned for 20 February was
forced to turn back due to insecurity and, in the process,
trucks were diverted, aid was taken - although some
was later retrieved - and drivers were abused.

It is our understanding that a local agreement was
signed between the Government of Syria and non-State
armed groups in Al-Wa'er earlier this month. As part
of that agreement, some 3,500 people - including
fighters, their families and civilians e were evacuated
on 18 and 27 March from the besieged neighbourhood
of Al-Wa'er in Homns towards J arablus in rural Aleppo.
It is our understanding that further evacuations are to
take place on a weekly basis until the process has been
finalized. Also as part of the agreement, Government
forces reopened one of the roads connecting Al-Wa'er
neighbourhood with the rest of Homs city and food
items are now entering the neighbourhood without
hindrance, prices have fallen and electricity has also
been restored.

The United Nations has also received reports
of an agreement between parties to the conflict to
evacuate people from the besieged towns of Madaya
and Zabadani in rural Damascus and Fo'ah and Kefraya
in Idlib, otherwise known as the Four towns. The
agreement reportedly includes the entry of humanitarian
assistance and a nine-month pause in fighting covering
the Four towns and southern parts of Damascus and its
countryside. We are monitoring developments closely
as the level of humanitarian and protection needs of
those in each of the besieged Four towns remains of the
highest severity.

Let me be clear. The United Nations was not
involved in any of the negotiations for these agreements
or the evacuation process for Al-Wa'er, but I must
underscore our concern over such agreements. As we
have seen elsewhere, evacuations from besieged areas
typically follow months or even years of unrelenting
military siege and offensive military action; of severe
restrictions on freedom of movement for civilians, as
well as on commercial and humanitarian goods; and of
unremitting, appalling humanitarian conditions.

All sieges are stark, contemptuous violations of
the Council's resolutions. All sieges must be lifted
immediately - full stop. However, as I have made
clear before, this should not be through any type of
surrender agreement that results in the decimation of
an area and the forced displacement of some parts of
the civilian population. Any evacuation of civilians
must be safe, must be voluntary, and must be to a place
of their choosing. It is imperative that all those who
are displaced through such agreements be allowed to
return voluntarily, in safety and in dignity, to their
homes as soon as the situation allows. Parties must
allow humanitarian organizations safe and unimpeded
access to bring life-saving help to those displaced and
those who wish to remain, and identify and respond to
protection threats.

Let me now turn now to access. I had sincerely
hoped that 2017 would bring about a step change in our
level of humanitarian access, particularly to besieged
and hard-to-reach areas, building on the relative
progress of last year, particularly the first nine months.
The bottom line is, however, that with a quarter
of the year gone, our current levels of access are no
better than they were at this time last year. Through
the March inter-agency convoy plan, we had sought to
reach 787,500 people through road convoys. However,
original approvals were received for only 44 per cent, or
348,200 people - the lowest approval rate since March
2016, when the monthly plan process began, although
this increased to some 74 per cent later this month when
additional approvals for some other locations were
received following intense engagement by the United
Nations team on the ground

As we sit here today, with the month virtually
complete, we have reached some 200,000 people
against the plan. This includes convoys for some
133,500 people in the hard-to-reach areas of Bludan
and Wadi Barada in rural Damascus and Talbiseh in
Horns. This is limited incremental progress, thanks
to extraordinary efforts of the team on the ground.
The only besieged areas reached through our convoy
plan were the Four towns and Khan El-Shih in rural
Damascus, which was completed today. In addition,
vastly expensive and technically challenging airdrops
to Deir ez-Zor continue for nearly 93,500 people given
no land access at all to these people besieged by so-
called Islamic State. Even then, various medical items
on the convoy completed today were removed, and
when we reached Madaya, one of the four towns, we
were unable to distribute all of the delivered assistance
owing to sniping from surrounding militias that itself
left several people dead.

After painstaking negotiations by our humanitarian
coordinator and the team from the Offirce for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the ground,
another convoy is planned to deploy today to the hard-
to-reach area of Rastan in Homs, reaching more than
110,000 people altogether, meaning a total of some
310,000 against the plan if the convoy successfully
deploys. With several deliveries over the past week, the
pace of convoys is picking up. and I salute the round-
the-clock efforts of my humanitarian colleagues in the
United Nations, SARC, the International Committee of
the Red Cross and our other humanitarian partners in
Damascus who bravely make that possible. However,
it is still the case that for every convoy that reaches its
intended destination, several more are unable to deploy
during the month as a result of the Government of
Syria's recurring administrative issues and delays. At
the same time, some non-State armed groups continue
to threaten or refuse to cooperate with humanitarian
workers. And sustained United Nations access to areas
under the control of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, such as parts of the Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor
governorates, remains extremely limited.

While the number of convoys this month represents
some progress compared to previous months, it is
essential that the Government agree to take further
steps to simplify the bureaucratic processes around the
preparation and deployment of inter-agency convoys.
The current bureaucratic architecture is at best
excessive and at its worst is deliberately intended to
prevent convoys from proceeding. The United Nations
continues to engage the Syrian authorities in good
faith to find a way to improve the inter-agency convoy
process. As part of that, the United Nations team has
submitted a two-month inter-agency convoy plan for
April and May with the aim of reaching 1 million
beneficiaries in 28 besieged and hard-to-reach locations.
It is hoped that spreading the plan over a period of two
months rather than one will provide enough space for
the approvals to be translated into deliveries on the
ground. Aside from genuine security problems, there
should be no compelling reason for the convoys to be
unable to proceed over that two-month period.

We will do our part to make that happen, but we
hope that the Syrian authorities will also do theirs
and take the necessary steps. That means removing
the requirement for multiple facilitation letters to be
received for health, agricultural or water, sanitation
and hygiene supplies, and signing facilitation letters
within two days of receiving a request from the United
Nations. It means allowing delivery on the basis
of United Nations needs assessments and allowing
requested surgical and medical items to be loaded.
Those are all simple steps that, taken immediately, will
have a definite positive impact on the lives of suffering
civilians in so many parts of Syria.

At the same time, for continued progress to happen,
we also need the renewed support of Council members
and the members of the Humanitarian Task Force of the
International Syria Support Group (ISSG) in doing their
part, which is exerting their individual and collective
influence on the parties. The breakthroughs last year
and even the progress this week, however incremental,
are proof that when there is enough political will, when
we work together in the name of humanity, it is really
possible to reach people in desperate need of lifesaving
assistance. But ifwe are honest with ourselves and add up
the score sheet today, the ISSG has not actually secured
any access to the besieged or hard-to-reach areas, either
for us - the humanitarian personnel - or the United
Nations more broadly. When we have reached them,
that has always been as a result of the brave, persistent
and patient negotiations by the teams on the ground and
by utilizing one or two influential channels.

These years of fighting and continued access
challenges have meant that millions of Syrians have
been forced to live in appalling conditions, often without
safety or the basic essentials of life. Some 13.5 million
Syrian people will try to go to sleep tonight in dire need
of assistance. The scale and severity of humanitarian
needs show no sign of dissipating, and that is why the
humanitarian work of the United Nations and its partners
remains as vital as ever. Despite all the obstacles and
dangers, they are nonetheless doing brave, successful,
lifesaving work. And those brave and committed
humanitarians have ensured the delivery of aid to as
many in need as possible. In 2016, some 6.8 million
people on average were reached with food assistance,
some 18 million medical procedures were carried out
or supported, 12 million treatment courses provided,
13 million people reached with water, sanitation and
hygiene support, and 3.4 million children and pregnant
or lactating women reached with essential nutrition
services.

I must emphasize that the United Nations and its
partners, who are mostly brave Syrian colleagues,
will continue to stand with the people of Syria to
deliver aid to millions of civilians, regardless of which
side they are on or are perceived to be on, or if they
are on no side at all. I welcome the release of the
2017 Humanitarian Response Plan for Syria, which
outlines requirements totalling some $3.4 billion for
undertaking a comprehensive humanitarian response in
Syria, including saving lives, enhancing protection and
building people's resilience. I sincerely thank donors
for their continuing support and respectfully ask
them to go above and beyond this year so that we can
maintain our critical humanitarian support to civilians
across the country.

Until there is any success in securing peace and
silencing the guns fully and permanently, we must
once again meet Syrians' immediate lifesaving needs
as well as those in the recovery time beyond that, for
as long as it takes, in what is now the seventh year of
this hideous conflict. That is why the meeting to be
held in Brussels on 5 April is so important, because
it is this year's pledging event for the Syrian people
and their surrounding neighbours. It will build on the
successful strategic approach taken in London last
year, but will be very mindful of the fact that, just like
the humanitarians, the international community and
donors are at full stretch.

In addition to all the points I have made this
morning, I would like to finish by adding my voice
to the two urgent appeals to all parties made by the
Secretary-General earlier this month. First, we should
make the most of the 30 December 2016 ceasefire
established by the guarantors of the Astana meetings
by enhancing it further with real protections for
civilians and civilian infrastructure, and by removing
the remaining obstacles and impediments in order to
ensure that humanitarian aid keeps flowing to reach all
those in need in Syria. Secondly, we should appeal to
the parties, and all those with influence over them, to
strive to overcome their differences and work together
to put an end to the conflict. That is the only way to
stop the suffering of Syrian men, women and children.
I sincerely hope that this is the year that the parties to
the conflict, and those who support their actions, regain
their sense of humanity. As the Secretary-General has
said, peace in Syria is a moral and political imperative
for both the Syrian people and the world, and it is an
imperative that cannot wait.

