Mrs. Kazragiene (Lithuania): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Abou Moussa for his briefing on the latest
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) and on the implementation
of the regional strategy on the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA). I want to express my delegation's appreciation
for his leadership and dedicated service in implementing
the challenging mandate, which brought about tangible
results in promoting peace and security in the Central
African region. I also welcome the appointment of
Abdoulaye Bathily as the incoming Head of UNOCA.

The results of the activities of the African Union
Regional Cooperation Initiative against the LRA and of
the African Union Regional Task Force, as well as those
of other regional and international actors, are obvious.
We see a sharp decrease in the number of LRA fighters
and in the overall number of attacks attributable to that
terrorist group. We understand that the LRA is now
primarily involved in survival-mode activities and that
its command structure is weakened.

However, the threat posed by the group has not
passed. One hundred and sixty thousand civilians
remain under constant threat. We should not remain
complacent. UNOCA's role is vital, especially as the
deteriorating security situation in the Central African
Republic and South Sudan threatens to undermine
the progress made thus far. We note with concern
the increased LRA activities in the Central African
Republic, where the leaders of the LRA are reported to
be based now. We urge all concerned countries in the
region to fulfil their commitments to fighting the LRA,
including by contributing troops to the African Union
Regional Task Force. We note that it is crucial to ensure
close cross-border cooperation and information-sharing
among actors in the region. We also note the importance
of enhancing collaboration between the Regional
Task Force and the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic, as well as
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.

UNOCA will continue to play a leading role in
fostering the development of long-term programmes
to address humanitarian problems in LRA-affected
areas. Many civilians will depend on humanitarian
assistance. We also stress the importance of developing
and promoting disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes in LRA-affected areas
as one of the means of addressing the threat posed
by that terrorist group and encouraging further
defections. Former combatants must be provided with
an opportunity for reintegration into society and the
possibility of different life to avoid their return to rebel
life.

The challenge remains how to successfully
reintegrate children abducted by the LRA. In that
regard, we welcome Chad's intention to sign a protocol
on the release of 46 children who were associated with
ex-Seleka in Koro-Toro, as well as the plan to develop a
reintegration plan. We commend UNICEF for its work
on child protection and the prevention of sexual and
gender-based violence in LRA-affected countries. It is
important to put an end to those crimes and to ensure
accountability for the perpetrators.

Let me express our concern over the Boko Haram
terrorist group, whose activities across the borders of
Nigeria pose a threat to security in the broader region.
We strongly condemn Taliban-style acts of violence
against schoolgirls in Chibok, in the Borno state of
Nigeria. That is a grave violation of international and
national laws. Education is a human right, and girls
throughout the entire world should be able to pursue
it free from violence, fear and intimidation. The girls
must be released immediately and unconditionally.
Abduction, sexual violence and exploitation constitute
grave violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law, and may amount to crimes against
humanity as defined in the Rome Statute. Therefore,
the crimes by Boko Haram should be addressed by the
International Criminal Court.

The violent acts of Boko Haram remind us that
women's rights are constantly under assault, thereby
undermining gender rights, equality and development.
We are deeply concerned that the activities of Boko
Haram force thousands of people to flee their homes,
schools and fields. We commend and encourage regional
initiatives to strengthen cooperation in addressing the
security threats posed by terrorist groups, as well to
tackle the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.

As noted by Mr. Moussa, the humanitarian effect
of the Central African Republic crisis on countries in
the region is yet another issue to address. Neighbouring
countries continue to receive high numbers of refugees,
many of whom are women and children. We welcome
the advancement in the inter-agency Regional Response
Plan, which is aimed at addressing the growing
humanitarian needs. We urge its implementation and
encourage strong engagement by international actors.
Rising maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea,
poaching and the illegal trade in resources in the region
remain of great concern. That has to be addressed, in
particular as transnational rebel and terrorist groups
in the Central African region, including the LRA,
are financed through such activities. We welcome
the regional and international activities to tackle the
challenge and we commend UNOCA's engagement in
mobilizing a cooperative approach to the issue among
the countries of the region.

Finally, Lithuania encourages an enhanced,
comprehensive and more regional approach to address
the threats faced by Central African States. Let me
conclude by expressing our full support for the activities
of UNOCA.

