Mr. Vinay Kumar (India): I too wish to join
others in thanking Ambassador Nestor Osorio for
presenting the twentieth 90-day report of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). We commend the professionalism with
which the Committee has been implementing its
mandate under his stewardship.

I also wish to thank the Panel of Experts for its
hard work since its mandate was extended for one year
by resolution 1984 (2011) in June this year. We have
taken note of the Panel's midterm report and its
recommendations. We are carefully studying the report
and the views expressed by Member States. We support
the continued work of the Panel in accordance with its
mandate and the preparation of its reports in
consultation with Member States and by including
inputs they provide.

India has consistently supported the right of all
States to the peaceful uses nuclear energy consistent
with their respective obligations. Iran, as a
non-nuclear-weapon State signatory to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, has all the
rights and obligations that go with its membership with
regard to the use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes. We underline the importance of the full and
effective implementation of all obligations undertaken
by States. We also emphasize the need for international
focus on clandestine proliferation activities.

India has consistently underlined the critical
importance of continuing dialogue between the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and Iran.

We support intensification of dialogue between Iran
and the Agency aimed at urgent resolution of all
outstanding substantive issues, including providing
clarification regarding those issues that have been
highlighted in the reports of the IAEA.

India would also like to reiterate its support for a
diplomatic solution. We believe it is necessary to
expand the diplomatic space to address all outstanding
issues in reassuring international confidence in the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear
programme. It is therefore essential to keep the door
open for dialogue and to avoid confrontation.

We support full implementation of Security
Council resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1929 (2010) by
all States. At the same time, all efforts should be made
to ensure that legitimate trade and economic activities
do not suffer.

We support open briefings by the Committee's
Chair and the Coordinator of the Panel for interested
Member States on implementation procedures. We
believe that all Member States should provide their
support, as appropriate, to the discharge of the mandate
of the 1737 Committee.

