Mr. Yun Byung-se (Republic of Korea): Let me
join others in thanking Secretary Tillerson for having
convened this very timely meeting and Secretary-
General Guterres for his comprehensive briefing.
This ministerial meeting of the Security Council, the
first ever on the denuclearization of North Korea,
demonstrates the sense of gravity and urgency shared
by all members of the international community.

North Korea is now at the final stage of nuclear
weaponization and claims to be a nuclear-weapon
State, as it has declared in its amended Constitution.
Since the first North Korean nuclear crisis, a quarter-
century ago, North Korea has made huge advances
in all areas of its nuclear-weapons and missile
programmes through five nuclear tests and numerous
missile launches. We have witnessed, first, exponential
growth in its nuclear stockpile - from what used to
be a few kilograms of plutonium, back in 1992, to a
significant nuclear arsenal now. Secondly, we have seen
rapid development of ballistic missiles of all types and
ranges, which now threaten to reach every corner of the
world. And, finally, we have witnessed its willingness
to actually use weapons of mass destruction (WMD),
as manifested in the assassination of the North Korean
leader's half-brother with a chemical weapon. In brief,
North Korea's WMD capability, coupled with the intent
to actually use them, bring us ever so closer to the
tipping point. It is no wonder that some experts say the
world is facing its greatest nuclear emergency since the
Cuban missile crisis.

A nuclear-armed North Korea will significantly
disrupt the security landscape in North-East Asia and
in the world. It will also deal a fatal blow to the global
regime based on the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and increase the risk of North Korean
nuclear material or related technology falling into the
hands of terrorists. In order to avoid that nightmarish
scenario, we must act now. We are racing against time.

What should our response be? Extraordinary
circumstances require extraordinary responses. A
pundit once said, "Insanity is doing the same thing
over and over again and expecting different results".
What we need is a new approach led by the Security
Council, not allowing North Korea to dictate the
agenda and timeline. Resolutions 2270 (2016) and 2321
(2016) are milestone measures that illustrate such a
new approach. Based on those most comprehensive
and robust resolutions, the international community
has built and solidified a united front against North
Korea over the past year. For its part, my Government
also took a series of unilateral measures in line with
the Council's efforts. We are seeing evidence that
sanctions are biting, by cutting off North Korea's hard-
currency income, deepening Pyongyang's diplomatic
isolation and blocking its illicit activities on all fronts.
The international community must sustain efforts to
thoroughly implement those resolutions.

Moreover, the Security Council must discuss
additional punitive measures to take against future
provocations -proactively, not reactively, as was
the case up until now. The Council has repeatedly
warned that it will take further significant measures,
including sanctions, in the case of future provocations.
But Pyongyang may still harbour the illusion that the
Security Council will take only limited action and
that it can disregard and ridicule the authority of the
United Nations.

In order to change such strategic calculus by
Pyongyang and induce changes from within, we could
take potent measures such as halting the export and
supply of crude oil to North Korea; completely cutting
off North Korea's hard-currency earnings by, for
instance, suspending all imports of coal from North
Korea; and seriously considering whether North Korea,
a serial offender, is qualified as a Member ofthe United
Nations, as well as downgrading diplomatic relations
with North Korea.

Let me be clear: our goal is not to bring North
Korea to its knees, but to bring it back to the negotiating
table for genuine denuclearization. We must be clear-
eyed about Pyongyang's intent. It is not interested in
negotiating for denuclearization. Instead, its game plan
is to be recognized as a nuclear-weapon State and to
negotiate nuclear disarmament as such. Just last week,
the North Korean Deputy Permanent Representative
to the United Nations himself made clear that any
denuclearization talks were a non-starter.

Under those circumstances, dialogue for the sake
of dialogue cannot be an option. If history teaches us
anything, it is that we must not repeat the tried-and-
failed approach. Over the past 20 or so years, we have
left no stone unturned. Yet countless negotiations
and agreements with this rule-breaker par excellence
have led us nowhere but back to square one due to
North Korea's reneging and deception. They have
only bought time for the regime to advance its WMD
capabilities. We must once and for all break this vicious
cycle of provocations-negotiations-provocations and
rewarding North Korea's bad behaviour. Our goal is
not to compromise on half-measures for a bogus peace.
Our goal is the complete, verifiable and irreversible
dismantlement of the North Korean nuclear weapons
and missile programmes.

Finally, in dealing with the North Korean nuclear
issue, we must not lose sight of another serious threat,
emanating from North Korea's chemical and biological
weapons programmes. Resolution 2270 (2016) decided
that North Korea shall abandon all chemical and
biological weapons and weapons-related programmes.
In that regard, I welcome the joint letter by Secretary-
General Guterres and Director-General Uziimcii of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
calling upon North Korea to accede to the Chemical
Weapons Convention.

History tells us how in the first half of the twentieth
century the failure to counter Nazi ambitions led to the
outbreak of the Second World War. If we do not respond
to North Korea's repeated provocations in a resolute
manner, we will only further fuel the appetite of the
trigger-happy regime in Pyongyang. In that regard,
should North Korea conduct a sixth nuclear test or
launch an intercontinental ballistic missile, it will be a
game-changer for all of us. That is why it is critical that
this time the entire international community continue
to maintain the unprecedented unified front against
North Korea. This is the last opportunity to break
and reverse the process. The heavy responsibility is
incumbent upon all of us.

With regard to the deployment of the Terminal
High Altitude Defense battery system in my country,
it is purely a defensive measure in the face of such a
threat from North Korea. It is not aimed at any third
country. Furthermore, the annual United States-South
Korea military exercise is a defensive and transparent
exercise. It cannot be on a par with North Korea's
obligations under Security Council resolutions

As this is my last appearance in the Security
Council, I would like to take this opportunity to express
my deepest gratitude for the unflinching support that
members of the Security Council have rendered to
me and to my Government over the past four years
in confronting North Korea's nuclear and missile
challenges. I assure members that the Republic ofKorea
will continue to be a stalwart partner in the Council's
efforts to safeguard international peace and security.

