Allow me to first congratulate you, Sir, on a successful presidency of the Security Council and to extend our appreciation to you for organizing this commemorative meeting. I also wish to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and all the briefers for their statements. This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of landmark resolution 1325 (2000), the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the seventy-fifth anniversary of our Organization's founding. All of these instruments recognized the vital and indispensable role women play in the promotion of peace and security and called on Member States to prioritize gender equality and women's empowerment. As the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/946) on women and peace and security makes clear, despite the progress made with regard to gender equality over the past two decades, major hurdles remain. Those limited gains are now at risk of reversal due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Gender-based violence is on the rise. Women are at the forefront of the fight against this deadly virus and are paying enormous sacrifices. Tragically, they are also likely to be disproportionately affected by its economic consequences. That is why it is so fitting that this debate focuses on the implementation of that milestone resolution. More work and practical commitments are needed to bridge the gap in implementation, including in the context of the COVID-19 response, and to support Member States in developing policies and strategies that align with the women and peace and security agenda. The full, equal and meaningful participation of women in development and peace and security should no longer be an option. It is an absolute imperative. We believe that neither peace nor prosperity can be achieved or sustained without the active and meaningful involvement of women in society. Lasting peace and security cannot prevail as long as women continue to face gender-based violence, have their rights violated, lack access to public services and enjoy only limited participation. For Ethiopia, the empowerment of women is a key pillar of our development aspirations. Women have been responsible for the transformation in the provision of basic health services throughout rural Ethiopia, especially with regard to maternal and child health. They continue to be instrumental in conflict prevention, notably in mediation and in the resettlement of internally displaced persons. Women's role in our security sector reform is also central. The equal participation of women in all sectors of life in Ethiopia is constitutionally guaranteed. Access to education is a critical element in that endeavour. Women cannot enjoy their full rights as long as they continue to struggle for access to education. Addressing poverty and the educational deprivation of women is essential if we are to achieve fundamental changes in advancing gender equality. Ethiopia is working to increase the enrolment of women at all levels of education and boost their participation at all levels of decision-making in our national institutions. The appointments of the country's first woman President, the first woman President of the Federal Supreme Court and the first woman Chair of the electoral board and achieving gender parity in the Cabinet are all part of our efforts to increase and elevate women's participation. My Government also set up a new ministry with a direct oversight of the security sector to ensure women's involvement in peace and security matters. Over the past two decades, Ethiopia has made steady progress in increasing both the number of women and women's leadership positions in our armed forces and police, as well as in addressing their barriers to entry. To minimize the implementation gaps, we must strive to mainstream the women and peace and security agenda in all our policy interventions, and my Government is committed to implementing a series of actions over the next decade under the 10-year perspective development plan. We are also consulting with a wide range of stakeholders, including civil society organizations, on a draft national action plan on the women and peace and security agenda. Inconclusion, let me reaffirm Ethiopia's full commitment to sustaining progress towards the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Today's commemorative meeting is an opportunity for us all to recommit to implementing the resolutions and declarations we have agreed on, thus ensuring that women are fully involved as equal partners in peace and political processes at all levels. I would like to take this opportunity to call on the members of the Security Council to redouble their efforts to strengthen women's role in conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, mediation and enforcement, including through capacity-building and the provision of financial and technical support to developing countries.
