Mr. Colomina (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first of all like to thank Ambassador Motoc for
the concise briefing he has just made and for his
excellent work and great efforts at the head of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).
Spain shares the concern of those who believe
that the possibility that non-State actors - terrorists in
particular - may acquire weapons of mass destruction
and related materials poses a real, serious and present
threat to international peace and security. We therefore
believe that it is necessary to take urgent action to
close the legal gap that results from the fact that
international non-proliferation and disarmament
instruments and regimes do not adequately address this
sensitive matter.

As part of the global struggle against terrorism
and of the process begun by resolution 1373 (2001),
Spain decided to co-sponsor resolution 1540 (2004)
and called for the establishment of a Council
committee to serve as a follow-up mechanism to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

Spain would like to congratulate the States that

have already submitted national reports on the
measures adopted to implement resolution 1540
(2004). We encourage States that have not yet done so
to submit their reports as soon as possible. We also call
upon States that are encountering technical difficulties
in the preparation of their national reports to so inform
the Committee and to request the assistance they deem
necessary to overcome those difficulties.

Given the considerable number of national
reports received, my country welcomes the fact that the
Committee has been given the necessary tools to
enable it to begin the vital task of studying those
reports and to eventually brief the Security Council on
the degree of compliance with the resolution. In that
connection, we are relieved to know that the
Committee has now agreed to immediately hire four
experts to assist it with its work, and that two
additional experts will be hired in the near future.

In order to facilitate the Committee's work and to
avoid overlap, we believe it especially relevant that it
establish as soon as possible a fluid working
relationship with international organizations and
regimes with experience in the area of non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, as well as
with subsidiary bodies of the Security Council with
competency in the field of counter-terrorism, including
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban. We also
find very relevant the suggestion made by the Russian
delegation that, following the practice of the CTC, the
Committee in the future consider holding periodic
meetings with international, regional and subregional
organizations working in the area of non-proliferation.

We welcome the fact that the Committee's
functioning is following a path similar to that of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, which is to say that it is
governed by the same principles of cooperation, equal
treatment and transparency. We believe it essential for
that to continue. To ensure that there is transparency in
the Committee's work, we encourage the Committee
leadership to continue the sound practice, begun today
and also followed by the CTC, of submitting regular
reports to the Security Council, at least every three
months. We also urge it to continue to hold periodic
informal meetings with all interested Member States.
The imminent launch of the Committee's web site will
also make an important contribution to transparency in
its work.

Lastly, I would like to say that we are convinced
that, as was the case with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, providing technical assistance to Member
States for the implementation of the resolution will
become another essential aspect of the Committee's
work as it moves forward with its tasks.

