Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. Abou Moussa, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, for his briefing.

The crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Central African Republic and South Sudan, as well
as the presence of the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA)
on the borders of those countries, makes Central Africa
a breeding ground for very worrying insecurity. The
seriousness of that threat has led the United Nations,
the African Union, the international community and
subregional organizations to mobilize in order to find
appropriate solutions. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the outcome of that joint effort has led to
a relative improvement in the situation following the
defeat last December of the main armed group, the
Mouvement du 23 mars. Nevertheless, the security
situation remains volatile and huge efforts must still be
made to consolidate peace and stability in the country.

The Boko Haram terrorist group, whose activities
span the borders of neighbouring Nigeria, poses a real
threat today, both for Central Africa and for the entire
Sahel region. Chad condemns the kidnapping in Nigeria
of more than 200 young high school girls by Boko
Haram and expresses its solidarity with Nigeria. In that
regard, Chad welcomes the international community's

strong mobilization in the fight against such terrorist
groups.

The violence in the Central African Republic
recently reached unimaginable levels. More than
6,000 children aged between 8 and 14 years old have
been torn from their families by rival armed groups,
who force them to torture, kill and carry out sexual
violence in public to demoralize and humiliate the rival
community. Humanitarian personnel of the United
Nations and non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
are working in a climate of insecurity and are under
threat daily. The Central African Republic today is a
country half-emptied of its population. Armed gangs
have divided the capital, as they have the entire country,
into areas of influence, and attacks against the civilian
population continue.

It is against that backdrop of a total lack of security
that the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) is preparing to deploy on 15 September,
in accordance with resolution 2149 (2014). But in the
immediate term, Chad believes it would be important
for the United Nations, in coordination with the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States and the countries of the region, undertake
urgent efforts, among other things, go consolidate the
authority of the State and its ability to perform all of
its functions, ensure the safety of civilian populations
and humanitarian personnel, guarantee access for
humanitarian aid to populations in need, pay the
salaries of State employees and put basic services on
a stronger footing so as to reduce tensions. Putting
those conditions in place, in our humble opinion, would
allow for the return of refugees and displaced persons
as well as facilitate preparations for the deployment of
MINUSCA.

The fight against the LRA continues because
the armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, South Sudan and the Central African Republic
create positive conditions for them, undermining the
efforts of the international community. Chad welcomes
the coordination efforts carried out by UNOCA to
implement the regional strategy of the United Nations
against the threat and impact ofthe LRA and the African
Union's anti-LRA Regional Cooperation Initiative.

Furthermore, we welcome the determination of
the United States of America in the fight against the
LRA. Their human resources, financial, material and
logistical support are crucial for intelligence-gathering
and aerial surveillance of elements ofthe LRA. We also
welcome the valuable support of the European Union
as well as the role played by United Nations agencies,
donors and NGOs to assist civilians in the areas affected
by the activities of the LRA.

The reported death of in 2013 of Okot Odhiambo,
the LRA's second-in-command, who was subject to an
arrest warrant of the International Criminal Court, the
capture of Commander Charles Okello in April, and the
defection of a large number of LRA fighters, saving
dozens of women and children, are further encouraging
results of the joint efforts.

Despite such encouraging achievements, the
reported presence of LRA leaders in the north-east
of the Central African Republic and its increased
activities in the east of the country, on one hand, and
its intensified activities in the west of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, on the other, remain cause for
concern. In that regard, the international community
must keep up the pressure on the remaining scattered
elements, which are a small, highly mobile group, in
order to eradicate them.

The threats to security in Central Africa require
robust efforts from the international community and
close cooperation among the countries involved in the
fight against terrorism and the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons, as well as in the coordination
of joint border-control mechanisms. UNOCA has a key
role to play in such joint efforts. Chad therefore calls
for the strengthening of the necessary resources, for
the smooth functioning of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa in the light of the ever-
growing threats imperilling that region. The multiple
security challenges facing the subregion, which I
have addressed, require decisive involvement by the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and
continuous follow-up.

In conclusion, I would like to pay sincere tribute
to Mr. Abou Moussa for his excellent work as the Head
of UNOCA, and for all of the service he has given to
the United Nations in the 34 years of his career in the
Organization. I wish him well on his return to Chad and
the greatest of success in his future endeavours.

I would also like to welcome the appointment
of Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily as the new the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
UNOCA, and to wish him the greatest of success in his
new role.

