Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I should like at the outset to express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate on the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). I should like to extend my thanks
to the Commission for its third annual report
(S/2009/444). We also extend our thanks to His
Excellency Ambassador Mufioz, the Permanent
Representative of Chile and Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and to the current and former Chairs of
the four country-specific configurations for their
distinguished efforts in guiding the work of the
Commission and its configurations.

We appreciate this debate, as well as that which
took place in the General Assembly recently, as
important opportunities to assess the progress achieved
by the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund in carrying out their mandates to
consolidate peace in post-conflict countries. We should
also like to express our appreciation of the efforts
exerted by the Commission and its country-specific
configurations to increase international interest in and
commitment to the mobilization of resources, so as to
put the strategic plans and frameworks agreed upon
into effect with the countries on the agenda of the
Commission. Libya reaffirms its support for the stance
of the Non-Aligned Movement in this respect.

We express our high appreciation for the efforts
exerted by the Peacebuilding Commission to
collaborate effectively with other bodies of the United
Nations, such as the General Assembly, the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council, and we
emphasize the importance of continuing such
interaction and fostering further coordination and
cooperation between the Peacebuilding Commission
and other regional and subregional organizations,
including the African Union (AU). In this respect, we
commend the recent successful visit by a delegation of
the Peacebuilding Commission, chaired by Ambassador
Mufioz, the Permanent Representative of Chile, to the
AU headquarters in Addis Ababa, We call for such
visits and meetings to be continued, with a view to
creating a common strategic understanding of the
priorities for peacebuilding in post-conflict countries
and to specify a more effective methodology for
tackling the current challenges we face in this respect.

Libya commends increased efforts and interest in
peacebuilding and the greater interaction between the
Peacebuilding Commission, other bodies of the United
Nations and other regional and international
organizations, which in itself reflects the importance of

expanding the membership in the Peacebuilding
Commission. This is a request that has been made
repeatedly by the Non-Aligned Movement. We are
confident that this would enhance the effectiveness of
peacebuilding efforts in post-conflict countries and that
the Commission would benefit from the various
experiences that we have accumulated in this respect.

Peacebuilding is a multidimensional process
involving a number of challenges. Among these, we
believe, is the challenge of how to strategically link the
social, economic, developmental, political and security
elements and priorities of peacebuilding. We believe
that peacebuilding efforts will never bear fruit if we
focus on certain elements and priorities and ignore
others, especially with regards to the priorities of
economic recovery and development. We therefore call
for the developmental aspect of the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission to be further enhanced.

We agree with the remarks and conclusions
mentioned in the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission, especially those relating to coordination,
coherence and partnerships with a view to developing
integrated peacebuilding strategies based on the
fundamental principles of national ownership, mutual
accountability and continued partnership. There has to
be greater contact, awareness and information on the
role of the Commission, especially with regard to the
countries on its agenda.

With regard to the mobilization of resources,
undoubtedly financing constitutes a fundamental aspect
for maintaining the momentum of peacebuilding. In
this regard, we should like to stress the importance of
confirming the conviction contained in paragraph 79 of
the Commission's report, which states that "rapid and
flexible funding, aligned to an agreed and prioritized
strategy, is critical for successful peacebuilding".
Peacebuilding funding must be viewed as an early
investment in peace and development, and this requires
taking greater risks, beyond regular financing for
development. And, in this respect, we call for the
revised competencies of the Peacebuilding Fund to be
swiftly applied, so as to enable the Fund to act as a tool
that provides swift and flexible financing and effective
response to peacebuilding efforts.

Through its membership in the country-specific
configuration for the Central African Republic, Libya
is well aware of the importance of making strenuous
efforts to build peace in a country whose people long
to live in peace and to enjoy sustainable development
and prosperity, especially in view of the broad
momentum produced by the political dialogue and
comprehensive agreements, in whose successful
outcome Libya has participated.

In addition to the commitment expressed by the
Government of the Central African Republic and the
local, regional and international stakeholders, those
developments deserve to be encouraged through
tireless efforts to build peace in that country. That is
what we are striving for, as well as for other efforts on
the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission in Sierra
Leone, Guinea-Bissau and Burundi. We hope that the
forthcoming visit of the delegation of the country-
specific configuration for the Central African Republic,
to be led by Ambassador Grauls, the Permanent
Representative of Belgium, will be successful. We are
confident in Belgium's leadership and commitment to
achieving peace.

We look forward to a comprehensive review of
peacebuilding activities in the coming year, which will
help bridge the existing gap, and we trust that
preparations for such a review will start soon.

