Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to see you, Mr. Minister,
presiding over the Security Council. We thank the
Secretary-General for preparing and presenting his
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (S/2009/304), a document richly deserving of
the most careful analysis and consideration.

We share the approach to the criteria for
peacebuilding activities set out in the report. We agree
that it should be based on the principles of national
ownership and capacity-building in countries moving
towards peacebuilding, together with the development
ofa peacebuilding strategy as soon as possible after the
settlement of a conflict. The task of the United Nations
is to coordinate international assistance and ensure
coherent synergy and efficiency in the efforts of
various international actors.

External assistance to post-conflict countries
should be aimed at building their national capacities.
The report provides an objective account of the
challenges facing peacebuilding activities. Quite
rightly, it includes such factors as the ways in which
international assistance is fragmented and inadequate,
the irrational division of labour among the various
participants in the peacebuilding process, and the
inadequacies of financial mechanisms.

The drive to enhance the efficiency of United
Nations efforts in post-conflict response is hampered
by systemic problems that are addressed with great
candour in the report. We welcome the fact that the
Secretary-General intends to promote initiatives aimed
at strengthening the Secretariat's organizational
mechanisms and ensuring their coordinated
implementation. The report quite rightly states that
there should be a single methodology for assessing
countries' needs during the post-conflict phase and that
national institutions should play the lead role in that
regard. We studied with interest the programme
developed by the Secretary-General to improve the
post-conflict response mechanism, and we consider
many of the related proposals to be reasonable and
appropriate.

In addition to the establishment of a standby team
and rosters of peacebuilding experts, national
capacities must be exploited to the utmost and
strengthened. We must encourage the creation of
rosters and of civilian standby teams by Member
States, regional organizations and international
financial institutions. The Secretary-General's proposal
that such rosters be drawn up at the United Nations
level to create capacities for ensuring accountability
and reform in our human resources divisions should be
submitted for the consideration of Member States,
including for an assessment of their financial
implications. We support measures aimed at further
improving strategic coordination between the United
Nations and the World Bank, an important partner of
the Organization on peacebuilding issues.

The Peacebuilding Commission plays the primary
role within the peacebuilding architecture. It is
required to coordinate international peacebuilding
activities, mobilize resources and monitor progress in
the implementation of national strategies. While we are
generally satisfied with the experience accumulated by
the Commission in this area thus far, its mechanisms
and working methods must be further adapted and
developed. Unfortunately, the report does not devote
sufficient attention to the Commission per se, although
the time is ripe to develop proposals to improve the
way in which it functions.

The Commission could be more actively engaged
in the processes of peacebuilding and socio-economic
transformation currently entrusted to many
peacekeeping operations. Given the increasing
complexity and multifunctionality of modern
peacekeeping mandates, it would be rational to assign
United Nations peacekeepers only to initial recovery
tasks, and for the capacities of the Commission,
regional organizations, international financial
institutions and donors to be deployed in the
subsequent stages of post-conflict peacebuilding.

Of particular importance is the task of
strengthening the organic relationship between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council,
particularly on issues on the agendas of both entities.
We must also ensure timely exchanges of information
between them, as well as a clear division of labour and
complementarity. Clearly, this must be done in parallel
with the strengthening of the linkages among the
Commission, the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council. We support General Assembly
resolution 63/282 on the revision of the terms of
reference for the Peacebuilding Fund. It is important to
continue to work to increase the Fund's effectiveness
and transparency.
We are grateful to the delegation of Uganda for
preparing the draft presidential statement on post-
conflict peacebuilding, which has our full support.

