Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I should like to
join others in welcoming you, Sir, to the Security
Council today, as well as to thank Nikolay Mladenov
for his briefing and, through him, his team for all they
are doing.

I want to start by stating clearly that the brutal
murder of an Israeli soldier on 8 August and the
improvised explosive device terror attack, which killed
a l7-year-old Israeli on 23 August, are both an outrage.
This perpetual cycle of violence does not serve anyone's
interests and must end.

The United Kingdom is also concerned by the
increase in tension in Gaza, including the four attempts
this month by Gazan militants to infiltrate Israel, which
contribute to an environment of terror. We utterly
condemn the abhorrent rocket attacks by militants
in Gaza. Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and all
militant groups must cease all actions that are violent or
provocative or put civilian lives at risk. We encourage
the Palestinian Authority, Israel and regional and
international actors to put forward sustainable, long-
term proposals for resolving the threat posed to Israel's
security by Hamas and for returning the Palestinian
Authority to Government functions in Gaza.

It is also important that we continue to address the
underlying causes of the economic and humanitarian
situation in Gaza, in particular, by improving
movement and access for people and goods. On this
point regarding the humanitarian situation in Gaza, let
me say that the United Kingdom is of course firmly
committed to supporting the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) and Palestinian refugees across the Middle
East. UNRWA is a vital humanitarian and stabilizing
force in the region. The United Kingdom has increased
its funding to £655 million this year, to match our
support from 2018, but does remain concerned about
the funding crisis.

Turning to settlements, the United Kingdom is
seriously concerned about the plans announced earlier
this month by Israel to advance over 2,300 housing units
in Israeli settlements in the West Bank. We urge Israel
to halt its settlement expansion, which is contrary to
international law and promotes the effective annexation
of the West Bank. As we put on record before in the
Security Council, the United Kingdom would be
strongly opposed to any move to annex all or part of
the West Bank. Such a move would be deeply damaging
to prospects for lasting peace between Israel and the
Palestinians and could not pass unchallenged.

During last month's open debate (see S/PV.8583),
many Member States expressed alarm regarding
the demolition of Palestinian properties in Wadi
Al-Hummus in Sur Bahir. I reiterate that the United
Kingdom remains seriously concerned by the continued
demolition of Palestinian property and evictions of
Palestinians by Israeli authorities. This practice causes
unnecessary suffering to ordinary Palestinians and is
harmful to the peace process.

I also want to touch on the clashes that took place on
the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif on 11 August,
during the religious holidays of Eid Al-Adha and
Tisha B'Av. The United Kingdom urges all parties to
maintain calm, avoid provocation and uphold the status
quo to ensure the safety and security of the Temple
Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif and all who worship there,
particularly during religious Observances.

I noted what Mr. Mladenov had to say about the
recent escalation between Israel and Hizbullah. That
is a cause for concern for the United Kingdom. Of
course, we support Israel's right to security, but we
also condemn violations of Lebanon's sovereignty. We
urge both sides to show restraint and to de-escalate. A
conflict would be in no one's interests.

Turning to the more positive developments, the
United Kingdom welcomes the agreement between
Israel and the Palestinian Authority to transfer
outstanding fuel taxes. But we remain worried about
the impact of Israel's wider decision to withhold tax
revenues from the Palestinian Authority. We encourage
the Israeli Government to reverse its decision, which
undermines the Oslo Accords. We encourage the
Palestinian Authority to accept the remainder of the
revenues on a provisional basis, as refusing all revenues
only harms Palestinians.
Every Israeli and Palestinian has the right to live
in peace and security. The ongoing violence serves to
underline that a just and lasting resolution that ends
the occupation and delivers peace to both Israelis and
Palestinians is long overdue. The United Kingdom
therefore continues to encourage the United States
Administration to bring forward detailed proposals
for a viable Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement that
address the legitimate concerns of both parties. And,
as we have said before, the best way to achieve that
is through substantive peace talks between the parties,
leading to a two-State solution, based on 1967 lines,
with Jerusalem as a shared capital, and a just, fair,
agreed and realistic settlement for refugees.

