Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Allow me to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting. I would
also like to thank our colleague, Assistant Secretary-
General Khiari, for his briefing.

We believe that our objective remains the same.
We seek the complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, as well as
lasting peace, stability and prosperity. If we are to
obtain those objectives, we cannot backtrack on what
we have achieved so far. We should avoid all matters
that would hinder progress. In that regard, allow me to
make three points.

First, while we express our concern about the
recurrence of missile testing, Indonesia continues to
support the resolution of issues through dialogue and
negotiations as the only way forward. That includes the
full and expeditious implementation of the Panmunjom
Declaration on Peace, Prosperity and Reunification
of the Korean Peninsula, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea-United States Joint Statement,
and the Pyongyang Joint Declaration. We also urge
the two parties to fulfil their stated commitments,
including those on complete denuclearization. We
support the recent rounds of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea-United States dialogue and View the
technical-level dialogue that took place between them
last October as an important milestone. Continued
dialogue will bring the parties closer to resolving the
issues. It is not an instant process, and we should not
be discouraged if the first round of negotiations did
not yield a concrete result. Persistence and patience are
required. We are following the developments closely
and urge the two parties to resume their next round of
negotiations.

Secondly, we reiterate our call on all parties to
exercise the utmost restraint. This is not a time to
point fingers. Everyone has the same responsibility to
exercise self-restraint and persevere to build mutual
confidence. We commend the relevant parties that have
demonstrated efforts to exercise restraint. We urge
for that to continue in order to create stability and an
atmosphere conducive to dialogue. We must not forget
that self-restraint will contribute positively to the
stability of the region, which is also important to trade
and other economic activities.

Thirdly, as responsible members of the
international community, we must also not forget our
overarching obligations on nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation. Indonesia underscores the need to
take concrete measures to reduce and eliminate nuclear
weapons and their means of delivery without further
delay. As a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the South-East Asia
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone, as an ardent supporter of
the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons and
as the coordinator of the working group on disarmament
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, Indonesia
continues to stand determinedly for a world without
any nuclear weapons. We look forward to the roles
of the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
in the denuclearization verification process and in
advancing the possibility of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea returning to the fold of the NPT as a
non-nuclear-weapon State.

As a voice from the Asia-Pacific region, let me
conclude by reiterating that our common goal should
be to achieve lasting peace, stability and prosperity in
the region and beyond. Let us work together to achieve
those goals. We owe that to the people of the Korean
peninsula, of Asia and of the entire world. Let us
build trust, confidence and an environment conducive
to generating political solutions and dialogue. The
Council should be united in sending the message to all
parties to continue dialogue.

