Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I wish to thank
you, Minister Ndiaye, and your delegation for having
convened this important and very interesting debate. I
also express my appreciation to the Secretary-General
and the other briefers.

The subject of today's debate is somewhat
challenging for New Zealand: on the one hand, we are
surrounded by water and that water - seawater - is
fundamental to our security and to our economic well-
being. On the other hand, with our nearest neighbour
more than 1,200 miles away, that water is uncontestably
subject to New Zealand jurisdiction, in accordance
with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the

Sea. We are in the lucky situation of not having to share
freshwater resources with any other nation or manage
the challenges of a shared riverine boundary.

But we know that other members of this
Organization have much more difficult situations to
manage and that access to critical natural resources
can have profound implications for the survival and
prosperity of communities, and competition for these
has long been a potential source of conflict. Therefore,
while I agree with my Russian colleague that there is
nothing inherent in water that makes it a security issue,
we all know that no resource is more central to human
survival than fresh water and that where that resource is
scarce or access is restricted, the potential for conflict
is real.

As we heard from Mr. Danilo Turk, approximately
145 States and 40 per cent of the world's population fall
within 263 international river basins. In some regions,
hundreds of millions of people rely on the outflow
of just a handful of at-risk water sources. Even in a
country like New Zealand, which has mostly clean and
relatively abundant fresh water, economic activities
and a growing population are putting pressure on
freshwater resources in terms of both managing access
and maintaining water quality.

Those regions of the world already struggling with
water shortages are expected to experience further
scarcity as they feel the combined effects of rapid
population growth, increased agricultural production
and climate change. Moreover, the potential for conflict
between countries over transboundary water resources
is well documented. Water crises can increase State
fragility and act as a threat multiplier.

I wish to highlight three areas where we believe
more could be done on this issue to support international
peace and security.

First, we need to acknowledge that the effective
management of water resources is not only essential
for resilience and sustainable development, but is also
an effective conflict-prevention tool. In many parts
of the world, considerable progress has been made
in the collaborative management of water resources,
enhancing security and prosperity. This is most
effective at the regional level.

There are many successful multiparty management
frameworks, stretching from the Mekong River in
South-East Asia to the Senegal River and the Lake Chad

Basin in West Africa. Effective regional cooperation to
mitigate conflict risk must be applauded. We need to
support such initiatives and foster them in areas where
frameworks are absent.

As the Secretary-General noted this morning,
the United Nations can play an important role. We
welcome, for example, the work of the Department of
Political Affairs, through the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, in
fostering dialogue and cooperation on the management
of transboundary water resources in Central Asia.
Initiatives such as the Global High-Level Panel on
Water and Peace can also allow us to focus our efforts.

Secondly, in existing conflict situations we need
to recognize that competition for water resources
can affect the conduct and continuation of hostilities.
Disputes over water need to be fully integrated
into conflict analyses and conflict-prevention and
resolution strategies.

The denial ofaccess to water can be used for political
leverage or as aweapon of war, as we have heard anumber
of times this morning. We have seen the shocking and
deliberate use of such cynical tactics against civilians
in Syria, Yemen and elsewhere. Freshwater systems
form part of critical civilian infrastructure and, as such,
are protected under international humanitarian law. As
the representative of the International Committee of
the Red Cross made clear this morning, deliberately
denying civilians' access to fresh water represents
a violation of international human rights law and in
conflict settings may even amount to war crimes.

Thirdly, and finally, we need to ensure that water
security is not considered solely as a transboundary
issue. As the Council heard during the open debate on
security challenges facing small island developing States
convened by New Zealand last year (see S/PV.7499),
security threats can take different forms for such States.
For many small island States in my own region, reliable
access to fresh water is an existential issue.

Almost half ofthe small island developing States in
the Pacific have no significant surface water resources.
Almost as many also lack groundwater reserves. This
leaves many communities reliant on unpredictable
rainfall patterns for fresh water, representing a threat to
the sustainable development and health and, ultimately,
the viability of many Pacific populations.

Climate change effects on the region are likely
to include more intense droughts and the potential
contamination of available groundwater resources.
Those impacts can exacerbate security risks. New
Zealand has been working with its Pacific partners to
address a range of water-related vulnerabilities across
the region, including rainwater-harvesting systems
in Kiribati and Vanuatu and strengthening national
water management and delivery systems. We are also
working towards improving supply and reliability of
water supplies for drought-prone islands in Tuvalu,
Tokelau, Cook Islands and the Marshall Islands.

In conclusion, ensuring water security for the
world's population represents one of the most critical
challenges facing the global community. Ultimately,
that can only be achieved through effective regional
and international cooperation. Doing so will enhance
prosperity and security by fostering resilience and
trust. It can help prevent conflict and save lives.

I thank Senegal for its work in the area and the
briefers for their instructive contributions. We must
continue to lend our full support to such efforts.

