Judge Byron: I am greatly honoured to address
the members of the Security Council and to present the
second annual assessment of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda's completion strategy, for the
period June 2007 up to the present time.

In August, one new indictment was issued,
namely, to prosecute a witness for giving false
testimony. It was the first such case in the history of
both International Tribunals and an important
mechanism for protecting the integrity of the judicial
process. Final trial chamber judgements were delivered
and sentences were imposed against three persons,
including in the case of false testimony. Cases of two
accused were referred to France.

The evidence phase in the trials against five
persons was completed, bringing the total in the
judgement-writing phase to cases against nine persons.
Trials are in progress against 18 persons in the four
multi-accused cases and in one single-accused case that
was commenced during the reporting period. There are
three detainees awaiting transfer to the Tribunal. The
case of Bagaragaza, which had been transferred to the
Netherlands, met technical difficulties there and has
been referred back to the Tribunal for disposition. Two
of the fugitives arrested during this reporting period
await the completion of the judicial process for their
transfer to the Tribunal, one in Germany and one in
France. At the Tribunal, there are two detainees whose
trials are due to commence in early 2008 and four
detainees whose cases for referral to a national
jurisdiction are pending. There are 14 fugitives still at
large.

I should recall that in previous reporting periods,
one accused died before trial and two indictments were
withdrawn. One of those, the case against Bernard
Ntuyahaga, was tried in Belgium earlier this year. In
summary therefore, of the 91 indictments issued, 41
have been disposed of, 36 are under active judicial
management and there are 14 fugitives at large.

This reporting period has seen substantial
achievements, despite unexpected problems. The
Tribunal was saddened by the sudden passing of
Mr. Gaudreau, a Canadian citizen, who was Lead
Counsel for Jerome Bicamumpaka in the Bizimnngu
trial, which necessarily caused a hiatus until his
replacement.

The judicial calendar for 2008 projects the
delivery of final judgements in all previously
mentioned cases that are in the judgement-writing
phase. The evidence phase in the cases of the accused
whose trials are in progress will be completed, except
for the multi-accused case of Karemera, about which
there have been previous reports, and the case of
Augustin Ngirabatware, who is yet to be transferred to
the Tribunal following his recent arrest in Germany.
The cases of the accused in detention awaiting trial
should be completed, with the four courtrooms running
at maximum utilization during the entire year. That, of
course, cautions that, if there are new cases for trial
resulting from the arrest of the 14 fugitives still at
large, difficulties with the referral of cases to national
jurisdictions for trial, any new indictments, or
unexpected developments in the cases already planned
for trial, special arrangements will have to be made.

At the appeals level, two final judgements
concerning four accused were delivered during the
reporting period, bringing to 24 the total number of
persons whose judgements have been completed at the
appellate level. There are currently two accused
persons with pending appeals.

I should highlight that the Appeals Chamber
delivered its decision in the Media case of the Trial
Chamber presided by Judge Pillay of South Africa,
which set for the first time in international criminal law
standards applicable to the responsibility of journalists
for serious crimes against humanitarian law. However,
the complexity of the appellate progress was evidenced

by the fact that the Trial Chamber decision had been
delivered during the year 2003.

It is, indeed, not too early to make plans for the
completion of the Tribunal's appellate functions. As we
consider the number of cases and referral proceedings
in progress, it is expected that, during 2008, the appeal
workload will substantially increase, and the same is
true for the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia (ICTY). I would venture to suggest
that, unless it is supplemented, the Appeals Chamber
will not have sufficient capacity to complete its
anticipated workload by December 2010. That is a
situation that needs to be urgently addressed, perhaps
as soon as June 2008.

The significant results achieved by the Tribunal
over the past six months are indisputably due to the
coordinated efforts of all sections within the Tribunal.
The Tribunal's ability to maintain and improve upon its
current level of efficiency remains, however, largely
dependant on the retention of its highly experienced
and qualified judges and staff.

The Tribunal has been deploying its best efforts
to persuade the Security Council and General
Assembly to make special provisions to assist in
retaining its staff. The crisis will undoubtedly escalate
as we get closer to December 2008. I am aware that the
issue is being actively considered by the relevant
committees and officials. At this juncture however, I
would like to invite the Council to authorize the
Secretary-General to take all reasonable measures to
ensure that the Tribunal is able to retain its staff in
order to achieve its mandate strategy.

In relation to the permanent judges, I would
simply like to express my solidarity with my colleague,
President Pocar, on the issue of pensions.

At the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), however, there is the special case of
the ad litem judges, who have contributed equally with
the permanent judges to the achievements and
efficiencies that the Tribunal has exhibited. The
Council's decision to extend the mandate of permanent
and ad litem judges provided the Tribunal with the
continuity, stability and experienced judges necessary
for an expeditious completion of our mandate. It is our
submission that a necessary sequel to that decision is to
make further adjustments to the mandate of the ad
litem judges, in order to consolidate achievements and
to further efforts to achieve the completion strategy.
The Tribunal has benefited from the cooperation and
assistance of States, which is paramount for the
successful accomplishment ofits mission.

In that regard, I must record with approbation
that during the reporting period France has received
two referral cases and that there were arrests of four
fugitives, three in France and one in Germany. Yet,
there are still the 14 fugitives who remain at large.
Failure to arrest them and bring them to justice will
seriously undermine the purpose for which the Tribunal
was established. On behalf of the Tribunal, I once
again call upon Member States to guarantee the arrest
and transfer of these fugitives without delay.

The relocation of acquitted persons has also
become a matter for the Council's attention. Two
acquitted persons remain under the protection of the
Tribunal in Arusha. The Registrar continues to make
strenuous attempts to find a country of residence for
them, but without positive results to date. I kindly
request the support and assistance of Council members
in finding and imposing a sustainable solution.

In compliance with Security Council resolution
1503 (2003), the Tribunal and various stakeholders of
the justice sector in Rwanda have continued to work to
strengthen the capacity of the judicial system of
Rwanda. Through its Outreach Programme, the
Tribunal continues to raise awareness of its activities
through multifaceted activities in partnership with
academic institutions, the media and organizations of
civil society. In November, the Tribunal co-organized a
three-day symposium in Arusha, focusing on the legacy
of the Tribunal. Delegates from the African legal
community contributed to valuable discussions on the
work of the Tribunal and on mechanisms for
disseminating the lessons learned to inform
international law and to assist in the development of
legal systems in the Great Lakes region.

During the reporting period, significant progress
has also been made in addressing one of the important
residual and legacy issues: the Tribunals' archives. The
Advisory Committee on Archives has engaged in
informal consultations with Governments, civil society,
non-governmental organizations, victims groups and
international organizations, in Rwanda and elsewhere.
Its report, which is expected to be presented before the
next reporting period comes to an end, will assist the
Tribunals to provide informed recommendations to the
Security Council for its consideration and ultimate
decision-making.

The impact of the Tribunal's work has already
extended beyond the number of persons prosecuted and
judgements rendered. One of the fundamental and
lasting contributions of the Tribunal is bringing justice
to the peoples of Rwanda and the Great Lakes region.
Justice is an essential element of peace and
reconciliation. There will be no lasting peace if there is
no credible international justice perspective that unites
on a higher level the peoples of Rwanda and the Great
Lakes region, who have suffered from the heinous
crimes committed in 1994.

On behalf of the Tribunal, I want to take this
opportunity to thank the Security Council, the
Secretariat and Member States for their steadfast
support to the Tribunal which is crucial to the
accomplishment of its work. I respectfully request the
continued assistance of all Member States as we pursue
our commitment to complete the ongoing trials in light
of the Completion Strategy and to guarantee the
triumph of international justice and the fight against
impunity.

