Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank Lord Ashdown for his presentation,
which highlighted the outstanding progress made by
Bosnia and Herzegovina as it moves towards admission
to the Partnership for Peace programme and towards
the commencement of negotiations for the conclusion
of a stabilization and association agreement with the
European Union (EU). Those national projects are
decisive for peacebuilding and for the sustainable
development of the country. They also are indicators of
the degree of the country's integration within the
European family.

The encouraging information that the High
Representative has provided us demonstrates that the
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities have correctly
understood the full importance of this question for the
future of their country.

With the support that the country has enjoyed for
the strengthening of its judicial system, we hope that
the issue of war crimes can also be resolved through
the establishment of the War Crimes Chamber and the
actions taken to allow it to operate free from outside
influence so that it can carry out its mandate in a spirit
of impartiality and political neutrality.

Turning to another area, reform of the economy
seems now to have attained full speed in terms of the
actions that have been undertaken. We welcome the
positive measures taken in the context of monetary and
tax policy, which allowed the country to rebalance the
State budget for 2004.

The substantive progress made in various key
sectors such as transportation and energy and in the
renewing of ties to the European network is indeed
decisive. The Bosnian authorities must therefore be
encouraged to persevere in that positive direction in
order to overcome the effects of war.

We also welcome the efforts made in the area of
defence designed to strengthen the central State
through the restoration of the competences exercised
by the entities. The resulting savings could help in the
mobilization of the financial resources necessary to
implement the bold measures required to achieve
rationalization of the sector.

We deem it particularly important to strengthen
efforts to inculcate a genuine culture of peace through
the promotion of national reconciliation, of which the
reunification of the city of Mostar, now under way, is
clear evidence.

However, the situation with respect to the
establishment of a control and monitoring policy with
respect to the media in the country is not satisfactory,
although it seems to us to be of the greatest
importance. We hope that those obstacles which have
prevented the adoption of broadcasting legislation will
be overcome soon.

In conclusion, we would like to pay a well-
deserved tribute to the High Representative and his
Office for the far-sighted and prudent work done with
respect to the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. We also welcome the role taken on by the
European Force, which has seamlessly taken over from
the Stabilization Force in maintaining the commitment
of the international community to peacebuilding in the
country.

