Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation wishes
to commend you, Mr. President, for convening this
open meeting on the issue of the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as this provides an
opportunity for us to address in a transparent manner
the issue of the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
its linkage with the continuation of the conflict in that
country and the implications for the Great Lakes region
as a whole.

My delegation wishes to thank Mme Ba-N'Daw
for the presentation of the report of the Panel of
Experts appointed by the Secretary-General at the
request of the Council. We recognize only too well,
from the report as well as from Mme Ba-N'Daw's
presentation, that the task has been an arduous one.

My delegation joins others in welcoming to the
Council the Ministers from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda. We have
taken careful note of their statements, because my
delegation believes that it is important for those who
have a direct interest in the report to be listened to by
the Council before any action is taken.

My delegation has noted that the report contains
disturbing allegations about the illegal exploitation of
the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Those allegations regard financial and
economic matters, the diamond business, forests and
timber. We have noted that they are extremely serious
in nature and must be studied along with the comments
we heard this morning from the representatives of the
Governments concerned. In that regard, we welcome
the determination expressed by several of the Ministers
who spoke that investigations will be carried out and
that where perpetrators are found, they will be brought
to justice.

The Panel's recommendations revolve around six
broad themes, and they carry very serious implications.
It is in that context that we support the extension of the
Panel's mandate for a further period of three months so
that it can finalize its work. It will only be at that stage
that the Council will be able to examine the
recommendations and the further findings of the Panel
so that it can take appropriate action.

My delegation supports the action to be taken by
the Panel based on its action plan, as well as that
outlined in the statement to be delivered by the
President at the end of this debate.

We continue to be extremely concerned about the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
because with so many people affected, including more
than two million internally displaced persons and
refugees in neighbouring States, we have on more than
one occasion drawn attention to the makings of an
immense humanitarian tragedy.

We are pleased that progress has been made
towards the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement.
We believe that the mission to be carried out by the
Council later this month will go a long way in
providing a basis for further action by the Council in
support of the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement.

At this stage, my delegation wishes to express our
sincere condolences to the families of the staff
members of the International Committee of the Red
Cross and to the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Colombia and Switzerland.
Those persons who lost their lives in the cause of peace
remind us of the immense pressure under which
humanitarian workers ~ who go into areas into which
we often would not send peacekeepers - labour on
behalf of the international community.

The discussions today clearly attest to one fact,
and that is the need for a comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo within
a regional context involving the entire Great Lakes
region. We look forward to that day, and we look
forward to continuing support to the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the people of
the neighbouring States as the international community
seeks to bring peace to that war-torn region.

Again we emphasize that there can be no military
solution to the crisis in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is therefore important for us to continue to
give our support to the steps leading towards national
reconciliation.

