Mr. Yang Jiechi (China) (spoke in Chinese): It
gives me great pleasure to attend this high-level
meeting of the Security Council on diplomacy. I wish
to thank Lebanon for its initiative and the efforts it has
made to make this meeting possible.

Over 60 years ago, world leaders jointly
established the United Nations, with a view to saving
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. They
made a solemn commitment in the Charter to take
effective collective measures for the prevention and
removal of threats to peace. That has given us both
theoretical guidance and a basis for action in
conducting preventive diplomacy and preventing the
outbreak of conflicts. Over the past six decades, the
United Nations has actively promoted the concept of
preventive diplomacy and put it into practice, making
important contributions to defusing tension, resolving
hotspot issues and restoring regional peace and
stability.

Our world today is undergoing profound and
complex changes. The international situation on the
whole is stable, yet regional hotspot issues keep
emerging, and traditional and non-traditional security
threats are intertwined. The new situation requires us to
have a keener appreciation of the importance of
preventive diplomacy and to employ diverse means to
add new impetus to the United Nations efforts in the
area of preventive diplomacy so that it can contribute
more to maintaining international peace and security.
Here, I would like to make a four-point proposal on
United Nations preventive diplomacy under the new
circumstances.

First, we should pay greater attention to
prevention and early warning. The successful
experiences of the United Nations in the past have
shown that it would be doubly rewarding to forestall
the outbreak and spread of conflicts with prompt and
appropriate actions at an early stage of a crisis. The
United Nations should truly change the mindset of
prioritizing treatment over prevention and the practice
of prioritizing peacekeeping over mediation. There
should be more input into early-warning mechanisms,
conflict prevention and peace mediation. This will help
save resources, improve efficiency and protect people
from the scourge of war. The Secretary-General and
regional offices of the United Nations have a bigger
role to play in preventive diplomacy.
Secondly, we should adopt an integrated strategy
and seek to address the root causes of conflict.
Conflicts in today's world differ from each another in
nature, and the causes for disputes are increasingly
complicated. The United Nations should formulate a
comprehensive, scientific and effective strategy on
preventive diplomacy. We may use such measures as
good offices, mediation and negotiation to mitigate
crises. At the same time, we should increase input into
development, particularly development in Africa. Only
by helping the countries concerned achieve economic
growth, social progress and sustainable development
and eliminate the underlying economic and social
causes of conflicts can we fundamentally prevent
conflicts. The United Nations, and the Peacebuilding
Commission in particular, has made some positive
efforts in recent years. They should continue to explore
new ideas and new practices in this regard.

Thirdly, we should enhance communication and
coordination and bring into full play the strengths of all
parties. Preventive diplomacy is a multidimensional
task and cannot be achieved without the support and
coordination of all sides. In recent years, the African
Union and subregional organizations in Africa have
played an important role in mediating hotspot issues in
Africa. Their success shows that regional and
subregional organizations have unique political, moral
and geographic advantages in preventing and resolving
local conflicts. The United Nations, particularly the
Security Council, should strengthen cooperation with
these organizations and fully realize their initiative in
using their unique strengths to actively engage in
preventive diplomacy. Other countries that can
influence the parties to a conflict should also play their
due role.

Fourthly, we should make use of all available
resources to build strong synergies. The work of the
United Nations covers a wide range of areas, and the
entities and agencies within the United Nations system
all have their respective and clearly defined mandates.
The United Nations as a whole is endowed with rich
resources and unique overall strengths. We hope that
the United Nations will coordinate its resources and
work in various areas, fully utilize the expertise of the
General Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic
and Social Council and other organs, and make good
use of the resources of the World Bank, the United
Nations Development Programme, the World
Food Programme and other specialized agencies,
programmes and funds. We hope the United Nations
will encourage all sides to enhance exchanges and
coordination so as to build synergies and conduct
preventive diplomacy more effectively. We support the
Secretary-General in playing a more active role in
coordinating the efforts of all agencies.

As early as 2,000 years ago, the Chinese people
put forward the concept of guarding against potential
dangers and the idea that peace is of supreme value. As
a permanent member of the Security Council, China
has always advocated peace, development and
cooperation in the United Nations and the Security
Council and has exerted great efforts for the peaceful
settlement of disputes and conflict prevention. On the
basis of our practice over the years, we are more
convinced than ever that the peaceful settlement of
disputes, as one of the basic principles of the United
Nations Charter, remains highly relevant under the new
circumstances. It is a principle that should continue to
be respected and upheld. Preventive diplomacy
deserves more attention and input.

Let us work together to reaffirm the solemn
commitments made by the older generation of leaders
in the United Nations Charter, enable the United
Nations and the Security Council to better meet threats
and challenges and strive for a world of common
security and enduring peace.

