The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Colombia.

I have already thanked Mr. Serry for his very thorough
and thoughtful briefing. In my capacity as President
of the Security Council, on 19 July I disseminated a
statement issued by this organ condemning in the most
severe terms the terrorist attack on Israeli tourists in
Bulgaria, in which Israeli and Bulgarian nationals died
and many were wounded. My country reaffirms its
total repudiation of that heinous act, and reiterates its
condolences to the families of the victims.

Colombia has always clearly and precisely
articulated its vision ofa Palestinian State living in peace
with Israel within internationally recognized, defined
and secure borders resulting from an agreement that
guarantees coexistence between the two peoples. We
therefore reiterate today that negotiations between the
two parties are the only viable path to a comprehensive,
structured and lasting solution.

We support the work of the Middle East Quartet,
and most specifically the platform for seeking a
definitive solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict based on
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003), 1850 (2008), the Madrid principles, and the road
map laid out in the Quartet statement of 23 September
2011. We regret that, notwithstanding the individual
and collective efforts of members of the Quartet and
various countries of the region, the parties have not
been able to overcome the existing obstacles or renew
direct bilateral negotiations without prior preconditions
so that talks could be successful. It is urgent to create
confidence-building measures.

I find relevant Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's
comment, in his message to participants at the United
Nations Asian and Pacific Meeting in Support of
Israeli-Palestinian Peace, held in Bangkok on 10 July,
that
"recent actions on the ground have not contributed
to a conducive environment for dialogue. Israel
has continued settlement activity, contrary to
international law and its commitments under the
Road Map."

In addition, the Palestinian reconciliation process
taking place in the context of the commitments of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, under the leadership
of President Abbas, continues to be a crucial element
in achieving lasting peace between Palestinians
and Israelis. We believe that a unified Palestinian
Government is essential to achieving two States based
on the principles of mutual acknowledgement and
peaceful coexistence.

While efforts continue to rekindle peace talks
between the Palestinians and the Israelis, my country
believes it to be of the utmost importance to renew efforts
to strengthen the financial position of the Palestinian
Authority and to revitalize the Palestinian economy. In
order to achieve sustained economic growth and create
jobs in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, there is a need
for efforts aimed at increasing investor confidence and
unleashing the enormous potential of the Palestinian
private sector.

The international community should promote
respect for human rights and the protection of all
Palestinian and Israeli civilians without exception.
That includes a halt to the launching of rockets from the
Gaza Strip into Israel. There is no justification whatever
for such indiscriminate attacks against civilians. Both
the Palestinian and Israeli peoples have a right to live
in peace and security with dignity, free from fear of
indiscriminate violence.

The Syrian crisis constitutes a flagrant threat to
the peace and security of the region, where conditions
are already fragile and in a state of alert. We therefore
deplore the impotence of the Security Council to act in
a tougher manner, with a View to halting the violence
and bloodshed and facilitating a political solution.

I would like to draw attention to the effects of
the devastating tragedy that Syria is experiencing
when it comes to providing stability, protection and
humanitarian access to the 500,000 refugees living
in that country. The inability to be able to effectively
ensure the protection of the humanitarian personnel
and facilities in Syria of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
is a matter of concern. We call on all the parties to
take the necessary measures to save lives, avoid forced
displacements and ensure the protection of Palestinian
refugees trapped in the armed conflict taking place
in Syria. The neutrality and integrity of the facilities
of the United Nations in areas where Palestinians and
other civilians are living should also be respected.

In conclusion, we are alarmed about the incidents
taking place along the Syrian-Lebanese border, as they
violate the sovereignty, independence and territorial
and political integrity of Lebanon, including the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. We
should maintain our firm commitment to support the
Government of President Sleiman and Prime Minister
Mikati in meeting their humanitarian obligations
vis-a-vis Syrians who have sought refuge in Lebanon.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, there are 30,000 such
refugees, with 2,500 awaiting registration.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.

