The President: I thank Mr. Lake for his statement.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Malaysia.

I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
remarks and his steadfast commitment to the children
and armed conflict agenda. I also wish to express my
heartfelt appreciation to Special Representative Leila
Zerrougui and Executive Director Anthony Lake of
UNICEF for their insightful and compelling briefings.
My delegation pays tribute to them both, as well as to the
people and institutions they represent, for their tireless
dedication to and relentless advocacy for the protection
of rights of children affected by armed conflict.

Malaysia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Thailand on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

In making her call for action 20 years ago, Graca
Machel appealed for daring solutions to address the
impact of conflict on children. The international
community rose to that challenge by embracing the
children and armed conflict agenda both in the General
Assembly and in the Security Council. Under this
agenda, the landscape of international child protection
has evolved over the past two decades through the
development of a unique set of tools within the United
Nations system to end grave violations against children,
channel assistance and support to children affected by
conflict, and hold parties to conflict accountable for
their obligations under international law.

In that regard, the important role played by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, as a high-level
advocate who gives children scarred by war a voice
and a champion for their cause, must continue to
be supported. Ms. Zarrougui and her predecessors
have been successful in galvanizing international
commitment to child protection, both through the
close engagement of Member States and partners as
well as through campaigns that raise broad awareness
and support.

One heartening example is the progress achieved
through the Children, Not Soldiers campaign, co-led by
the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and UNICEF, to eliminate the recruitment and
use of children in national security forces. Malaysia

commends the resolute commitment of Member States
that have signed action plans to achieve that objective,
and calls for continued international support for their
efforts beyond 2016.

The deployment of child protection advisers
in United Nations peace operations has also been
instrumental to mainstreaming and implementing the
child protection mandate in that field. Child protection
advisers, together with other actors in the United Nations
country task force, play an important advocacy role in
dialogue with Governments and parties to conflict on
child protection concerns, including developing action
plans.

In that regard, we are closely following the
consolidation of protection functions exercises in three
United Nations peace operations: the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia. We call on the Secretary-General to continue
ensuring that dedicated child protection capacities
are maintained and strengthened, including if and
when embedded in larger human rights units, and
urge consultations to be held with Member States on
this issue.

Malaysia also reaffirms its strong support for
the monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave
violations against children in situations of armed
conflict, established under resolution 1612 (2005),
which enables the collection of verified information
on grave violations against children that is crucial to
ensuring that such heinous acts do not go unreported.
We reiterate that accurate and objective facts, including
information gathered through the monitoring and
reporting mechanism, should be the determining factor
that guides our actions in seeking the compliance of
parties to conflict and holding perpetrators of grave
violations accountable. The mandate and the tools it
created remain urgently relevant today as children
continue to suffer the horrifying consequences of war.

We echo Ms. Machel's call for daring solutions in
the face of evolving trends and persisting challenges
affecting children in situations of conflict. Non-State
armed groups remain among the biggest perpetrators
of grave violations against children, and ensuring their
compliance with child protection's obligations under
international humanitarian law is an ongoing challenge.
We are deeply alarmed that non-State armed groups,
including groups employing violent extremist tactics,
remain the main perpetrators of the recruitment and
use of children. One Boko Haram militiaman told
a kidnapped girl who had been repeatedly raped by
militias and subsequently trained to become a suicide
bomber,

"It would not be painful to be a suicide bomber. It
would be just like if an ant bites you".

Even more heartbreaking, children who have
been kidnapped by the non-State armed groups are
stigmatized and shunned by their own families and
communities upon their return or escape. They are
treated with suspicion as possible suicide bombers or
for having a baby fathered by a kidnapper. We urge
Member States to treat children associated with such
groups primarily as victims and to consider alternatives
to prosecution and detention where appropriate, as
well as to prioritize reintegration and rehabilitation
programmes. The peace talks between the Government
of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo provides a positive
example in ensuring the protections and rights of
children separated from armed groups.

Another challenge is addressing the needs created
by the large scale of the displacement of children
by armed conflicts. The image of Aylan Kurdi, the
3-year-old boy who drowned as his family attempted
to escape the Syrian conflict in 2015, is emblematic of
the fate of hundreds of children forced to flee armed
conflict. Surviving a perilous journey, however, does
not guarantee safety. Displaced children, particularly
separated and unaccompanied children, are especially
vulnerable to exploitation and grave violations by
unscrupulous parties. It is therefore imperative that
children in situations of displacement be given support
to help them adapt to their new surroundings, including
access to medical and psychosocial services, education
and recreational activities.

Malaysia firmly believes that the agenda on children
and armed conflict must continue to be strengthened and
enhanced. In the two decades since the establishment of
the agenda, the hopes and dreams of children in many
parts of the world have continued to be dashed and their
innocence robbed. The international community must
redouble its efforts to secure peace and lift them from
the depths of despair. While we have made progress
in using the tools at our disposal, much more needs
to be done. Our work is far from over. I pledge my
delegation's enduring commitment to that end.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.
