Mr. De Loecker (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
have the honour of taking the floor on behalf of the
European Union. The countries of Central and Eastern
Europe associated with the European Union, Bulgaria,
the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, and
the associated countries, Cyprus, Malta and Turkey
align themselves with this declaration.

The European Union welcomes the attention the
Security Council has sought to give to the current
situation in the Central African Republic. The
international community must maintain its focus on
that country, which lies in the heart of Central Africa
and is beset by numerous political, economic, social
and security problems. The report just presented to us
by the Secretary-General's Representative, Mr. Cisse,
has provided us with some interesting ideas and
concrete recommendations to help this country to
overcome those problems.

I would also like to thank Mr. Calderisi for
presenting to us an account of the activities of the
World Bank in the Central African Republic in the
months to come.

Like the other countries of Central Africa, the
Central African Republic has not been spared the
transnational scourges that have afflicted the region for
several years. The effects of the conflicts on
neighbouring countries are acutely felt; they include
the proliferation of small arms that fuels insecurity and
organized crime. Today, the Central African Republic
is host to thousands of refugees from many countries,
while thousands of its citizens have fled to Congo-
Brazzaville and to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. As the Secretary-General has indicated, the fact
that the crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the situation in the Central African Republic are
closely interlinked is particularly worrying. The
international community must establish a global
strategy to address the numerous, closely
interconnected regional problems.

The international community must continue its
efforts to assist the Central African Republic.
Multidimensional assistance programmes, both
bilateral and multilateral, are indispensable. The
international community made a vital contribution
towards stabilizing the country and restoring law and
order after the mutinies of 1996 and 1997. First, it set
up an Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Bangui
Agreements (MISAB) and later a United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA),
both hailed as successes.

The United Nations cannot now fail in the
process of consolidating peace. BONUCA has a central
role to play in this effort, as have a number of players,
foremost among whom are the President and the
Government of the Central African Republic,
democratically elected following the legislative and
presidential elections prepared and held under the aegis
of the United Nations.

The European Union attaches particular
importance to the achievement of genuine national
reconciliation and supports BONUCA's efforts to
intensify political dialogue. The absence of a true
dialogue generates tensions that can rapidly produce
explosive situations, as was the case last May. The
European Union unconditionally condemned the
attempted coup and asked the parties to commit
themselves to political dialogue and to respect the
constitutional order, the rule of law and human rights.
Another aspect of national reconciliation is peaceful
understanding between the various components of
society. The Central African Government must take
every measure within its power to bring an end to all
acts of violence inspired by ethnic hatred.

The European Union is prepared to continue to
provide assistance to the Central African Republic.
Following the crisis last May, the European Union
provided immediate financial support of 1 million
euros to cover the food and health requirements for six
months of around 80,000 displaced residents of Bangui
and to help them to return to and resettle in their areas
of origin.

The European Union has also provided 11.5
million euros in the form of budgetary support. It is
currently discussing with the Central African
authorities, and in close coordination with the
international financial institutions, the arrangements
for a second payment. That should be dependent on
compliance with the undertakings to implement
macroeconomic reforms, particularly the sound
management of public finance, as agreed by the Central
African Republic with the Bretton Woods institutions.

In the medium term, the European Union is in
discussion with the Central African Republic to devise
jointly a support strategy to include continued support
for the economic reform programme, taking into
account in particular social sectors such as health and
education. In this respect, we call on the Government
of the Central African Republic to submit detailed and
realistic projects to its development aid partners.

In conclusion, the European Union supports
BONUCA's activities and those of Special
Representative Cisse. We hope that the reinforcement
of BONUCA, as proposed in the Secretary-General's
report, will help to accelerate the process of economic
and political recovery in the Central African Republic.

