Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Like other speakers, I
would like to welcome the participation in this debate
of Deputy Prime Minister Covic of the Republic of
Serbia. We have heard his statement with great interest.

I would also wish to add my voice to express the
profound sadness of the Government and people of
Pakistan at the recent brutal murders in Gorazdevac. As
it has done in the past, Pakistan unreservedly and
unequivocally condemns all ethnically motivated
crimes in Kosovo. We have consistently called for an
end to impunity and we will continue to urge that all
those who have committed such crimes in Kosovo over
the past four years be brought to justice.

The establishment of the rule of law and security
is the most essential element in almost all post-conflict
transitional administration situations. Kosovo is no
exception in this regard. We have repeatedly stated
that, without security, there can be no freedom of
movement, no protection of minorities, no sustainable
return of refugees and no economic recovery. The rule
of law is essential to progress towards justice,
reconciliation and self-governance. These are the
essential pillars on which the success of the Provisional
Institutions and the future political stability of Kosovo
depend. We hope that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), under
the new and able leadership of Mr. Holkeri, will give
these issues the highest priority.

We believe that something must be done urgently
to put an end to such ethnically motivated crimes as
have happened recently. Pakistan is fully committed to
do all it can to assist UNMIK efforts in that regard. We
have committed over 100 police personnel to UNMIK,
including a special police unit. Our Minister for the
Interior visited Kosovo last week and reiterated
Pakistan's resolve and commitment to the maintenance
of peace and security in Kosovo. We stand by that
commitment.

It should be recalled that in Kosovo, a province of
2 million people, there is a protection force of 17,000
troops led by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
in addition to the presence of over 4,000 UNMIK
police personnel deployed there.

I believe that the Security Council, in considering
such emergency situations, must make an overall cost-
benefit analysis of where and how forces should be
deployed. Let us not forget that the Council waited for
weeks to be able to deploy a few thousand forces in
Liberia, where hundreds of people were dying every
day. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo we
waited three years to be able to deploy 10,800 troops.
And the most classic example is that in Jammu and
Kashmir, an area populated by 10 million people, only
45 United Nations observers were able to be deployed
to contain the situation in what has been recently called
the most dangerous place on earth.

My delegation is of the view that the brutal
murders that took place in Gorazdevac should be a
wake-up call. Our assessment is that, although this is
one in a series of incidents, it is indicative of the fact
that the underlying political issues relating to Kosovo
remain to be resolutely addressed and resolved. Of
course, the slogan "standards before status" sounds
good, and we hope that it will be fulfilled. But all the
parties concerned bear a responsibility to reach an
agreement and to resolve their differences in Kosovo.
Nationalist rhetoric - on all sides - does not help.
Hate must be discarded as a political currency in
Kosovo, as elsewhere.

