Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Just two days ago, the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
addressed the Security Council and reaffirmed the
responsibility of the international community, under
the relevant rules and provisions of international law,
to ensure the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
In that regard, he stated that

"There are too many times when we still do not
come to the defence of civilian populations in
need. When our response is weak, we appear to
wash our hands of our humanitarian
responsibilities to protect lives. The world is a
safer place for most of us, but it is still a death
trap for too many defenceless civilians - men,
women and children. (S/PV.5476, p. 2)

For the Palestinian civilian population being held
captive under Israel's belligerent military occupation,
such a statement tragically and precisely describes the
situation of that people over the 39 years since Israel
occupied the Palestinian territory in 1967, up until
today. The occupying Power has been systematically
and egregiously violating international law, particularly
the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, to which it is bound.

The images of the thousands of innocent and
defenceless Palestinian civilians murdered by the
Israeli occupying forces are indelibly etched in our
memories, including those children, women and men
killed in recent weeks by the barrage of Israeli missiles
that have rained down on the Gaza Strip. In the month
of June alone, the excessive and indiscriminate use of
force by the occupying Power against the Palestinian
civilian population in the Gaza Strip has made death,
mourning and grief a near-daily ritual, as it has resulted
in the killing of several members of the same families,
has left numerous children motherless and fatherless,
has deprived mothers and fathers of their young
children and babies and has maimed and wounded
thousands of others. For the Palestinian people, the

protection of their human lives - to which they are
entitled under international law, just like all other
civilians in situations of armed conflict - remains

elusive, as the international community has remained
passive about their plight, leaving them to continue
suffering more loss, misery and hardship at the mercy
of their occupier.

The list of flagrant violations and grave breaches
of international law - war crimes - that have been
and are being committed by Israel, the occupying
Power, against the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, is
endless. The list of pretexts used by the occupying
Power for its continuing systematic violations and
crimes is endless as well -including, for example,
having no partner for peace, so-called security
concerns and, now, the capture of a soldier of the
occupying forces.

Yet such pretexts ring hollow when the situation
is accurately examined. What we are witnessing today
in the occupied Palestinian territory - the blatant
military aggression by the Israeli occupying forces
against the Palestinian people and their leadership, and
the collective punishment of the entire Palestinian
civilian population - is clearly rooted in the long
history of Israel's brutalization, humiliation and
dehumanization of the Palestinian people for the
purpose of furthering Israel's malicious agenda against
the occupied territory and its people, specifically
including its insatiable desire to acquire land through
its colonial settlement campaign and the construction
of the wall.

The scope and scale of the recent military
assaults and the wanton destruction being carried out
by the Israeli occupying forces in the Gaza Strip
indicate that this flagrant military aggression against
the Palestinian population under occupation was
clearly premeditated and planned. Indeed, well prior to
the capture of the Israeli soldier on 25 June from a
military outpost on the Gaza border, Israel, the

occupying Power, had issued a series of threats and
declarations about its intention to launch a major
invasion of the Gaza Strip and had begun to mobilize
its troops. The soldier's capture became the spark, or
the pretext, for the actual launching of the invasion.

Two days ago, on 28 June, Israel, the occupying
Power, after amassing thousands of troops along the
southern border of the Gaza Strip, near the Rafah area,
launched a major air and ground military assault on the
Gaza Strip, using warplanes, tank artillery,
bombardment and shelling from naval units. That
assault is threatening the lives of the defenceless
Palestinian civilian population in the area, causing
wanton destruction of civilian property and
infrastructure and further destabilizing the fragile
situation on the ground. Collectively punishing and
terrorizing the Palestinian civilian population, the
Israeli occupying forces have bombed and destroyed
Gaza's only power station, leaving the majority of the
population without electricity.

The occupying forces have also bombed major
water pipelines - making clean water even more
scarce - and have destroyed three bridges in Gaza,
severely undermining movement throughout the area.
In addition, the occupying forces have been flying
warplanes over civilian neighbourhoods throughout
day and night, causing sonic booms intended to cause
fear and panic among the population. They have
bulldozed large tracts of agricultural land, bombed a
soccer field and launched missile strikes against
official Palestinian Government institutions, including
the Ministry of Interior in Gaza.

Hundreds of Palestinians, particularly from the
Rafah area, have fled their homes in search of safety in
a place where nowhere seems to be safe from Israel's
military onslaught, which is expected to expand, as
Israel has now deployed thousands more troops along
the northern border of Gaza, threatening to invade
Palestinian towns and refugee camps in the north. The
Palestinian civilian population in the devastated and
impoverished Gaza Strip is now under complete siege,
as Israel has also sealed all border crossings, and -
with the deprivation of electricity and clean water,
including for hospitals, and intensifying shortages of
food and medical supplies - the dire humanitarian
crisis in the Gaza Strip is being severely exacerbated.
In this regard, it should be noted that the International
Committee of the Red Cross, among others, has today
expressed its deep concern regarding Israel's military
escalation in the Gaza Strip and has called upon Israel,
in accordance with its obligations under international
law, to allow for the delivery of urgent medical
supplies to Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip to
alleviate this grave humanitarian crisis.

Following the launch of this invasion on
Wednesday, the Israeli occupying forces yesterday
expanded their aggression into the West Bank, carrying
out a series of raids and the kidnapping and detention
of at least 64 Palestinians, the majority of them high-
ranking, democratically elected officials, including
eight cabinet ministers of the Palestinian Authority, 24
members of the Palestinian Legislative Council and
several mayors. Those officials, in addition to the more
than 9,000 other Palestinians, including women and
children, imprisoned in Israeli jails, are being held by
the occupying Power in blatant violation of the Fourth
Geneva Convention. Moreover, the direct targeting by
Israel of senior Palestinian officials in such an
operation is a clear indication that all of this is being
done for political objectives: it is intended to sabotage
the recent agreement achieved among Palestinian
parties for reconciliation and unity, and is also intended
not only to severely hamper the functioning of the
Palestinian Authority, but ultimately to cause the
complete collapse of the Authority as a whole, thus
clearing the way for Israel to continue with its
unlawful unilateral measures and plans, on the pretext
of having "no partner for peace".

Indeed, this recent Israeli military campaign was
coincidentally launched on the eve of the agreement
reached among Palestinian parties directly aimed at
opening the door for a resumption of negotiations and
the peace process. The continuation and the expected
expansion of Israeli military aggression will surely pre-
empt any such resumption, thus killing the prospects
for negotiations between the two sides aimed at
achieving a peaceful settlement, based on the two-State
solution, and the occupying Power will thus achieve its
objective of leaving no option except unilateralism.

And yet, despite the relentless Israeli onslaught
and the incessant crimes and State terror being
committed against the Palestinian people, the
Palestinian leadership continues to choose the
diplomatic option. Under the leadership of President
Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian side is sparing no
effort to resolve the issue of the Israel soldier taken
prisoner, to make sure that he is treated in accordance
with the rules of international humanitarian law and to

secure his release unharmed. Such efforts have been
exerted simultaneously with the efforts exerted to
secure agreement among all Palestinian parties for
national unity and to promote calm. President Abbas
continues to call for diplomacy to be given a chance in
order to save many lives on the Palestinian side - and
also on the Israeli side - and to save Palestinian
civilian infrastructure from even further destruction
and avert the further deterioration of this humanitarian
tragedy being caused by the crimes of the occupying
Power against the Palestinian people. Israel, the
occupying Power, should reciprocate such serious
efforts by abandoning the military option, which will
lead to only more suffering and loss and will further
destabilize the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory and beyond, in the region as a whole, clearly
making this a matter of international peace and
security.

It is now the duty of the Security Council, in
accordance with its responsibilities under the United
Nations Charter, to act in order to address the crisis
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory. The
Council cannot continue to remain passive in the face
of such military aggression against a defenseless
civilian population and the grave breaches of
international humanitarian law that are being
committed by Israel, the occupying Power. The
Council should act by condemning this Israeli
aggression and calling for the immediate cessation of
hostilities and for compliance with the rules and
provisions of international law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention, and calling also for the immediate
withdrawal of Israeli occupying forces from within the
Gaza Strip and for the release of the Palestinian
officials being detained. The Security Council and
other concerned parties within the international
community must exert the necessary efforts to pressure
all parties to move away from aggression and back
towards the resumption of negotiations and the peace
process.

Failure by the Council to take the measures
required to bring a halt to this most recent Israeli
aggression and a halt to the collective punishment and
human rights violations being committed against the
Palestinian people will surely only further bolster the
occupying Power's impunity and perpetuate the cycle
of violence reignited by Israel, worsening the
humanitarian conditions and civilian suffering in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and taking us all even further away from the
realization of the peace so desperately yearned for.
Moreover, as we stated last week before the Council
during its important debate on strengthening
international law (see S/PV.5474), the repeated
inability of the Council to act with regard to the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory has not
only aggravated and prolonged the conflict, but has
resulted in the questioning of the strength of
international law and of the credibility of the Council
in its fair implementation of international law.

We reiterate today that it is not too late for the
Security Council to assert its rightful and proper role
and to use its authority to address this issue through
appropriate measures aimed at bringing an end to the
grave breaches being committed, bringing an end to the
hostilities and salvaging the prospects for reaching a
peaceful settlement on the basis of international law,
United Nations resolutions, the Quartet road map and
the Arab peace initiative. We affirm our belief in the
authority and the ability of the Security Council and in
the primacy and legitimacy of international law, and
once more convey to the members of the Council our
strong hope - the hope of the Palestinian people and
their leadership - that the Council will uphold its
duties and responsibilities and will thus spare us all
from the tragedy of even more loss and suffering.

