The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs for New
Zealand.

Today, the Council has been asked to remember
the tragic events of 17 July 2014 in which 298 people
were killed, including one New Zealand citizen and
one resident. One year ago, the Council adopted
unanimously resolution 2166 (2014), which condems
the attack and calls for those responsible to be held to
account. Today's draft resolution S/2015/562 sought to
establish a mechanism by which that accountability
could be sought. The fact that we have not preserved
the unanimity that characterized resolution 2166 (2014)
is deeply disappointing.

In failing to find a way forward, the Council has let
down the families and friends of those killed on Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17, and has let itself down as well.
This is a matter on which the Council should have
been able to agree. For the Security Council, charged
with upholding international peace and security, not to
be able to agree on an accountability process when a
commercial airliner was brought down and 298 people
were killed is indeed a serious indictment. This does not
appear to me to be a matter that can be seen in shades of
grey: either we follow a path of accountability or there
is impunity. I very much regret that the latter was the
result of the Council vote today.

As President of the Council, we worked hard to
promote a consensus outcome. However, the positions
on the establishment of a tribunal at this time were not
reconcilable. That this outcome has been achieved by
the use of the veto is a matter of special regret to my
country. New Zealand has opposed the veto consistently
since 1945, and we oppose its use today. We as a Council
simply have to find better ways of working together.

The countries that suffered heavy losses, including
in particular Australia, Malaysia and the Netherlands,
are our close friends. New Zealand supported and
co-sponsored the draft resolution for an international
tribunal as a serious effort to establish accountability
for the downing of Flight MH-l7. That is the least we
can do to honour the victims and alleviate the grieving
of their families.

I conclude by conveying the condolences of my
Government and country to the families and friends of
the victims of Flight MH-17 and our strong regret that
the Council was unable to meet its obligations to them
today.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Albert
Koenders, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom
of the Netherlands.

