Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): Like previous
speakers, we welcome the opportunity to discuss the
situation in Afghanistan, and to hear the views of
countries directly affected. We hope this debate will send
a signal to the people of Afghanistan that theirs is not a
forgotten conflict and that this meeting will mark the
beginning of a renewed push for peace.

The tragic humanitarian situation, especially in
Kabul, has caused all Security Council members to look
with renewed determination at the problems of
Afghanistan. The international community has a duty to
do all it can. The United Kingdom continues to provide
assistance; we have spent more than £100 million on
humanitarian aid since 1980.

The concern is not just humanitarian. Countries such
as the United Kingdom have a real and increasing interest
in an Afghanistan at peace with itself. Seventy per cent of
Europe's heroin comes from Afghanistan. The territory of
Afghanistan is increasingly used to train terrorists whose
activities have consequences far beyond that country's
borders. An unstable Afghanistan represents a threat to
the stability of a region which is of great importance to
us.

It is unfortunately the case that no solution is in
sight. No amount of international pressure can
compensate for a lack of commitment by the parties
within Afghanistan. But we must not become frustrated.
We believe that the United Nations remains the best hope
for progress. The General Assembly resolution adopted by
consensus at the fiftieth session, reaffirmed the
commitment of all the members to Afghanistan and the
readiness of the United Nations to assist the people of
Afghanistan in their efforts to achieve national

 

reconciliation. The statement by the President of the
Security Council on 14 February reiterated the Council's
concern. We continue to call upon all Afghan parties to
begin to make the compromises, and to show the flexibility,
without which peace will never be possible.

The Special Mission headed by Ambassador Mestiri is
faced with an extremely challenging task. We continue to
support his efforts. We regret that the Mission has often
been forced to adopt a wait-and-see attitude. Ambassador
Mestiri recently returned to the region. This is welcome.
There is a need for new impetus. We support the Secretary-
General's intention to strengthen the Mission within
existing resources. We agree with the Secretary-General's
conclusion in his report (A/50/908) on Afghanistan that it
may be necessary to explore additional ways and means to
facilitate the realization of a lasting settlement and peace in
Afghanistan. We look forward to hearing more about the
proposal for an international conference and how it might
play a useful role in forging a durable peace. Clearly, the
time will have to be right and the agenda clear if such a
meeting is to play a positive role.

We have only just received the Secretary-General's
report. We will wish to reflect on it and on the views
expressed in this debate, and to consider how further the
Council may be able to help. But I wish to put on record
now our particular concern at the Secretary-General's
assessment that foreign interference by countries in the
region and beyond, both military and political, has been
increasing. There can be no excuse for this. We need to
look carefully for ways to prevent further such interference.
We call again for an end to the disastrous flow of weapons
into Afghanistan. Peace cannot be won by force of arms; it
can only be won when the arms are laid down and Afghans
themselves accept that reconciliation is the only way
forward.

