Luxembourg aligns itself with the statements submitted by the Delegation of the European Union and on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict. We thank France for organizing today's open debate, and the briefers for their statements and priceless work. We congratulate Belgium on its commitment as Chair of the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict. Fifteen years ago, resolution 1612 (2005) set important benchmarks by establishing both the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict and the monitoring and reporting mechanism. Through the mechanism and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General's commitment, undeniable progress has been made. Nevertheless, the current trend is worrisome. Over 25,000 serious violations against children were recorded in 2019. The coronavirus disease pandemic is likely to worsen that trend, as children suffer the most from the impact of denial of access to humanitarian assistance. Regarding the annexes to the annual report, Luxembourg is concerned at the premature removal from the lists of the Saudi coalition and the Tatmadaw. In relation to the former, 222 cases of murder and mutilation of children have been recorded, while 205 cases of violations have been recorded in connection with the latter. Accordingly, we join the others who have requested an independent assessment of the basis on which the addition and removal of entities are decided. Education remains under attack, with schools being destroyed or closed, teachers threatened or killed, sometimes in front of their students, and many children denied access to education. The Sahel region has seen a significant rise in such attacks. Over 3,300 schools have been closed, thus affecting nearly 650,000 children. Luxembourg notes that Burkina Faso and Cameroon have been added to the list of situations of concern. In West Africa, Luxembourg's cooperation agency has set education and vocational training as its priority, providing particular support to a funding system for training and specialization. Education is an essential element that makes children less vulnerable to forced recruitment. In this twentieth anniversary year of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, Luxembourg reiterates its full support to the mandate of Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter and will continue to provide support to her office in Brussels. The Special Representative's work and recommendations must be taken into account, especially in the planning and formulation of peacekeeping mandates. It would be appropriate for the Special Representative to be invited more systematically to brief the Security Council on specific geographic situations. Luxembourg has endorsed the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, and encourages all Member States to do the same.
