Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): For
the record, during the years that I have worked here I
have never seen the Security Council invite us to sit at
the Council table while an specific issue is being
deliberated. Then the Council decided to conduct the
vote in our absence. I do not know the reason for that,
but I understand that that has not been the usual
practice at any previous meetings.

We, with the Arab Group, co-sponsored a draft
resolution that was very moderate. We thought that it
would be adopted and would have broad support,
amounting to 14 votes. However, in light of what we
have been told or has been stated publicly by Member
States, I would like to assure the Council that the
United States delegation did not declare that it would
use its veto power. It did not inform us, a Permanent
Observer Mission, of that, not even as a courtesy.
Therefore, that delegation did not make any direct
proposals for amendments and did not conduct any
discussions with us. That, I believe, raises a question
about what has transpired so far.

Generally speaking, it is regrettable that not only
has the position of the United States of America been
biased in favour of Israel for so many years, but also
that it has been transformed into a position that accepts
Israeli logic and positions almost completely, to such
an extent that it has basically become a heavy, dark
shadow over the entire process that does not permit the
United States to play an unbiased role in the Arab-
Israeli conflict or to act as an honest sponsor of the
peace process.

As for President Arafat and the Palestinian
leadership, I wish to reiterate that the Palestinian
people will not accept outside interference, particularly
if the interfering parties are considered unfriendly by
our people. The Palestinian people will not accept any
interference regarding who is going to be politically
isolated or who is going to retain his position.

Serious consequences may follow the use of veto,
such as the possibility of wrong interpretation by
Mr. Sharon's Government in Israel, and the United
States alone will bear the responsibility for that. It is
also regrettable that the United Kingdom and Germany
chose to abstain in the vote for reasons that remain
incomprehensible to us.

I wish to reassure the Council once again that we
will not refrain from working with it. We will return to
it, perhaps in the near future. We will not be
intimidated by what has happened. We are encouraged
by the positions of many Council members who have
done their best to preserve the role of the Security
Council, in keeping with the Charter, and who have
attempted to maintain a reasonable, balanced and
moderate political position that will be in the interest
of the peace process in the region.

Finally, I wish to thank all the Member States that
co-sponsored the draft resolution and those who that
voted in favour of it.

