The President: I am pleased to acknowledge the
participation in this summit meeting of the Security
Council of heads of State or Government, Ministers for
Foreign Affairs and other distinguished representatives
of Security Council member States. We all greatly
appreciate the spirit of cooperation that has motivated,
and imbues, this very important meeting.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
our deepest concern and sympathy to the American
people, led by President Bush, for the loss of life and
damage to property inflicted by Hurricane Katrina. We
are all confident that America will overcome that
natural disaster. It is manmade disasters, like terrorism
and conflict, that continue to elude a comprehensive
solution.

The United Nations Charter was born because of
conflict, and its job continues to be, among other
things, to prevent conflict. Although the Charter did
not foresee the threat of terror in its form today, it is
adequate to provide appropriate means to meet that
challenge through the Security Council.

In Madrid last March, the Secretary-General
acknowledged the need for a principled and
comprehensive strategy to fight terrorism globally. Our
job in this body today is to adopt a resolution to
support that comprehensive strategy, as well as a
resolution concerning the prevention of conflict,
especially in Africa. Because we are the only body in
the United Nations whose resolutions are binding on
Member States, the Council must provide the
leadership for effective solutions to the problems of
terrorism and conflict.

The Security Council meeting at the summit level
will now begin its consideration of the question of
threats to international peace and security. Members of
the Council have before them documents 8/2005/577
and S/2005/578, which contain the texts of two draft
resolutions prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

In accordance with the understanding reached
earlier among members, the Security Council will take
action on the two draft resolutions before it, prior to
hearing statements from the Secretary-General and
Council members. Accordingly, I shall now put the two
draft resolutions to the vote, one after the other.

I shall first put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2005/577, which concerns the
prevention of incitement to terrorism.

A vote was taken by Show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1624 (2005).

I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2005/578, which concerns the
prevention of conflict, particularly in Africa.

A vote was taken by Show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1625 (2005).

I now invite the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, to take the floor.


