The President: I should like to inform the Council
that l have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Angola, Brazil, Guinea-Bissau, India, Kenya,
Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, the Netherlands,
Norway, Portugal, Senegal, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Tunisia, the United Republic of Tanzania, Zaire, Zambia
and Zimbabwe, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Moura
(Angola) took a place at the Council table; Mr.
Lamamra (Algeria), Mr. Valle (Brazil), Mr. Toure
(Guinea-Bissau), Mr. Sreenivasan (India), Mr.
Muthaura (Kenya), Mr. Qhobela (Lesotho), Mr.
Bwanali (Malawi), Mr. Afonso (Mozambique), Mr.
Gurirab (Namibia), Mr. Biegman (Netherlands), Mr.
Biprn Lian (Norway), Mr. Catarino (Portugal), Mr.
Cisse' (Senegal), Mr. Nzo (South Africa), Mr. Yanez-
Barnuevo (Spain), Mr. Osvald (Sweden), Mr. Fayala
(Tunisia), Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Lukabu Khabouji N 'zaji (Zaire), Mr.
Mushota (Zambia) and Mr. Mumbengegwi (Zimbabwe)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. II), documents
8/1995/97 and Addendum 1.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1995/ 117, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:

S/1994/1441 and S/1994/1451, letters dated 9 and
28 December 1994, respectively, from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, concerning the
Lusaka Protocol;

S/1995/51, letter dated 17 January 1995 from the Charge
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Angola
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council; and

S/1995/94, letter dated 30 January 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of Angola to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
the text of a message dated 24 January 1995 from the
President of the Republic of Angola addressed to the
Secretary-General.

The first speaker is the Minister for External
Relations of Angola, His Excellency Mr. Venancio de
Moura. On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome him
and invite him to make his statement.


