Mr. Mota Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to
thank the Non-Aligned Movement for its most
appropriate initiative of requesting this open meeting. I
also wish to express the Brazilian Government's
appreciation for the work carried out by the inspectors
of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission and the International Atomic
Energy Agency under the careful and resolute guidance
of Mr. Hans Blix and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei.

Scarcely two weeks ago, we expressed to the
Council Brazil's commitment to a peaceful solution to
the Iraqi crisis. President Lula da Silva took it upon
himself to contact several heads of State and
Government involved in the negotiations and addressed
a letter to Secretary-General Kofi Annan with a view to
promoting a peaceful solution. At the same time,
Brazilian Foreign Minister Celso Amorim was in touch
with many of his colleagues. Unfortunately, those and
other initiatives aimed at a peaceful solution did not
come to fruition.

At this juncture, Brazil can only profoundly
deplore the initiation of military action and, in
particular, the fact that force has been used without the
express authorization of the Security Council. The
Brazilian Government calls for a cessation of
hostilities, for restoration of peace and for respect for
Iraqi territorial integrity and sovereignty.

As in any armed conflict, this war will inevitably
bring great suffering and desolation to innocent people
and will result in an unavoidable toll on human life. In
that regard, the Brazilian Government stresses the need
for strict observance of all principles of international
humanitarian law, in particular those referring to the
protection of civilian populations and refugees and to
the treatment of prisoners of war.

The present question has acquired a dimension
that goes beyond the conflict itself and could have
adverse and long-standing effects on the work of the
United Nations. The Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and it is the only source of
legitimacy with regard to the use of force. Peace and
security are essential in order to foster economic
development and social justice, and the Security
Council must be at the centre of that challenge.

In that regard, Brazil reaffirms that the Security
Council must be both preserved and strengthened,
through conformity with and full enforcement of the
resolutions that the Council itself has adopted. It must
be preserved and strengthened through the
enhancement of its methods of work and through
reform that results in a Council that better reflects new
global realities, the increased membership of the
Organization and the enhanced role of developing
countries in world affairs. The immediate question
before the Council is how to extend to the Iraqi people
the humanitarian assistance so urgently needed. As has
been amply reported and reiterated, even before the
military intervention, more than 60 per cent of the Iraqi
population was dependent on the oil for food
programme for basic provisions. Since the initiation of
this conflict the situation has certainly deteriorated, and
suspension of the programme has made the situation
even more dramatic.

Military action without the express authorization
of the Council has profound, sensitive, legal and
political implications, which must be carefully weighed
as the Council works towards the reestablishment of
urgent forms of humanitarian assistance by the United
Nations.

We are of the view that the humanitarian relief
work of United Nations agencies should be promptly
resumed and that the coordination of all humanitarian
efforts should remain the Secretary-General's
responsibility. This is a question that demands an
urgent solution.

The Government of Brazil extends its full support
to the Secretary-General's efforts to address the
situation in accordance with the United Nations Charter
and international humanitarian law.

