The President: The Security Council will
now proceed to the election of five members of the
International Court of Justice, in accordance with
Article 13 of the Statute of the International Court of
Justice, to fill the five seats that will become vacant
upon the expiry of the terms of the following Judges
on 5 February 2018: Mr. Ronny Abraham (France),
Mr. Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf (Somalia), Mr. Antonio
Augusto Cancado Trindade (Brazil), Mr. Christopher
Greenwood (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) and Mr. Dalveer Bhandari (India).
The list of candidates, indicating the national groups by
which each candidate was nominated, is contained in
document S/2017/620, as amended by S/2017/620/Add.1.

I should like to inform members of the Council
that I have received a letter addressed to me by the
Legal Counsel, dated 3 November 2017, informing
me, on behalf of the Secretary-General, that after
the established deadline for nominating candidates,
namely, 3 July 2017, a national group submitted a
nomination to the Secretariat. I should like to draw
the Council's attention to the fact that the additional
nomination relates to a candidate already nominated
by other national groups and whose name therefore
already appears in document S/2017/620. The Legal
Counsel recommended that, in accordance with
established practice, I inform Council members orally
on the day of the election about the decision of the
aforementioned national group. I am also informed that
the Legal Counsel made a similar recommendation to
the President of the General Assembly.

The nomination of the aforementioned national
group is as follows: for Dalveer Bhandari, Sri Lanka.

The Security Council has before it a memorandum
by the Secretary-General, contained in document
S/2017/6l9, describing the present composition of the
Court and setting out the procedure to be followed in
the conduct of the election. I should like to remind
the Council that under Article 10, paragraph 1, of the
Statute of the International Court of Justice,

"Those candidates who obtain an absolute
majority of votes both in the General Assembly
and in the Security Council shall be considered
as elected".

The required majority in the Security Council is
eight votes.

If, in the first ballot, the number of candidates
obtaining an absolute majority is less than five, then
pursuant to rule 61 of the provisional rules of procedure
of the Security Council, the Council will proceed to
a second ballot on the remaining vacancies. Balloting
will continue in the same manner until five candidates
have obtained the required majority of votes.

If, on the other hand, more than five candidates
obtain the required majority, according to established
practice and as set forth in paragraph 13 of the
Secretary-General's memorandum, a new vote will be
held on all the candidates. That rule will also apply to
any subsequent ballots, if the number of candidates
obtaining the absolute majority is greater than the
number of vacancies remaining.

The voting will be held by secret ballot. When we
proceed to the vote, members ofthe Council will receive
a ballot containing the names of all the candidates. No
withdrawal will be accepted once the ballot papers
have been distributed. However, it will be possible to
withdraw between ballots.

Members of the Council will be requested to place
an "X" in the box next to the names of the candidates for
whom they wish to vote. Only those candidates whose
names appear on the ballot are eligible for election.

I should like to remind members of paragraph 10
of the Secretary- General's memorandum (S/2017/619),
which specifies that "[e]ach elector may vote for not
more than five candidates on the first ballot". Any
ballot paper containing votes for more than five names
will be considered invalid.

I should like to inform Council members that in
accordance with established practice, the ballot papers
in the Security Council will not be counted until it
has been verified that the ballot papers in the General
Assembly have also been collected. The Council will
remain in session pending the receipt ofthat information.

Only when five candidates have obtained the
required majority of votes in the Security Council, I
shall communicate the result to the President of the
General Assembly, and I shall request the Council
to remain in session, pending the receipt from the
President of the General Assembly of the result of the
voting in the Assembly.

The Council will now proceed to draw lots to select
two delegations to serve as tellers.

The delegations of France and the United Kingdom
will not be considered to serve as tellers because
candidates of their nationalities have been nominated.

The names of the delegations of the Russian
Federation and Ukraine have been drawn. I request
each of them to appoint one of their members to serve
as teller.

At the invitation ofthe President, Ms. Melikbekyan
(Russian Federation) and Mr. Bondiuk (Ukraine)
acted as tellers.

The President: May I take it that the Council is
now ready to proceed with the election of five members
of the International Court of Justice?

It is so decided.

I am informed that the General Assembly is now
ready to proceed with the voting process.

I request the Conference Officer to distribute the
ballot papers.

Members of the Council should place an "X" in the
boxes next to the names of the five candidates for whom
they wish to vote.

>l<>1<>k


The President: I take it that all the members of
the Council have now voted and I ask the Conference
Officer to collect the ballot papers.

***


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. I should like to remind Council members that
in accordance with the established practice, the ballots
will not be counted until it has been verified that the
ballot papers in the General Assembly have also been
collected. The Council will remain in session pending
the receipt of that information.

*>l<*


The President: I have now been informed
that the ballot papers have been collected in the
General Assembly.

The counting of the ballots in the Security Council
will now begin. The tellers will now count the ballots.
As per practice, there will be two independent countings
of the ballots, one by each teller. I should like to remind
Council members that in accordance with established
practice, I shall wait for the General Assembly to
complete its count before I announce the results of
the voting in the Security Council. The Council will
remain in session.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: The result ofthe voting is as follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Number of abstentions: 0
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Ronny Abraham 15
Mr. Dalveer Bhandari 11
Mr. Antonio Augusto Cancado Trindade 11
Mr. Christopher Greenwood 14
Mr. Nawaf Salam 11
Mr. Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf 12

As more than five candidates have obtained an
absolute majority, the Council will now proceed to a
new vote on all candidates, as noted in paragraph 13
of the Secretary-General's memorandum contained in
document S/20l7/6l9.

I should like to remind members of the Council that
each elector may vote for not more than five candidates
and that only the candidates whose names appear on the
ballot papers are eligible. Any ballot paper containing
votes for more than five candidates will be invalid.

I now ask the Conference Officer to distribute
the ballots.

I request members of the Council to place an "X"
in the boxes next to the names of the five candidates for
whom they wish to vote.

>l<>l<>l=


The President: I take it that all members of the
Council have now marked their ballots.

I ask the Conference Officer to collect the
ballot papers.

>z<>x<>x=

The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. The tellers will now count the ballots. There
will be two independent countings of the ballots by
each of the tellers.

***


The President: The result ofthe voting is as follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Number of abstentions: 0
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Ronny Abraham 15
Mr. Dalveer Bhandari 10
Mr. Antonio Augusto Cancado Trindadell
Mr. Christopher Greenwood 14
Mr. Nawaf Salam 11
Mr. Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf 12

As more than five candidates have obtained an
absolute majority, the Council will now proceed to a
new vote on all candidates, as noted in paragraph 13
of the Secretary-General's memorandum contained in
document S/2017/619.

I should like to remind members ofthe Council that
each elector may vote for not more than five candidates
and that only the candidates whose names appear on the
ballot papers are eligible. Any ballot paper containing
votes for more than five candidates will be invalid.

I now ask the Conference Officer to distribute
the ballots.

I request members of the Council to place an "X"
in the boxes next to the names of the five candidates for
whom they wish to vote.

***


The President: I take it that all members of the
Council have now marked their ballots.

I ask the Conference Officer to collect the
ballot papers.

***


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. The tellers will now count the ballots. There
will be two independent countings of the ballots by
each of the tellers.

The President: The result ofthe voting is as follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Number of abstentions: 0
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Ronny Abraham 15
Mr. Dalveer Bhandari 9
Mr. Antonio Augusto Cancado Trindade 8
Mr. Christopher Greenwood 13
Mr. Nawaf Salam 10
Mr. Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf 11

As more than five candidates have obtained an

absolute majority, the Council will need to proceed to a
new vote on all candidates.

I understand that the President of the General

Assembly has proposed that the Assembly suspend its
meeting until 4 p.m., when it will reconvene. I propose
that, with the consent of Council members, we proceed
in the summer manner and reconvene at 4 pm.

It is so decided.

The meeting was suspended at 12.55 pm.

