Mr. Antonio (Angola): I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
situation in Bougainville. I should also like to express
my thanks to Ambassador Sinclair and to our colleague
from Papua New Guinea for this briefing, which
provided an update on the situation in the territory.

My delegation highly appreciates the progress in
the political process since the adoption of the
Bougainville Peace Agreement, particularly the
significant improvement in the constitutional aspect.
The Bougainville Constitutional Commission has been
working to arrive at a consensual Bougainville
constitution. The Peace Monitoring Group, whose
mandate expired on 30 June, has been succeeded by the
Bougainville Transition Team. The completion of stage
II of the weapons disposal plan has been verified and
certified by the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB). We welcome all those
achievements; they are proof of the unequivocal
determination of the people of Bougainville to reach
peace. Therefore, we should like to join those who
have called upon Mr. Francis Ona to join the positive
trends that are occurring in the territory.

A new Bougainville constitution is a central part
of the implementation of the Peace Agreement. It is
therefore important that the draft constitution be
finalized and submitted to the Constituent Assembly of
Bougainville for adoption as a step towards the
achievement of goals set for the transitional period, an
essential element in the shaping of Bougainville's
future. With the completion of stage II of the weapons
disposal plan, the constitutional process can proceed
swiftly with a view to holding elections as soon as
possible.

My delegation would like to express its
satisfaction at the increased cooperation between Papua
New Guinea and Bougainville. The spirit of
commitment and trust between them has also been
demonstrated in other areas, such as the demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants into society and
the rebuilding of infrastructure.

My delegation hopes that Bougainville will be
one more case of a successful post-conflict situation.
Peacemaking and peace-building are often closely
interrelated. That interrelationship requires a
comprehensive approach in order to preserve the
results achieved. We are convinced that the United
Nations will continue its sustained peace-building
efforts in Bougainville, in particular to address
pressing issues of security and stability in that area by
establishing and increasing the capacity of the local
political structures.

My delegation encourages the recently created
Bougainville Transition Team to monitor fulfilment of
the commitments assumed in the Action Plan. In that
context, Angola welcomes the contributions of
Australia, New Zealand, Fiji and Vanuatu. We also
support the assistance of the United Nations
Development Programme and of other agencies in this
post-conflict rehabilitation period. We express our
gratitude to the donors - particularly countries in the
region - for their assistance. It is also gratifying to
hear renewed commitments with regard to the future
sustainable development of Bougainville.

In conclusion, we should like to commend the
United Nations Political Office in Bougainville and to
express the hope that it will continue to work to
achieve the goals set out in the Bougainville Peace
Agreement, which, in our opinion, remains a consistent
objective in shaping the future of Bougainville.

