We would like to thank the briefers for their interesting presentations. We would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the work of the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF), which this year celebrated its fiftieth anniversary and is represented here today by its Secretary-General, Mrs. Louise Mushikiwabo. The Dominican Republic is honoured to be an observer State of the IOF. Since 2009, when we joined the organization, we have been actively implementing its agenda by contributing to the settlement of international issues based on its founding values. We would like to highlight the significant impact of the OIF's cooperation with the United Nations in the context of peacekeeping, where their joint work plays a vital role. In that regard, multilingualism is a fundamental tool in developing peacekeeping operations. At present, half such operations are conducted in parts of French-speaking countries, and we therefore wish to acknowledge the major contribution made by the preparatory workshops for the troops deployed in those countries, organized annually by France, the United Nations and the OIF. We also recognize the significant contribution made by the OIF through its initiatives to promote the women and peace and security and the youth, peace and security agendas, which are priority areas for the Dominican Republic during our membership of the Security Council. We all must commit to guaranteeing the meaningful, full and effective participation of women and young people in peace and political processes, thereby ensuring the credibility and durability of those processes. We would like to highlight the positive impact of preventive diplomacy and early warning systems as tools that enable us to anticipate and prevent the spread of conflicts and massive human rights violations. We therefore recognize the excellent work done by the OIF in that regard through dialogue, mediation and good offices. Almost a year ago today, in the context of the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly of the United Nations, we participated in a high-level meeting of the French-speaking non-permanent members of the Security Council, where highly topical issues were discussed, such as conflict prevention, peacebuilding and the role of women and young people. We hope that such meetings can be repeated annually to encourage greater cooperation among the French-speaking members of that important body. We would not want to fail to mention the leading role of the OIF in climate change-related aspects by developing initiatives in that regard through its Institut de la Francophonie pour le developpement durable. Another of the most current challenges to international security is cybercrime. In that regard, the Dominican Republic hosted a regional workshop on national strategies in the fight against cybercrime and the development of cybersecurity in French-speaking Caribbean countries. At that event, experiences and practices were shared and regional cooperation mechanisms were established to combat that scourge. At this time of great challenges for multilateralism, we are convinced that close collaboration between the United Nations and the OIF facilitates a stronger and more effective international multilateral system based on diversity, mutual cooperation and shared international principles. We are very pleased that such collaboration is reflected in tangible initiatives for peace, development and human security. We look forward to deepening the comprehensive partnership between the OIF and the United Nations and to continuing the strong commitment to implement common, inclusive and people-centred strategies for peace.
