Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I will start by thanking
the Malaysian presidency of the Council for convening
this debate, which provides us with an opportunity
to continue our fruitful debate from March (see S/PV.7414), when we were glad to contribute concrete
proposals for dealing with non-State armed groups
and their consistent and grave violations of children's
rights.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement made earlier
by the observer of the European Union and welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2225 (2015) this morning,
which we were glad to sponsor.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on children and armed conflict (S/2015/409) and
to acknowledge the existing list of persistent violators
as a useful tool against those responsible for committing
crimes against children. We fully support the report's
recommendations.

Croatia welcomes in particular all the efforts of
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, who intensively and tirelessly advocates for
the rights and well-being of children affected by armed
conflict across the globe. Her active engagement in a
case-by-case approach has significantly contributed
to the integration of child protection into a number of
peacemaking activities. While there are no new parties
listed in the report, in our View her role is indisputable
and must be further strengthened.

We share the concern of the Secretary-General
about egregious violations to which children were
subjected during the reporting period, encompassing
also those children who were detained under the
suspicion of being associated with extremist groups.
In that regard, we have to be more than clear - it is
better to say "adamant" - that those children have to
be treated primarily as Victims and not as perpetrators.

Violations committed against children during
armed conflict are today, more than ever, part of the
changing nature of the armed-conflict landscape.
We are continuously witnessing grave violations of
children's rights committed by Boko Haram and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, putting children's
lives in danger and robbing them of their childhood. We
fully condemn the appalling atrocities committed by
Boko Haram, including abductions of girls, as well as
sexual abuse and all other acts of cruelty that directly
or indirectly affect children.

All of those acts represent grave violations
of international human rights and international
humanitarian law. However, due to their extreme nature
and the scale of threat they pose to citizens, they are
also acts of terrorism. In that vein, the real response to
this challenge requires serious and broad international
assistance through counter-terrorism measures.

Croatia believes that the mistreatment of children
must be addressed decisively and reiterates its support
for the inclusion of abduction among the listing criteria
in our efforts to ensure that perpetrators are held
accountable. Furthermore, let me once again add our
voice to those demanding that all perpetrators must
be brought to justice, for which we cannot adequately
stress the importance of significantly strengthening
the role of domestic courts. However, it is also of the
utmost importance that the Security Council refer
cases of serious crimes to the International Criminal
Court, in accordance with its supplementary role and
with due regard to the fact that children are specifically
protected by the Rome Statute.

Croatia fully supports the campaign "Children, Not
Soldiers" and its aim to end and prevent recruitment
and use of children by Government armed forces in
conflict by 2016. In that regard, we welcome the results
recently achieved in Myanmar and Chad.

We would also like to use this opportunity to call on
all countries to become party to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, as well as to
support the efforts of Somalia to join the family of the
parties to that Convention.

The issue of the protection of children during armed
conflict needs to remain on the agenda of this body,
with the goal of preventing further child recruitment
as well as to fully reintegrate former child soldiers. In
that regard, we note the tenth anniversary of resolution
1612 (2005), which established the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
which continues to actively contribute to the mission
and vision for a world without child soldiers and without
child abuse in times of conflict.

We pledge here today our full and unequivocal
support to finally bridging the gap between the
commitments towards and the actual practice of
ensuring childhoods free from fear and violence.

