Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I first wish to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ameerah Haq for her informative and important
briefing and her excellent work at the head of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT). Let me also welcome Her Excellency the
Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste, Ambassador
Borges, at this table and thank her for her important
contribution to today's debate. Austria aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the representative
of the European Union later in the day.

We welcome the positive developments in
UNMIT's mandated priority areas since the last debate
of the Security Council on the situation in Timor-Leste
eight months ago (see S/PV.6276). The closure of the
last transitional shelter for internally displaced persons
is a welcome development and an indicator of
increasing stability in the country.

The draft National Strategic Development Plan
can play an important role in making returns and
reintegration sustainable through economic and social
development. We welcome the inclusive approach
taken in the elaboration of the Plan and the efforts
made to ensure that it will deliver results for the rural
population. It is our expectation that the draft Strategic
Development Plan will also allow for more effective
international support and increased national ownership
in that area. We hope that its implementation will
contribute to reducing unemployment, especially
among young people.

Recent achievements in the field of governance,
such as the establishment of the national Anti-Corruption
Commission, are also to be commended. We hope that
the Commission, once fully operational, will contribute
to fostering the rule of law and the confidence of the
Timorese people in State structures and institutions.

We welcome the fact that the recently launched
Justice Sector Strategic Plan for Timor-Leste takes into
account most recommendations of the independent
comprehensive needs assessment. We look forward to
the effective implementation of that Plan. It is our hope
and expectation that it will further strengthen the
formal justice sector and also contribute to improved
protection of women's and children's rights. The
recruitment of women into the judiciary and the
provision of training to police and justice personnel
will be important measures for coping with such
challenges.

The establishment of the National Commission
on the Rights of the Child and the adoption of new
legislation relating to witness protection and to
domestic violence are further significant developments
in that regard. Full enforcement of the new laws will be
critical, in particular in view of the high number of
reported incidents of gender-based violence and human
rights violations committed by members of the security
services, and the difficulties encountered by victims in
obtaining justice. We welcome UNMIT's support for
the implementation of the new law against domestic
violence, as well as on human rights more broadly, as
set out in the most recent UNMIT periodic report on
human rights developments in Timor-Leste.

It is encouraging to see that certain steps have
been taken towards accountability for crimes
committed during the 2006 crisis, as recommended by
the Independent Special Commission of Inquiry (see S/2006/628, para. 24). At the same time, the Secretary-
General has referred to the limited number of cases
brought to trial and the number of acquittals due to
lack of evidence. We therefore share his view that
further work is needed on the remaining challenges.

Accountability for the gross human rights
violations committed during and prior to 1999 also
remains an area of concern. We therefore encourage the
Serious Crimes Investigation Team of UNMIT to
continue its important work. We very much welcome
the ongoing efforts to create an institution to take
forward the recommendations of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation and those of the
Commission of Truth and Friendship. It is good to see
that Parliament has undertaken wide consultations in
that context. We hope that, on that basis, discussions on
the relevant draft laws will soon be resumed and
concluded.

In the security sector, further progress has been
made in the handover of primary policing
responsibilities to the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) and its registration, screening and certification
process. It is also encouraging to see that the
resumption process has proceeded so well in line with
the mutually agreed criteria. We fully agree with the
Secretary-General's view that the reconfiguration of
the UNMIT police should be approached cautiously
and that continued capacity-building through UNMIT
and an increased focus on training and institutional
development will be critical. We also believe that the
accountability mechanisms of the PNTL, such as the
enforcement of effective internal disciplinary
measures, need to be further strengthened and
monitored.
It is particularly encouraging that progress has
also been made in creating an overall framework for
security coordination. We hope that this will lead to
comprehensive security sector reform, which will lead
to further clarification of the respective roles and tasks
of the police and the defence forces, especially in order
to offer the latter a new and meaningful role in a
peacetime setting, including through increasing
participation in international peacekeeping efforts.

In closing, I wish to commend the Government
and the people of Timor-Leste for the remarkable
progress that their country has made. UNMIT is doing
important work in support of Timor-Leste's future
under the able leadership of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and will continue to do so as
Timor-Leste approaches the next national elections in
2012.

Looking further into the future, we must build on
what has been achieved so far and carefully plan the
transition to a longer-term United Nations engagement
that helps to consolidate and build upon what has been
achieved to date. Capacity-building should be at the
centre of international efforts to further increase
national ownership and ensure the long-term stability
and prosperity of the Timorese nation.

We therefore welcome the recent establishment of
a jointly owned mechanism to plan and implement the
transition, and look forward to regular updates on that
work. The planned Security Council mission to Timor-
Leste in late November will provide the Council with a
welcome opportunity to enhance its understanding of
Timor-Leste's needs and aspirations in that regard. My
country looks forward to participating in that mission.

