Mr. De Santa Clara Gomes (Portugal): To
comply with the time limit you set, Sir, I will shorten
my statement.

I would like to begin by thanking the Secretary-
General for his latest report on the situation in Timor-
Leste and Jean-Marie Guehenno for his presentation. I
would also like to welcome the presence of Foreign
Minister Jose Ramos-Horta and his very valuable
contribution to this debate.

Since I associate myself with the statements made
on behalf of the European Union and the Community
of Portuguese-Speaking Countries, I will make only
three remarks. First, we agree with the evaluation made
by the United Nations of the situation in Timor-Leste
and share the Timorese Government's assessment of its
own limitations in coping with internal and external
security problems. In fact, threats to internal stability
can be expected to continue beyond May 2004 and we
know that Timorese defence and security forces are
still inexperienced and vulnerable, and clearly not able
to respond effectively to major disturbances.

In this context, even relatively low levels of
destabilization could have a significant impact and
serious consequences for the stability of Timor-Leste.
We note that there is a continuing problem resulting
from the presence of 28,000 former refugees along the
border. There have been reports of sightings of armed
gangs and criminal elements and suggestions of
preparations for destabilizing activity by Timorese
groups with unclear agendas.

My second point is a direct consequence of that
perception. Under the present circumstances, Portugal
strongly supports the Secretary-General's proposal to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) for a further 12-
month consolidation phase in a reduced and modified
form, as described in his report. This support would
include a military component, although much reduced
from the present level.

My final remark has to do with the responsibility
of the international community and of the Security
Council in relation to Timor-Leste. The Council can
take pride in the contribution it has unfailingly
provided to the Timorese people. The Council literally
made possible the creation of that country. All of this
began just four years ago. During this period, we have
been able to create a country literally from the ashes.
At the same time, the international presence has been
steadily decreasing. Let me recall that, in May 2002,
UNMISET included 5,000 observers and troops; two
years later, it has been reduced to 1,750. Now, the
Secretary-General is recommending today that this
presence be limited to a military component of 350
observers and troops. This clear trend shows that
Timor-Leste, far from becoming a victim of a United
Nations-dependency syndrome, is successfully
preparing for the end of that peacekeeping operation in
the near future. We could simply wish that other
peacekeeping operations, despite their unquestionable
importance, had been able to achieve so much in such a
short period of time.

As in the past, Portugal will remain committed
and ready to contribute to the consolidation and
development of Timor-Leste and to the United Nations
efforts to that effect.

