Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): Thank you, Sir,
for presiding over this meeting.

We are now in the tenth year since 270 innocent
people were murdered when Pan Am flight 103 was blown
up over the Scottish village of Lockerbie. They and their
families are the victims of an appalling act of terrorism
which the Security Council has unanimously condemned.
Representatives of the British and other victims' families
are present in this Chamber observing today's debate. My
delegation pays tribute to them and to their fortitude in
coping for so long with their grief and the denial of justice.
It is high time that justice was done and that the two
accused were handed over to face trial in Scotland. I
welcome this opportunity once again to state the position of
the British Government.

The solution to this issue lies in the hands of the
Libyan Government. Libya has only to comply with
Security Council resolutions and hand over the two suspects
in order for sanctions to be lifted. For whatever reasons,
Libya has refused for over six years to comply. It has
sought instead to enlist other members of the United
Nations behind its policies of non-compliance, on the basis
of misrepresentations about the trial process, about the
impact of sanctions and, most recently, about the
preliminary ruling of the International Court of Justice.

We greatly respect the Organization of African Unity
and the League of Arab States. We understand the pressures
of regional solidarity. But we hope these organizations will
not be used to undermine the Security Council's resolutions
and that their influence will eventually be deployed to bring
about Libya's acceptance of international law and justice for
the victims. As President Mandela said last October in
Libya itself, the United Nations must be respected. Making
an exception for Libya would harm the United Nations and
its authority more generally. Are we now to establish as a
new norm that those accused of crimes of international
terrorism may choose the place of their trial when it suits
them? Which other Member States here present would
countenance that, after the murder of innocent people in
their own territory and jurisdiction?

Let me address Libya's misrepresentations in detail.

First let me deal with the question of the fairness of
a trial of the two accused in Scotland.

Libya has formally stated that it has no reservations
about the fairness of Scottish justice. Instead Libya claims
that the climate of press and public opinion in Scotland
would render a fair trial impossible. This is simply untrue.
There is no television in court and no media circus in
Scotland. There are strict rules on prejudicial publicity
and contempt of court within the Scottish legal system
which are aimed at ensuring that no such prejudice can
take place. Indeed, trials have been stopped in the United
Kingdom on the rare occasions where press reporting was
held to have prejudged the issue.

On the subject of press reporting, the Libyan
Ambassador himself distributed the videocassette of a
recent BBC Scotland programme which argued that the
Libyan suspects were innocent. So much for prejudicial
publicity. This claim must, of course, be tested in a
Scottish court. We are nevertheless grateful to the Libyan
Ambassador for demonstrating that his contention that the
Scottish press or indeed the Scottish people have made up
their minds about the guilt of the two suspects in advance
is patently false.

The Secretary-General's own expert mission to
Scotland late last year exposed the hollowness of Libyan
arguments about a prejudicial climate for a trial in
Scotland. Regrettably, similar invitations from the British
Government to the Arab League and to the Organization
of African Unity to send missions to Scotland to see
Scottish justice at first hand rather than accept the Libyan
Government's own propaganda were rejected. I find this
hard to understand. Firsthand knowledge of the facts is
always preferable to hearsay and unsubstantiated
assumptions. The United Nations own two independent
experts - both respected judges, one from Zimbabwe
and one from the Netherlands - could not have been
clearer. They concluded not just that the Scottish legal
system was fair and independent. They also concluded
that, contrary to Libyan claims, the accused would receive
a fair trial under the Scottish judicial system, and that
their rights during the pre-trial, trial and post-trial

 

proceedings would be fully protected in accordance with
international standards.

Let me make it clear that for the trial itself in
Scotland, the British Government would also welcome
international observers, from the United Nations, from the
Organization of African Unity, from the Arab League and,
of course, from Libya. The independent United Nations
experts concluded from their visit that their presence could
be easily and fully accommodated.

The OAU and the Arab League have stated that they
wish to see justice done as soon as possible. On this
specific point, the report of the Secretary-General's expert
mission is quite clear. The speediest and fairest route would
be through the Scottish courts in Scotland. Moving the trial
to a third country would be without precedent. It could
offer to those who are looking to frustrate progress and
justice another opportunity for prevarication and procedural
delay. We have heard in the past from Libya that it cannot
require the accused to stand trial in Scotland; it is worth
remembering that in 1993 Libya said that it would
encourage the accused to do so. Frankly, we dispute that
contention. But assuming for one moment that it were true,
why should Libya be better able to require them to attend
a trial elsewhere?

I turn next to sanctions.
Libya is claiming that the Security Council's
resolutions are unjust because of the impact of sanctions on
their country. The report of the Secretary-General's own
emissary, Mr. Petrovsky, does not support these claims.
Indeed, to claim that restrictions on air travel have a major
humanitarian impact is, in itself, implausible. The sanctions
in resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993) have been
carefully targeted to minimize their impact on the Libyan
population. The vast majority of Libya's imports and
exports are unaffected, including all medicines and other
humanitarian supplies. I have also heard the suggestion that
Libya's oil production is affected. Let me quote Libya's
own figures that oil production in 1997 averaged 1.42
million barrels a day, up by 20,000 barrels a day from
1996, an increase that helped boost Libyan foreign currency
reserves up to a comfortable $9.95 billion. Libya has one of
the highest per-capita incomes on the African continent.
Meanwhile, and again I quote Libyan official sources,
Libyan gross domestic product went up by 6 per cent in
1997 and is predicted to go up a further 7 per cent this
year. If there is any truth to the Libyan Government's
statements about economic hardship, it might in the
circumstances be more realistic to look for the causes, not
in sanctions, but in policies.

Mr. Petrovsky's report also clearly states that Libya
is not making full use of the exemptions that already exist
to respond to humanitarian emergencies. On medical
evacuation flights, the United Nations Secretariat provides
a 24-hour service to deal with requests for emergency
evacuation flights every single day of the year. The facts
are simple: there have been no problems with medical
evacuations this year, nor have any medical evacuations
been prevented in previous years when agreed procedures
have been observed. Earlier this week the sanctions
Committee repeated its willingness to increase the number
of destinations for medical evacuations and to replace
Libyan medical-evacuation aircraft. And in a press release
from the Chairman of the Committee today, the
Committee makes clear that it will consider all necessary
steps to ensure that Libya has the means safely and
expeditiously to perform medical evacuation flights.

Similarly, the sanctions Committee has always
shown its respect for the religious obligations of Libyan
Muslims by facilitating arrangements to allow Libyan
pilgrims to perform the Hajj. The sanctions Committee
has declared its willingness to facilitate these
arrangements again this year. And again in today's press
release, the Committee reiterates that willingness, and its
willingness to continue considering necessary
humanitarian exemptions from the sanctions regime.
Let me now comment briefly, Sir, on the recent
decisions of the International Court of Justice. In his letter
to you of 4 March, the Libyan Permanent Representative
grossly misrepresents the facts.

The decisions delivered by the International Court on
27 February were rulings on preliminary objections
lodged by the United Kingdom and the United States to
the Libyan claim before the Court that, under the
Montreal Convention, it has the exclusive right to try the
two Libyans accused of the Lockerbie bombing. What the
Court decided was that it did have jurisdiction to decide
on the merits of the Libyan case about the Montreal
Convention. It did not decide that Libya's claims to try
the case in Libya were justified, and there has been no
decision on that question at all.

The United Kingdom is arguing before the Court
that this matter is governed by Security Council
resolutions 731 (1992), 748 (1992) and 883 (1993), which
oblige Libya to surrender the two accused for trial in

 

Scotland or the United States. Obligations under the United
Nations Charter - including compliance with binding
Security Council resolutions - take precedence over any
other alleged international obligations. The Court decided
on 27 February that this United Kingdom point is a
substantive one and that it cannot be ruled on in a
preliminary way; rather, the case should be considered at a
full hearing. The Court decided:

"Having established its jurisdiction and concluded
that the application is admissible, the Court will be
able to consider this objection [that is, the objection
based on the authority of the Security Council
resolutions] when it reaches the merits of the case".
[5/1998/191, p. 80, para. 50]

So what the Court has decided is that the substance of
this question, concerning the interpretation of the Montreal
Convention and the respective authority of the Convention
and the resolutions of this Council, should be fully
considered. This decision was just one stage in the judicial
proceedings, with the main argument on the merits still to
come. The United Kingdom Government will contest the
next phase of this case vigorously: our argument on the
binding nature of these resolutions and their overriding
authority is one which has implications beyond the facts of
this case and which should be of great concern for all those
States that are anxious to uphold the authority of the
decisions of this Council.

That is what the Court's decision was about. Let me
also remind Council members what it was not about. It was
not a decision that Libya's claim was valid. It was not in
any way a decision on the merits of the case against the
two accused. It was not a decision that Libya, or for that
matter the International Court of Justice, which has no
jurisdiction to hear criminal cases, should try the case
against them. Most importantly, it was not a decision that
the Security Council resolutions under which Libya is
obliged to surrender the two for trial in Scotland or the
United States are invalid. These resolutions are unaffected
by the Court's ruling and therefore remain in force.

Despite all attempts to muddy the waters, the plain
fact remains that Libya is under international obligations
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter, with which it has
not yet complied. Libya's claims that the ruling relieves
Libya of its obligations to hand over the two accused for
trial in Scotland or the United States are simply false.
Indeed, an application by Libya that it should no longer be
called upon to surrender the two accused because of these
proceedings has already been rejected by the International
Court, in a previous decision of 1992.

I hope that today's debate will dispel some of the
misrepresentations and distortions advanced by the Libyan
Government in its efforts to avoid compliance with the
resolutions of this Council. We should never lose sight of
the original reason why sanctions were imposed. They
were imposed because Libya refuses to give up for trial
in Scotland or the United States the two Libyans who
stand accused of the destruction of Pan Am flight 103, an
act of mass murder which cost 270 innocent lives.
Libya's attempts to justify that refusal are without force
or credibility.

In terms of their lasting claims to justice, the victims
do not, in the words of the poet, "go gentle into that good
night", they "rage, rage against the dying of the light".

Let those who have spoken today in favour of justice
for the families and relief from sanctions for Libya
prevail upon the Government of Libya to perform the
simple act of handing over the two suspects as soon as
possible, with all the guarantees that have been offered.

