Mr. Llorenty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing provided today on
peacekeeping operations. I should like also to thank the
presidency for having convened this debate, at which
we can discuss the relevance of current peacekeeping
operations and ask ourselves whether these in their
current format continue to be the best mechanism that
we have to ensure international peace and security.

First ofall, lwould like to underscore the importance
of peacekeeping operations. Today this is the most
important instrument at our disposal to maintain peace
in places where it is most needed. By the same token,
we would like to underscore and pay tribute to the key
role played by the troops, military observers, police and
civilian personnel that compose the various missions.
These men and women are on the ground risking their
lives every day to ensure that the various missions can
fulfil the goals and tasks with which we have entrusted
them. With this in mind, I should like to thank each
one of these individuals for their work; we hope that
they return safe and sound to their homes after having
fulfilled their mission.

It is important to recall that peacekeeping
operations are slightly less than 70 years old and that
in all this time some 69 missions have been deployed,
of which 16 continue to be operational today. Among
the most notable successes of the Organization are
missions that have contributed to ending conflicts and
promoting reconciliation, including in countries of our
region such as El Salvador and Guatemala. They have
also contributed to stabilizing Haiti.
The Plurinational State ofBolivia has been working
for 20 years with the United Nations Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. In 1997, the Organization
signed an agreement with Bolivia under which it
became a troop-contributing country. In 1999, we
sent a 70-soldier component to cooperate in the work
of closing down the operations of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola; it fulfilled that mission
in full.

Bolivia also took part as a troop-contributing
country in the United Nations Mission in the Democratic
Republic ofCongo,whichwasinsucceededbythecurrent
one, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
in the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
In each one of these missions, Bolivian troops acted
with the greatest professionalism, always respecting
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
acting in the framework of international law. Bolivia
currently contributes military observers to four of the
16 existing missions. We are committed to helping all
of them achieve their objectives and, to that end, our
personnel act based on the principles I have mentioned.

The United States delegation, which organized
today's meeting, encouraged Council members to focus
on whether our peacekeeping operations, as they are
currently constituted, are still the mechanism best
suited to meeting the needs of the people on the ground
and achieving the Council's political goals. That is why
it is important that we question the current value of
every one of our peacekeeping operations. There are
three points we should consider in that regard. The first
is the political support that every mission needs, from
the Government of the country where it is deployed,
from other Governments in the region and from the
international community in general. The second is
that we must always keep in mind the reason that each
mission was deployed in the first place. And the third
is that we must always keep each mission's specific
mandates and goals in the forefront of our minds.

Where the first point is concerned, Bolivia believes
that every mission should have the political support
of the country or countries where it is deployed. It is
impossible to imagine a positive outcome, even when
a mission is complying with its mandate, if it cannot
depend on the consent of the main parties in every
situation. Should that be the case, the mandate would
have to be restructured, even to the extent of questioning
its very existence if for one reason or another it cannot
rely on the consent of the parties.
That brings me to my second point, which is that
for missions to be seen as legitimate by the parties to
the conflict, it is essential that they are working for
the purposes for which they were conceived and are
upholding the principles of our peacekeeping operations.
They should therefore be impartial and serve only to
help build a lasting peace. They should never be seen or
used as an intervention force or be used to help justify
regime change. Every peacekeeping operation should
respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the countries in which it intervenes.

With regard to my third point, it is vital for
a mission to always have a clear, measurable and
achievable mandate. We must use the tools available
to us, such as monitoring and evaluation mechanisms,
to ensure that missions are meeting their goals and
fulfilling their mandates. If for any reason they
are not, they must be evaluated and their mandates
reconfigured. The part of the United Nations system
that includes peacekeeping operations has ended up in a
vicious circle of self-perpetuating bureaucracies where
mandates have become distorted and the bureaucracy
has become an end in itself. In other words, we find
ourselves in a situation where we see no way out
and renew the mandates every year simply to avoid
further complications. It is therefore crucial that every
peacekeeping operation have a maximum lifespan,
after which it must, of course, be evaluated and shut
down. If the conflict is still going, a new mission
should be established, with new mandates and new
goals that should be measurable and achievable in the
time allowed.

Before I conclude, I should make one last point,
which deserves the Council's full attention, although
it is unrelated to the previous ones. It is the issue of
the damage that peacekeeping operations themselves
can do, such as in the case of the cholera epidemic that
has affected Haiti in the past few years, and for whose
initial outbreak the Organization has already admitted
a degree of responsibility. It is important to ensure that
missions always coordinate with local authorities on
planning and staffing issues.

Lastly, I would like to emphasize that the
Plurinational State of Bolivia fully supports the efforts
of every peacekeeping operation and is very grateful
to their personnel for their work and the sacrifices
they make.

