Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
the representatives of Israel and Palestine for their
statements.

One of the consistent themes of the speeches heard
in the high-level debate in the General Assembly
last month was grave concern about the situation in
the Middle East. Violence and conflict in the region
continue to present the international community with
many challenges - challenges that this Council has a
responsibility to address.

The conflict in Gaza this summer was a grim
reminder of the devastating toll of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict on the lives of ordinary civilians.
The international community must act with urgency
to help the people of Gaza get back on their feet and
begin the hard work of reconstruction. We welcome the
$5.4 billion pledged towards the reconstruction of Gaza
and commend the efforts of Egypt and Norway to rally
international support for reconstruction efforts.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza must be the
immediate priority. The parties must move quickly
to accelerate reconstruction efforts, including by
implementing the United Nations mechanisms agreed
with the Palestinian Authority and Israel to allow the
import of construction materials. Urgent progress
is also needed to improve access to electricity, clean
water and sanitation.

This conflict in Gaza, the third in six years,
underlines that a return to the status quo is unacceptable.
Why should the international community spend billions
of dollars rebuilding Gaza when there is no guarantee
that it will not be destroyed again within a few years?
There must be rapid progress towards a durable
ceasefire that ends the cycle of violence and addresses
Israel's legitimate security concerns. The ceasefire
should be underpinned by a comprehensive monitoring
and verification mechanism that provides guarantees to
both sides. It is crucial that the Palestinian Authority
return to Gaza and restore effective and accountable
governance, capable of providing people with services
and security.

We continue to have serious concerns about
deteriorating conditions on the ground in the occupied
Palestinian territories. We deplore Israel's recent
decisions to advance settlement plans in Givat Hamatos
and plans to expropriate land near Bethlehem. We
are deeply concerned about an impending decision
by Israeli to proceed with proposals to relocate the
Bedouin population from around the sensitive E1 area.
We urge the Government of Israel to change course now
and to reverse those plans.

We are also concerned about tensions at the Haram
al-Sharif/Temple Mount compound in Jerusalem
in recent weeks and urge the Israeli and Jordanian
authorities to work together in order to stabilize the
situation.

We are clear that the best way for both Israeli and
Palestinian families to live without fear of further
violence is agreement on a comprehensive negotiated
solution without delay. The United Kingdom will
continue to work closely with international partners to
support efforts towards a negotiated solution that will
deliver an independent Palestinian State alongside a
safe and secure Israel. We urge all parties to make the
difficult choices required for meaningful progress.

We continue to witness appalling violence in Syria.
While an international coalition has been trying to save
Kobani from falling into the hands of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the Al-Assad regime has
continued it murderous policy of indiscriminate attacks
and aerial bombardments on Syria's civilian population,
including around Aleppo and Damascus.

There should be no doubt that Al-Assad cannot be
part of the solution to the crisis in Syria. There needs
to be a Government in Damascus that enjoys legitimacy
in the eyes of the Syrian people and credibility with
the international community and that can take effective
action against extremism. For as long as Al-Assad
remains in power, there will be no peace in Syria.
We strongly support the efforts of the United Nations
Special Representative and urge all parties to work
towards a Syrian-led political transition.

In Iraq, the security situation remains very serious,
with ISIL maintaining control of significant swathes
of territory. It has made advances in Anbar province
in recent days, including taking control of the city
of Hit and attacking the provincial capital, Ramadi.
Liberating that territory from ISIL will take months
and years, not days and weeks, and the horrific effects
of ISIL on governance, security and Iraqi society
will be felt for even longer. We welcome Prime
Minister Al Abadi's steps towards the formation of a
Government of national reconciliation. To preserve the
integrity ofthe Iraqi State, its Government must commit
to a more inclusive approach to the decentralization of
power to Iraq's communities and to a more equitable
sharing of Iraq's natural-resource wealth.

It is vital now that all parties in Iraq have the
courage to build bridges to each other, in particular to
appeal to the Sunni populations who are living under,
and in some cases acquiescing in, ISIL'S brutal regime
and who must be brought back into the political fold if
ISIL is to be comprehensively defeated.

