Mr. Fedotov: I thank you, Sir, for inviting me
to participate in this very important meeting of the
Council. I would like to thank the Security Council,
under the presidency of Italy, for its continued vigilance
and attention to the need to stop the destruction, looting,
trafficking and sale of cultural heritage by terrorists
and organized criminals.

As the Security Council and General Assembly
have recognized, we have a strong international
framework in place. I take this opportunity to urge
the international community to maintain focus on
strengthening the effective implementation of almost
universally agreed instruments, such as the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, the International Convention for the Suppression
of the Financing of Terrorism, and the United Nations
Convention against Corruption. The United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) has worked
closely with UNESCO, INTERPOL, the International
Institute for the Unification of Private Law and other
international partners to assist Member States in
promoting comprehensive responses and stopping
looted or stolen cultural property from being trafficked
from the affected countries.

Looking ahead, we need to do more to support
countries to detect stolen cultural property with a view
to dismantling criminal networks. We must build up
international cooperation in investigating, prosecuting
and adjudicating cases related to trafficking in cultural
property. We must also work to further promote the
exchange of information on measures taken at the
national level, including relevant criminal cases. That
includes sharing such information with international
organizations engaged in this fight. The art market
and museums should pay special attention to the
provenance of cultural items that they are considering
for acquisition, or with which they otherwise come into
contact. Governments can help them to ensure that this
care is diligently exercised.

UNODC remains fully engaged in working with
our partners to support countries to build capacities
and provide technical assistance. The UNODC-World
Customs Organization Container Control Programme
has developed advanced training to better position port
control units to detect and interdict illicitly trafficked
cultural heritage. That includes specialized knowledge
for region-specific types of cultural property and
methods to detect shipments containing such goods, as
well as criminal intelligence training and support. We
also continue to support anti-corruption and anti-money
laundering action and to provide technical assistance
to prevent and counter terrorism financing, including
through the illicit sale of antiquities.

The International Guidelines for Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice Responses with Respect to
Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related
Offences, adopted by the General Assembly in 2014,
represent a comprehensive reference for implementing
the needed crime prevention and criminal justice
responses. UNODC has developed an assistance tool
to help put the guidelines into practice. The list of key
actions outlined in the brochure entitled Protecting
Cultural Heritage - An Imperative for Humanity,
which was developed by the Governments of Italy and
Jordan with UNODC, UNESCO and INTERPOL, also
remains highly relevant. I urge all Member States to use
these expert resources.

Even as we welcome news that groups such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant are losing control
over territories, we must take the opportunity to further
strengthen efforts to better safeguard vulnerable
cultural property in various areas of conflict, as well
as pursue longer-term measures to prevent terrorists
and criminals from profiting from trafficking. Only in
that way can we protect precious cultural heritage from
being lost forever. UNODC's research and technical
assistance capacities, reinforced by our network of field
offices, remains at your entire disposal, Sir, to support
such action.

