Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): France
associates itself with the statement to be delivered on
behalf of the European Union.

Since the last debate in the Council on climate
change was in 2007 (see S/PV.5663), science has
progressed, the facts have been confirmed and the risks
have been further analysed, as Mr. Steiner set out in his
statement. I therefore pay tribute to the German
presidency of the Security Council for the initiative to
hold a debate on the impact of climate change on
international peace and security.

The climate threat concerns us all. It is, in
particular, a threat for our small island Pacific State
partners, whose very existence is in peril, as is the
survival of their territory, culture and identity. The
President of the Republic of Nauru, Mr. Marcus
Stephen, whose presence I welcome in the Council
today, is better placed than I to speak about the
immense challenges affecting the islands of his region.
I regret enormously that we cannot respond to his
appeal.

In addition, agricultural productivity is under
threat. My country has made food security a priority of
its presidency of the Group of 20. How can we
maintain international peace and security if a situation
of chronic food shortages sets in?

It is also a threat in terms of water resources in
regions where these are rare, and generates tension.
How can we ensure appropriate management if they
become yet scarcer?

It is also a menace for the viability of coastal
regions, where more than one third of the world
population lives.

The facts are clear: climate change has an
immense destabilizing potential and could multiply the
threats to peace and security in the most fragile regions
and States.

The international community is mobilizing to
tackle the various challenges posed by climate change.
There is still time to avoid its worst effects, but we
must act fast. There is only one way to do this, namely,
international cooperation.

We must begin a new stage in formulating an
ambitious multilateral response at the Durban
Conference. We must give operational impetus to the
agreements negotiated at Cancun. We must also
safeguard the Kyoto Protocol and move towards a
broader legal instrument.

We must also work to respond to sector-specific
threats and promote partnerships. This is the objective
of the World Water Forum, to be held in Marseille in
March 2012.

Access to clean energy for all is another major
priority, because development is itself a way of
responding to climate change and can contribute to
preventing and reducing conflicts. It is in this context
that France and Kenya together launched the Paris-
Nairobi Initiative last April.

Lastly, we must reinvigorate global partnerships
for sustainable development and adopt, in Rio in June
2012, an ambitious road map for a global transition
towards a green economy supported by solid,
financially strong and effective institutions.

The international community has seen the
diversity of risks related to climate change and is
taking measures in various forums. In this context, the
implications of climate change for maintaining
international peace and security should be taken into
account. In conformity with its mandate, the Security
Council must therefore assume its responsibilities.

The Council is not infringing on the competence
of other United Nations bodies and does not want to
replace other forums, in particular that under the
Convention on Climate Change. The Council today is

simply facing up to a new type of threats that are
multiform, complex and diffuse. In that spirit we are
exploring today the implications of these threats and
the Council's capacity to deal with them. Thus last
February the Security Council, under the presidency of
Brazil, held a useful debate on peace, security and
development (see S/PV.6479). It is in the same spirit
that today the Council is considering climate change -
while strictly respecting its mandate and the Charter -
in particular in the area of preventing conflicts.

My delegation therefore regrets that the Security
Council is not responding in the same way as it did in
the debate on security and development. Despite the
efforts by the presidency, the Council is not ready to
make a collective statement today on the implications
of climate change for the maintenance of international
peace and security. To oppose with bureaucratic
concerns the anguished appeals by our partners
threatened by climate change does not rise to the issues
at stake. It is not dignified.

Nevertheless, we are faced with reality. The need
will remain for the Security Council to endeavour to
analyze the threats and to better know the causes of
conflict on which climate change will have the most
immediate effects. The Council must also take account
of the impact of its own decisions. For example, it
must, as of today, take measures to ensure that
peacekeeping operations reduce their carbon emissions
and their impact on the environment. I therefore
welcome the fact that the Secretariat has already taken
measures in that regard.

Today's debate is just a first stage. It must be for
all of us in the United Nations a call for action. The
climate threat means that we must mobilize ourselves:
first in the short term, to ensure the success of the
Climate Conference in Durban and the Climate Change
Conference in Rio; in the medium term, to prevent
conflicts that could emerge; and in the long term to
save the planet. My delegation is convinced that the
Security Council must come back to this and in the
future must express itself in a single voice. This is not
over-ambitious; it is just taking account of the sad
realities that we face.
