Mr. Murphy (Ireland): I am speaking on behalf of the
European Union. The following associated countries -
Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Romania, the Slovak
Republic and Slovenia - align themselves with this
statement. Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway have also
aligned themselves with this statement.

The European Union has followed closely the evolving
situation in Burundi. It has expressed its deep concern at
the disturbing developments there, most recently on 19
August 1996. We have taken the opportunity of this debate
today to call on all sides to stop the violence and to commit
themselves to, and work actively towards, a negotiated and
peaceful resolution of the crisis.

The European Union supports the efforts of the
regional leaders, the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
and the former President of Tanzania, Mr. Julius Nyerere,
to assist Burundi to overcome peacefully the grave crisis
that it is experiencing. We encourage them to continue their
efforts to facilitate the search for a political solution. The
European Union has recently appointed a Special Envoy for
the Great Lakes region, Mr. Aldo Ajello, to assist in the
search for such a solution.

 

The report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Burundi documents fully and clearly the enormity and
seriousness of the political and humanitarian situation in
Burundi. All steps must be taken to ensure that there is
no further loss of life.
In this context, the European Union considers it
essential for a dialogue to be organized without delay,
bringing together all of Burundi's political forces without
exception, including representatives of civil organizations,
in order to negotiate a democratic, institutional consensus
capable of ensuring security for all.

Only when all sections of society are able to
participate freely and fully in the principal institutions and
bodies of the State can national reconciliation and peace
be restored on a lasting basis. As the Secretary-General
has said, the conflict in Burundi is not susceptible to a
military solution. Political mechanisms have to be found
to share power in a way that will allay the fears of both
sides and gradually build up the confidence that will
enable them to live in harmony. We fully endorse this
View.

The European Union urges all sides in Burundi to
call an immediate cease-fire. The process of reconciliation
cannot begin as long as acts of violence, which continue
unabated, are perpetrated. The safety of all Burundians
must be fully respected. We remain utterly convinced that
violence cannot provide the answer to the crisis in
Burundi. Only the inclusive dialogue that the international
community and the regional leaders have called for is
capable of achieving this. The guarantees that both
communities in Burundi require can emerge only from a
process that includes all sections of society.

We do not underestimate the complexity of the task
ahead. Political exploitation of animosity and suspicion
between the various communities in Burundi have made
it much more difficult to find a common ground on which
to begin to build the process of reconciliation. A new
relationship based on trust and on confidence must be
established. To this end, the prevailing culture of
impunity needs to be properly addressed. Each side must
find the confidence to compromise enough so as to
reconcile its often conflicting interests. The willingness to
engage in dialogue is almost the most basic test of
political responsibility; the willingness to cast aside
inflexible positions is the test of political courage.

The European Union and its member States have
made significant contributions at both the multilateral and

 

the bilateral level to alleviate the plight of the people of
Burundi. The Union reaffirms its willingness to support
Burundi's recovery efforts, once the necessary national
reconciliation is embarked upon with all the resolve
required.
The European Union wishes to reiterate the utmost
importance that it attaches to the prompt and satisfactory
resolution of the situation of those who have sought
protection in European Union and other foreign missions in
Bujumbura.

The European Union believes that today's debate in
the Security Council will serve to underline the concern of
the international community at the seriousness of the
situation in Burundi. It will also show the support for the
very considerable efforts of the regional leaders, the OAU
and former President Nyerere to restore the basic
democratic institutions in Burundi and to relaunch the
process of dialogue between the various parties. We believe
that a very clear signal has gone out to all sides in the
Burundi conflict. There must be an end to all violence.
There must be a beginning, without delay, to all-inclusive
dialogue. This is the only path to the lasting solution we all
seek, a solution based on a negotiated democratic and
institutional consensus, which ensures security for all.

