Mr. Gayan (Mauritius): We are grateful to you,
Mr. President, for convening this very important
meeting on Afghanistan. Allow me also to thank His
Excellency Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi for his very
comprehensive briefing, and we commend him for the
very arduous and strenuous task that he has undertaken.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his very important statement.

The 11 September terrorist attacks shocked the
world. But they were also an eye-opener for the
international community, which woke up to the
atrocities and indignities which the Taliban regime has
for many years been inflicting on ordinary Afghan
women, men and children. While the Taliban regime
was brutal in the treatment that it meted out to its
people, it gave comfort and shelter to terrorists and to
the Al Qaeda network. We are relieved to hear and to
know that the global coalition against terrorism is now
showing that the end of the Taliban regime is near.

Events on the ground in Afghanistan are
unfolding at a very fast pace. As we meet here to
consider the situation there, we have a duty to ensure
that the response we provide is commensurate with the
dimension and magnitude of the problems which
ordinary Afghans will face with the collapse of the
Taliban regime.

With the Taliban regime on the run, there will be
the temptation on the part of the Northern Alliance to
seek revenge and reprisals. There is therefore an urgent
need to ensure that there a minimum of law and order
in Kabul. It is to the United Nations that ordinary
Afghans will look for this particular comfort.

The United Nations has a daunting task, and,
whether it likes it or not, it will have to be closely
involved not only in the process of setting up an
interim Government but also in the post-war
reconstruction.

The priorities are clear, but they are by no means
easy. Nor are they by any means easy to achieve. We
consider that the interim government that Mr. Brahimi
has talked about will have to be set up under the
traditional Loya Jirgah system. The ideal of a stable,
broad-based, responsible and accountable government
can be realized, and it is our belief that after decades of
conflict and instability the Afghan people will cherish
an era where rules instead of brutal terror govern their
lives.

The fall of the Taliban regime must not become a
temptation for its neighbours to impose a government
of their liking. We support, in this context, the work of
the "six plus two" group; the work that they have been
doing on Afghanistan is very valuable. But we also
believe that this team must be expanded to include
other countries that may contribute to the provision of
help and support and that will later have a role to play
in the reconstruction of Afghanistan. We are convinced
that under no circumstances should the territorial
integrity of Afghanistan be imperilled. But we are sure
that the Afghan people must have breathed a sigh of
relief when, with the Taliban on the run, they realized
that they could start to live normal lives, just like
everybody else in the world.
I need to say a word about the humanitarian
crisis. This crisis is immense. While I was listening to
Mr. Brahimi, I could not help but think that the task
ahead will be extremely arduous and difficult. But we
are sure - and we hope - that those in need of
assistance will be able to get it, because the
international community is committed to providing this
help. We also hope that this help will be provided
before the onset of winter. In this context, we wish to
salute the courage of the United Nations personnel who
are directly involved and engaged in the provision of
relief to the Afghans.

In conclusion, the time has come for testing the
international community's commitment not to walk
away when the threat disappears. Whatever we do here
must always take into account that any failure in
Afghanistan - any failure on the part of the
international community to reconstruct Afghanistan -
will undermine the confidence and trust that people
have in the United Nations system and, in a word, in
world leaders.

We are sure that under the guidance of the
Secretary-General and his team, whom we support, the
end of the crisis in Afghanistan is not far off, and we
hope that very soon we will be able to welcome a
responsible and accountable Afghan Government into
our midst.

