Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): 1 would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the entire Venezuelan team,
for your hard, highly professional and effective work
in February. Despite the fact that today we are formally
summing up our work for the month, some important
and sensitive issues still require our attention in the
hours and days remaining, including one that has
particular importance for my country, that is, the
briefing on Monday by the Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. We commend your approach, Sir, in taking into
account requests from all delegations and doing your
best to try to accommodate them without prejudice
or discrimination.

Over the past few weeks, the Council has had to
address quite a range of issues, but our performance
has produced mixed feelings. I would cite as one of the
highlights the debate (see S/PV.7620) on the Security
Council's working methods. It was heartening to see a
high level of convergence of views and an overall general
understanding on the areas where the Council can make
tangible improvements in the work of its subsidiary
bodies. In that regard, the issuance of a presidential
note on the work of the Council's subsidiary bodies
(S/2016/ 170) is a welcome development and definitely
a step in the right direction, albeit a small one. We
therefore look forward to the first meeting next month
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions and stand ready to work
closely with all Council members in order to further
improve our methods of work.

The open debate (see S/PV.7621) on respect for
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations in the context of the maintenance of
international peace and security was very useful.
The variety of views and approaches to the subject
demonstrated the lasting validity of the Charter's
provisions. However, the discussion made one thing
clear, which is that any violation of any principles of the
Charter undermines the foundation of the Organization
and diminishes its legitimacy in the eyes of the world.
Dangerous precedents set by unscrupulous leaders with
no moral compass, preoccupied with visions ofpersonal
grandeur and blinded by imperialist ambitions, may
tempt some into thinking that it may actually pay to
bend the rules here and there, interpret the Charter as
it suits one and lie persistently, brazenly and with a
straight face. The lack of concrete action on the part
of the United Nations designed to punish perpetrators,
correct wrongs and restore respect for the Charter's
purposes and principles makes it only too apparent to
Member States that might makes right.

Is that the world that our leaders wanted to build
70 years ago? Is that the world that we would like to
create now? Our answer is a resolute no. What we need
is a United Nations capable of efficiently and swiftly
responding to Charter violations and other challenges
of today.

That brings me to the second part of my statement.
The Security Council has a special responsibility to
ensure that the Charter's purposes and principles are
upheld and respected. Violations of the Charter quite
oftenresultinarmedconflictsthatkill,maimanddisplace
huge numbers of people. When that happens, it means
that the Council has failed in its main responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. For the
Council to be effective, it must be united - and that
is something that is missing. Nowhere has that been
more pronounced and evident than in the context of the
Syrian conflict. Despite numerous discussions of the
Syrian issue in the Council, in practice very little has
been done to alleviate the Syrian people's suffering,
put an end to the bloody conflict and focus energy and
resources on combating the threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham, which is metastasizing into
other countries in the region. A glimmer of hope for the
Syrian people has recently appeared. We sincerely hope
that the Council will not waste that precious window
of opportunity.

I would be remiss not to mention the issue of the
sanctions against the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. After the January nuclear test, we expressed
our strong condemnation of the Pyongyang actions
threatening international peace and security. After the
February missile launch, we reiterated our position
that the Council must react robustly to such flagrant
violations of numerous Security Council resolutions.
While it is somewhat regrettable that it took so long for
a draft resolution to arrive on the Council's table, we
are nonetheless satisfied with its comprehensive nature
and would like to express our appreciation for the
efforts of the United States and China, which drafted
the text. We consider the draft resolution's upcoming
adoption to be a significant step on the part of the
international community in helping to strengthen the
global non-proliferation regime. We are realists, and
we do not expect Pyongyang's behaviour to change
overnight. But our long-term hope is that the Korean
peninsula will eventually be transformed from one of
the world's hotspots into a region of peace and stability.

Although today we are discussing what has
been done in the past month, I suggest that we take
a look further ahead to an issue of great interest
and importance to the general United Nations
membership - the appointment of the next Secretary-
General. In February there were some useful exchanges
among Council members on the selection process. With
seven candidates officially nominated so far and new
ones likely to emerge, I believe it is very important to
ensure that the Council start holding some preliminary
discussions on the issue right away, without postponing
it until July. In our opinion, it would be beneficial ifthe
Council were to convene at least once a month on the
subject in consultations format, under the "Any other
business" item, maybe towards the end of each month.

In conclusion, Mr. President, I would like to wish
you a successful completion of your duties in the
next few days and to assure the incoming Angolan
presidency of our full support.

