Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset to welcome Mr. Christian
Schwarz-Schilling, who has served as High
Representative and European Union Special
Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina since
1 February 2006. We would like to assure him of my
delegation's full support as he carries out his important
functions. We also welcome the presence at this
meeting of Mr. Adnan Terzic, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thank him
for the information that he provided.

On 21 November 2005, the Council renewed the
mandate of the European Union military mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and expressed support for the
European Union's decision to initiate negotiations with
Bosnia and Herzegovina on a stabilization and
association agreement.

We are pleased to note that, having initiated
technical talks in January of this year, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is now on its way towards Euro-Atlantic
integration and that it has met the conditions to
advance towards the stage of an autonomous national
State that is actively integrated into Europe.

We take note of, inter alia, the renewed
discussions on constitutional reform and the
commitment reached by the eight strongest political
parties to support the process and to agree on
constitutional changes; the agreement that was reached
on how to proceed with the police restructuring; the
conclusion of the defence-sector reform process; and
the continuation of the effective unification of the
administration of the city of Mostar. Those actions
show that the national authorities are taking
responsibility for moving forward with the process.
That is a positive step, which should be underscored, as
should the fact that elections will be held in October.

However, those achievements should not prevent
us from acknowledging that there are a number of
issues still outstanding. We believe that the progress
achieved in certain areas, including in the economic
sphere, must also be made in the fight against
impunity. Although further cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia has been noted, the failure to arrest two of
the most infamous figures accused of genocide and
crimes against humanity - Radovan Karadzic and
Ratko Mladic - not only impedes Bosnia and
Herzegovina's joining the NATO Partnership for Peace
but also delays the process of healing the wounds of
the past.

As we have stated on previous occasions,
Argentina urges unconditional compliance with the
Dayton Agreements and the effective implementation
of its commitments, in particular, cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. We believe that only through joint efforts
to combat impunity in cases of serious human rights
Violations will the development of judicial institutions
be fostered, thus helping to strengthen justice and the
rule of law. We urge the parties to do their best in this
regard so as to allow for reconciliation, which is a
prerequisite for laying the foundations of a truly
sustainable society in an economically sovereign State.

