Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to wish you
every success during your term. I would like also to
express our appreciation to Ambassador Yafiez-
Barnuevo of Spain for the competent manner in which
he guided our work during the month of September.

The delegation of Brazil supports the convening
of this timely debate on the situation in the Middle
East, as new, highly deplorable events characterized by
brutality and bloodshed are taking place in Gaza, in the
Palestinian occupied territories. Brazil is gravely
concerned at the escalation of violence and at the
mounting toll of casualties as a result of a massive new
operation - code-named "Days of Penitence" -
carried out in the past five days by Israeli military
forces. We condemn the disproportionate use of force
employed by the Israeli military in densely populated
areas that has caused widespread suffering and loss
among scores of Palestinian civilians, including
children. We also condemn the continuance by Israel of
its illegal policy of extrajudicial killings. Brazil fully
supports Secretary-General Kofi Annan's call for the
Government of Israel to halt its deadly military
incursions into the Gaza Strip and expects the Israeli
Government to fully comply with international
humanitarian Law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War.

We reject the activities of Palestinian militia
aimed against the Israeli civilian population. Yet, we
believe that the situation prevailing on the ground
further highlights the importance of achieving progress
in the peace process with a view to ending the
occupation.

No unilateral solutions - especially those
disregarding the need for negotiation and compromise
between the parties - are likely to ensure the fair and
lasting peace to which all the peoples of the region are
entitled. In that connection, Brazil urges both parties to
cease all acts of violence, to act in compliance with
their obligations under the road map, which was
endorsed by the Council by its resolution 1515 (2003),
and to renew their quest for a peaceful settlement. We
call upon the Quartet co-mediators to engage
decisively with the parties in order to make them halt
the present violence and to bring them back to the
negotiating table.

The delegation of Brazil supports the draft
resolution presented by Algeria for the Arab Group.

