Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): I would like to
begin by thanking Mr. Hedi Annabi for the very
valuable comprehensive briefing that he gave us, and I
certainly want to join our colleagues in welcoming the
two positive developments relating to self-government
and the transfer ofthe prisoners back to Kosovo.

We would also like to thank Deputy Prime
Minister Covic' for his statement. In our view, he made
some important points. I would like to use the bulk of
my statement today to respond to some of the points
that Mr. Covic' made this morning. I would like to
quote a few paragraphs of his statement.

He said:

"Turning to Kosovo and Metohija, the most
important point that I wish to make is that we are
currently in a race against time. Two different
forces are going to be pushing harder and harder
to come to a final solution for Kosovo and
Metohija: the ethnic Albanians from Kosovo and
Metohija and, for separate reasons, the
international community, which is growing tired
of investing resources and energy in the Balkans.
If this last statement should be doubted, one need
only consider the sharp reduction in refugee
funding for the Balkans for next year or the
statements made by various troop contributors
about withdrawing all or part of their forces.

"I firmly believe that we have less time than
most of us think or want to prepare for this final
solution, so every day counts. I personally think
that, unless we make major progress on key
issues this very year, we will face immense
problems."

I think that that was a very strong statement on
the part of the Deputy Prime Minister. I believe that it
behoves us as members of the Council to discuss
whether or not we share that evaluation. If we share it,
why do we do so? And if not, why not?

That brings me to a point that I was planning to
make in today's discussion. I find that when we discuss
the Kosovo issue we face a real paradox. We probably
discuss it more regularly than any other issue - we
have regular meetings once a month to discuss the
Kosovo situation. Indeed, I think that this is our
fifteenth discussion of the subject. But what we have
had so far are 15 snapshots of the situation, with no
clear indication of a trend line showing which way
things are going in Kosovo. I think it is important for
us actually to work out the trend line, especially in
view of what Mr. Covic' said.

I would like to add that if we do not do so, the
media will do the job for us and come up with their
own assessment of how we are doing in Kosovo. I
would like to quote from two recent assessments. One
was made yesterday in a broadcast by the German
radio station Deutsche Welle. It said:

"Three years after NATO joined up with
Albanian rebels to expel Yugoslavian forces from
the breakaway southern Serbian province,
Kosovo is a weird western protectorate with half-
fulfilled dreams and tough times ahead. It is still
a broken place, despite the NATO intervention -
or partly because of it, depending on how you
look at it. Kosovo, the southernmost province of
Serbia, is home to a mostly ethnic Albanian
population and a thinning minority population of
Serbs, and it is the temporary home to some
46,000 NATO troops. Their presence, a remnant
of the military alliance's 78-day bombing
campaign that began three years ago on Sunday,
has brought the region some stability but no
miracles."
I quote from an editorial in The Washington Post,
entitled "The Kosovo Measure" and dated Saturday, 16
March. It states:

"Like Afghanistan, Kosovo is a deeply
impoverished land with extensive war damage
and deep residual tensions among its different
ethnic groups. So it is worth taking the measure
of what reconstruction there has so far
required - and what is still needed. NATO began
with a peacekeeping force of 60,000 troops and
today still has 36,000 troops deployed" -

I note that Deutsche Welle says that there are 46,000
troops.

The editorial report continues,

"Sixty nations have sent military or civilian
personnel to the Balkan province, and $2 billion
has been spent just on civilian programmes since
1999."

The Washington Post goes on to compare the
situation with Afghanistan, stating:

"All this has been necessary for a province
that is about the size of Connecticut, contains
about 2 million people and is at least close to the
rich nations of Europe. Afghanistan, which is 60
times larger than Kosovo, has 13 times its
population and suffers from far greater
impoverishment and war damage, has received
nothing close to an equivalent commitment. Only
$4.5 billion in reconstruction aid has been
pledged so far, and the mandate of the small
international peacekeeping force expires in few
months."

Clearly, if we do not make our own assessments
of what we have achieved or failed to achieve in
Kosovo, we will be faced with assessments made by
other parties. That is why we believe that it would be
useful, in these monthly discussions, to step back and
take a long view of what we are achieving in Kosovo.
Here, we would like to reiterate two points that we
made during the previous debate, in January. First, we
said that we need to have a regular review of the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), because UNMIK is
unusual in the sense that it has a mandate in perpetuity,
when every other peacekeeping operation has very
specific time frames.

In the second point that we made, we emphasized
that that we also need very carefully to work out, over
time, an exit strategy for Kosovo, because, bearing in
mind the comments of the Deputy Prime Minister, if
we want to ensure that we leave it in a good fashion,
we must ensure that we build up to doing so.

In this regard, I was very encouraged by the
concluding remarks of Ambassador Lavrov. IfI got the
translation right, he said that time had perhaps come to
do a comprehensive survey of this issue, and that it
could be undertaken in the month of April. We hope
that during that comprehensive survey we will be able
to welcome Mr. Steiner to the Council. As our
colleague from Mauritius said earlier, we would be
very happy to welcome Mr. Steiner here to join in that
review. At the same time, we hope that, during the
comprehensive survey, we will also address a point that
has been left hanging on Kosovo: the final resolution
of Kosovo's future status.

I think that we are all aware that, in paragraph
11 (e), resolution 1244 (1999) calls on UNMIK to
facilitate "a political process designed to determine
Kosovo's future status, taking into account the
Rambouillet accords". The Rambouillet accords were
signed on 18 March 1999. Under those accords, three
years after entry into force we were supposed to have
formulated a mechanism for a final settlement for
Kosovo. The three-year time frame expired on 18
March 2002, nine days ago. Perhaps when we meet in
April to undertake a comprehensive survey we should
ask ourselves what happened to that time frame that
was set three years ago.

