Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): My delegation thanks
the Venezuelan presidency of the Council for convening
this open debate and for the thought-provoking concept
note (S/2016/103, annex). We also thank the Secretary-
General for his introductory briefing.

We take this opportunity to reiterate Bangladesh's
unwavering commitment to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, including in the
maintenance of international peace and security. I
wish to recall the words of the father of our nation,
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, in his maiden
address to the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth
session on 25 September 1974:

"The noble ideals enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations are the very ideals for which
millions of our people have made the supreme
sacrifice. I know that the souls of our martyrs
join us in pledging that the Bangalee nation fully
commits itself to the building of a world order in
which the aspiration of all men [and women] for
peace and justice will be realized" (A/PV2243, para. 2).

True to his words, Bangladesh has consistently
upheld the renunciation of war, respect for the sovereign
equality of States and non-interference in the internal
affairs of other States as the cornerstones of its foreign
policy. We have pursued the peaceful settlement
of disputes with our partners through dialogues,
negotiations and arbitration, based on the principle
of mutual respect. The determined leadership shown
by our Prime Minister, Sheikh Hasina, in amicably
resolving the long-pending land and maritime boundary
issues with our neighbours has further reinforced our
commitment to the ideals and values of the Charter of
the United Nations.

We have seen many efforts over the past seven
decades to justify deviations from the core Charter
principles under several theoretical doctrines and
concepts. Those concepts have come and gone, mostly
in response to the demands of realpolitik. The Charter
principles have, however, survived the test of time as
the bedrock of the international rule of law.

It would be pragmatic to acknowledge that the
notions of national sovereignty and internal affairs
have evolved over time since the promulgation of the
Charter of the United Nations. The unprecedented level
and scale of engagement of a diverse set of actors in
shaping international affairs and policies have added
layers to the traditional concept of sovereign equality.
The preponderance of internecine strife and violence
has also altered the landscape of armed conflicts
around the world. Under such circumstances, it may
be advisable for the entire United Nations membership
to engage in serious introspection about the possible
implications of the emerging global realities vis-a-vis
the Charter principles.

The Special Committee on the Charter of the
United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of
the Organization could be one of the suitable platforms
for embarking on such reflections and deliberations.
However, the continued impasse in the work of the
Committee does not hold much promise for the
collective willingness of Member States to leverage the
existing possibilities. It is also perhaps symptomatic
that the issue is not being directly approached in the
context of the ongoing discussions on the revitalization
of the General Assembly and Security Council reform.

Respect for the core principles is critical for
preserving the Charter's primacy on the pacific
settlement of disputes and for resorting to coercive or
enforcement measures only as measures of last resort.
After all, the toughest price for any such measures
are borne by the people in general. For third parties,
sanctions regimes are often couched in legal and
technical complications, creating possibilities for
lapses in compliance. These are further complicated by
unilateral prohibitive measures whose interface with
United Nations sanctions is not always explained in
clear, understandable terms.

In Bangladesh, we have a law giving effect to
Security Council resolution within our domestic
jurisdiction. It is therefore in our obvious interest to
see that the resolutions emerge through a participatory,
consultative and accommodating process within the
Council. The exercise of the veto power needs to be
reviewed for all practical purposes.

As underscored by many, the current focus of
the United Nations on ending and resolving conflicts
needs to be more than adequately balanced by its
work on preventing conflicts. The preventive aspect
can encompass a wide range of activities, including
reading the early warning signs of tension or conflicts,
responding to violent extremist trends, promoting
participatory governance and development, investing in
sound and inclusive institutions, and fostering a culture
of peace and non-violence. Enhanced partnerships and
synergies within the relevant regional arrangements or
organizations should bring useful dividends.

The Charter-stipulated measures of mediation,
conciliation and arbitration need to be mainstreamed
through the entire process of conflict prevention and
resolution, and not necessarily in the aftermath of
conflicts. Meaningful and sustained efforts must be
made to resolve protracted conflicts and humanitarian
situations that tend to foment further resentment,
intolerance and radicalization, including across borders
and regions. The nexus between peace and security,
development and human rights should form the basis for
the work of the overall peace and security architecture
of the United Nations.

These are responsibilities that may be shared by the
principal organs of the United Nations, consistent with
their respective mandates. A limited interpretation of
the provisions concerned would only continue to limit
the options for the Organization as a whole to deliver
on its potentials when it comes to effectively preventing
or resolving conflicts. The entire membership should
work towards realizing those potentials.

