Mr. Fall (spoke in French): As Council members
may recall, the report of the Inter-Agency Mission to
West Africa issued on 2 May 2001 underscored the
fragility of the political, security, social and
humanitarian situation, as well as the precarious
governance and economic development conditions in
West Africa, particularly in the Mano River Union
countries, Cote d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau and the
Casamance region of Senegal.

The report recommended that the United Nations,
as well as the international community, should consider
the adoption of an integrated and comprehensive
regional approach in the context of efforts to prevent,
manage and contribute to resolving the many conflicts
in the region. The report also affirmed that such an
approach would enable the international community to
address the multiplicity of factors that underlie those
conflicts, and that a regional strategy would also enable
us to take into account the cross-border problems that
often cause the spillover of a conflict from one country
to neighbouring ones.

The report also recommended that the Secretary-
General should consider the establishment of a United
Nations Office for West Africa to coordinate the
development and implementation of such a regional
approach and to facilitate and carry out good offices
missions, on behalf of the Secretary-General, in the
context of efforts to prevent conflicts at the early stages
of their gestation.

The time has come - today, perhaps - to assess
the evolution of the situation and also to outline the
challenges that remain and that will be addressed
specifically once the office has been established. I
should like to focus on that exercise, touching first of
all on the situation as it stands now before I turn to the
challenges.

With respect to the current situation, since the
report was issued the United Nations has begun the
process of implementing the recommendations
contained in it. In the absence of the funds necessary to
transform the Inter-Agency Task Force on the West
African Subregion into an integrated mission task
force, in accordance with the recommendations of the
Brahimi report, the Task Force has continued to meet
weekly to consider the problems in the subregion and
to commence the implementation of the priority
recommendations elaborated by the Task Force.

In that framework, all departments and
programmes represented in the Task Force conduct
regular comprehensive reviews of the subregion,
considering issues relating to peace and security,
governance, humanitarian assistance and human rights.
The Task Force has also begun considering some of the
crosscutting issues in anticipation of the creation,
establishment and functioning of the office of a special
representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa. In that regard, the Task Force has held
consultations with a variety of partners, including the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) through its Executive Secretary and
through many of its members and other international
partners such as the European Union, including the
special envoy of its President for the Mano River
Union region. There have also been contacts with the
United States Agency for International Development,
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
In that connection, we have made recommendations to
various departments and programmes on specific issues
discussed with those partners.

Members will recall that the report on West
Africa made a number of recommendations, some of
them specifically related to the areas of peace and
security, governance, human rights and humanitarian
assistance. Since the publication of the report and since
the last Council briefing, we have witnessed some
tangible improvement in some parts of West Africa,
including the following. The peace process in Sierra
Leone has continued to progress. Along the same lines,
the Government of cote d'Ivoire has organized a
dialogue for national reconciliation, which was
attended by all the major leaders; today we await a
statement from President Gbagbo on the outcome of
that national-reconciliation forum, which has now
ended and whose chairman transmitted its conclusions
to the President a few days ago. Moreover, the
Government of Guinea decided not to force through
legislative elections that would have caused an
escalation of the internal political crisis that followed
the controversial referendum last month on the possible
renewal and extension of the term of office of the
President of the Republic.

Along the same lines, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the World Bank,
on the basis of a recommendation contained in the West
Africa report, have dispatched a mission to Guinea-
Bissau and are in the process of developing an overall
peace-building and development plan for Guinea-
Bissau with the active involvement of the Office of the
Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea-
Bissau.

To this rather favourable picture, we can add the
fact that democratic, vigorously contested and
transparent elections were held in the Gambia, which
has helped further consolidate the democratic process
in the subregion.

Last but not least, the humanitarian situation has
greatly improved following progress in the peace
process in Sierra Leone.

Despite all those improvements, the overall
political situation remains volatile, and the threat of
insecurity and instability in the subregion remains real
in the Mano River Union area and in Guinea-Bissau.
The plight of refugees and internally displaced persons,
although improved, still continues to be of great
concern.
Since the Council's last briefing, there has been a
relative reduction of tension among the three countries
of the Mano River Union - Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone - following significant progress in the
ministerial dialogue among those three countries. That
was the result of internal political will as well as of
political pressure from outside, including from the
Chairman of ECOWAS and other ECOWAS leaders,
from the United Nations, from international partners
and from civil society actors in the Mano River
Union-including the Mano River Union Women's
Peace Network, which succeeded in convincing the
three Presidents of the need to instruct their ministers
to begin a process of confidence-building and dialogue.
Dialogue among ministers for foreign affairs, defence
and the interior began in August 2001 with the aim of
restoring confidence at the highest political level,
considering security problems along the common
borders and preparing for a summit of heads of State,
which is planned for early 2002. The ministers also
discussed revitalizing the institutions and mechanisms
of the Mano River Union.

The Foreign Ministers of the three countries took
advantage of their presence in New York to brief the
Secretary-General in the margins of the general debate
on the conclusions of their meetings and, most
important, to request the United Nations to provide
assistance in implementing their recommendations in
three major areas: support for the revitalization of the
Mano River Union and its secretariat; support for
confidence-building measures along the common
borders of the three States; and support for civil society
and for groups involved in the promotion of peace in
the subregion, in particular the Mano River Union
Women's Peace Network, to which I have already made
reference.

In the light of those developments, and as a
follow-up to that meeting between the Secretary-
General and the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
Mano River Union countries, consultations have began
in the Secretariat. Members will recall that, three years
ago, the Secretary-General requested the Economic
Commission for Africa, headquartered in Addis Ababa,
to consider bringing the three Mano River Union
countries together to study their economic integration
and development problems, and to see how the United
Nations could make an economic contribution to
reviving the Mano River Union. In spite of some initial
reluctance, with some leaders even calling the
existence of the Union into question, the Economic
Commission for Africa (ECA) sent four missions into
the field. We are in contact with the ECA with a View
to initiating a meeting of representatives of all of the
programmes, institutions and departments that are
involved with the Mano River Union, to consider what
kind of practical follow-up there might be to the
request that was made to the Secretary-General by the
three Foreign Ministers.

In this respect, I would like to pay tribute to the
United Nations Development Programme for its
generous contribution to the Mano River Women's
Peace Network, which has enabled it to continue its
activities and will make it possible for it to participate
in the ECOWAS summit, which is scheduled to begin
the day after tomorrow in Dakar. It will also make it
possible for it to sensitize the authorities to the
importance of peace in the Mano River Union as well
as in the entire ECOWAS region.

Today, the future of the subregion largely depends
on the capacity of the Mano River Union authorities -
and on the international community, which should
assist in the implementation of its decisions - for
turning the commitments of the leaders into concrete
action. Those decisions should usher in a new era of
good relations and cooperation based on a revival of
common economic activities. That is why we believe
that Council members may wish to appeal to the three
countries of the Mano River Union to maintain the
momentum generated by their recent ministerial
meeting so as to ensure the implementation of the
confidence-building measures adopted. The Council
could also urge the heads of State of the three countries
to hold the proposed summit to restore confidence and
cooperation at the highest level.

The report of 2 May 2001 focused a great deal on
developments in Sierra Leone. Today, we welcome the
progress being made in the peace process in Sierra
Leone, in particular the near-completion of the
disarmament programme and the deployment of
observers throughout the country. This has significantly
improved the political and security situation, not only
in Sierra Leone but in the subregion at large. It has also
facilitated the work of the developmental and
humanitarian and organizations, in particular as they
respond to the problems of refugees and displaced
persons.

However, it must be noted that the situation in
Sierra Leone cannot be isolated from developments in
neighbouring countries. On the one hand, progress in
the Sierra Leone peace process has had a positive
impact on the overall security and stability of the Mano
River Union. On the other hand, the recent
intensification of fighting in the north-east and north-
west of Liberia poses a real problem and threatens
peace, not only in Liberia but in Sierra Leone. There is
now even speculation that rebels from Liberians United
for Reconciliation and Democracy may have decided to
attack Sierra Leone with the aim of prompting that
country to build up its military forces and start a war
with Liberia. In the absence of peace and stability in
Liberia, therefore - unless the fighting is isolated and
the civil war there contained - it is clear that the
process of peace and stability in Sierra Leone may be
threatened. This only reinforces the validity of the
concept of a regional and integrated approach, which is
at the heart of the report of 2 May 2001. We believe
that in the face of this worsening situation, Council
members should encourage President Kabbah and
President Taylor to cooperate fully and join together in
an effort to contain the situation, in the mutual interests
of the two countries and in their own interests.

As for Guinea-Bissau, the political, economic and
social situation remains fragile. Attempted coups d'e'tat
have led to instability and a number of crises within the
country - disagreements between the President and
the Assembly, between the President and the judiciary,
between the President and officials - 60 per cent of
whom he considers to be corrupt - and between the
President and his own party. Recently, in the light of
information regarding an attempted coup d'etat,
measures were taken that led to, inter alia, the
replacement of the Prime Minister, a number of arrests
within the military hierarchy and a worsening of the
unstable political situation.

In consultation with the leaders of ECOWAS, the
Secretary-General has initiated, or provided support
for, various initiatives involving the President of
Guinea-Bissau and the authorities of that country, and
the United Nations is continuing to cooperate with
ECOWAS and with the Community of Portuguese-
Speaking Countries, with a View to stabilizing the
political situation in Guinea-Bissau. We believe that
the opportunity for us to represent the Secretary-
General in the ECOWAS summit, scheduled to take
place in Dakar in two days' time, will make it possible
for us to participate in various informal consultations
on Guinea-Bissau.

In spite of the unstable situation, we believe that
international financial assistance to Guinea-Bissau
remains an urgent necessity if we are to enable that
country to deal with the deep-rooted causes of the
crisis, given that institutions are Virtually non-existent,
the army is disorganized, former combatants need to be
reintegrated, and there is endemic poverty and a
crippling debt burden. Even if at present the persistent
instability has adversely affected the will of donors and
their confidence in the Government's ability to
function efficiently, we believe that it is necessary for
the international donor community to continue to assist
the country so as to help it meet its most pressing
economic and social needs and to foster the feeling
among the population that democracy can bring
tangible improvements in their living conditions. In
this respect, we wish to commend the World Bank for
continuing its initiative to finance the reintegration of
former combatants in Guinea-Bissau, as recommended
by the mission in its report of 2 May. This support is
crucial, as any further deterioration of the situation in
Guinea-Bissau would affect not only that country but
also Senegal, because of its proximity to the
Casamance region of that country, where rebellion is
under way.

Members of the Council will recall that in the
report of 2 May, in addition to the questions regarding
the Mano River Union, Guinea-Bissau, cote d'Ivoire
and other countries, the situation of refugees was
emphasized by the mission, and some of the most
important recommendations related to that question. In
that respect, the Mission made recommendations
regarding moving refugee camps that were too close to
the borders and relocating them far from those borders,
separating real refugees from armed militias and
ensuring access to populations requiring humanitarian
assistance. It could be said that the situation has
improved significantly since then, both in Sierra Leone
and Guinea.

The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has done
excellent work in assisting, relocating and repatriating
refugees and in helping displaced persons - with
regard to both Sierra Leonean and Liberian refugees in
Guinea. UNHCR has also launched a mass information
campaign targeting Sierra Leonean refugees in order to
inform them about the repatriation options available to
them. Moreover, it has adjusted upwards its
repatriation and reintegration plan. It expects to be able
to repatriate 500,000 displaced Sierra Leoneans in the
subregion, including the 200,000 Sierra Leoneans
residing as refugees in neighbouring countries, mainly
in Guinea, and also in Liberia.

Nonetheless, the humanitarian situation has been
affected by the latest fighting in Liberia. Several
thousand refugees, mostly women and children, have
been forced to flee their homes at a time when the
capacity of humanitarian agencies to respond to their
needs is at its lowest. Most of them have even crossed
borders and now find themselves in neighbouring
countries. This means that we must act very quickly to
help these innocent victims, as well as to put in place
processes to contain the war in Liberia and to scale it
back.

Humanitarian agencies are currently assessing the
needs in Liberia, and the situation will become clearer
in the coming days. The Secretary-General has already
alerted his representatives in both Sierra Leone and
Liberia to monitor the situations closely and propose
ways and means for better response by the United
Nations.

I would also like to draw the attention of the
members of the Security Council to the fact that many
Liberian refugees are still living in Guinea and Sierra
Leone and that there are also displaced Liberian
nationals in Liberia itself. At this very moment the
departments concerned are in the process of requesting
authorization from the security services to send a
mission to the Kolahun region and to northern Liberia.

At the same time, we are seeing signs of
impatience towards Sierra Leonean and Liberian
refugees on the part of the host community in Guinea.
Members of the Council could make an urgent appeal
to the international donor community to respond
favourably and generously to requests for humanitarian
assistance for refugees and displaced persons in the
countries of the Mano River region.

That is the situation today. I would now like to try
to respond to the question of the challenges that must
now be met.

The developments in the subregion, and
particularly in the Mano River region, clearly point to
the need for the Council to remain engaged. It is clear
that there continue to be tensions within the countries
concerned and across their national boundaries. If not
contained, those tensions could jeopardize the peace
and security, development and integration of the entire
subregion. It is for that reason that the following
questions present particular challenges.

The first question is that of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR). The current
impossibility of having adequate resources to support
the reintegration of demobilized soldiers and armed
militia groups in several countries of the subregion
continues to pose a risk to the stability of the
subregion, as well a risk of a resurgence of the conflict
in Liberia - as recent events in Kolahun illustrate. It
could also jeopardize peace in Sierra Leone.

It has been proposed that the Security Council
appeal for the process of disarmament and reintegration
under way in Sierra Leone to be given greater support
from the international community. In fact, we must
note today that a great deal remains to be done with
regard to the reintegration of former combatants of the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) and other former
combatants in Sierra Leone.

Mozambique was in its time a relevant case, in
which former combatants were generously reintegrated,
and we can see how peace has prevailed in
Mozambique since then. On the other hand, the cases
of Liberia and Guinea Bissau, where the reintegration
process has been blocked, show that when there is such
a blockage, war can break out again at any time. And,
with regard to Sierra Leone, the imminent end of
disarmament, the transformation of the RUF into a
political party, the upcoming electoral campaigns for
the presidential and legislative elections, and the
triumphs and disappointments that will follow the
elections, are all factors that could, in conjunction with
the blocked reintegration process and the almost non-
existent hope of an economic recovery, jeopardize the
current peace process in Sierra Leone and have an
effect on the subregion.

The second problem posing a challenge is that of
the circulation of light weapons. With regard to this
problem and how it impacts the process of
reintegration, the mission recommended that the United
Nations consider a simultaneous DDR process in the
Mano River Union subregion. But that
recommendation was not heeded, at least not by the
United Nations. We are pleased to note, however, that
in deciding on the confidence-building measures I
referred to a while ago, the three countries of the Mano
River Union envisaged having common observers
along the borders and allocating resources for the
reintegration of some of the combatants.

As for the circulation of weapons per se, the
mission recommended international action to stop the
illegal circulation of small arms in the subregion. The
Executive Secretary of ECOWAS informed the Task
Force on the West African Subregion that, for a number
of reasons, the objectives of the Moratorium on Small
Arms in West Africa that had been drawn up by its
members three years before had only been partially
achieved. Nevertheless, he reiterated that ECOWAS
member States had just renewed their commitment by
once again extending the Moratorium for another three
years and by asking the United Nations to continue to
lend its support for its implementation.

In this regard, several initiatives have been
undertaken by ECOWAS. For example, an ECOWAS
office responsible for the issue of light arms was
created. Likewise, a liaison officer has also been
appointed in ECOWAS to act as a link with the
Programme for Coordination and Assistance for
Security and Development (PCASED), which is in
place in Bamako. Finally, a new director of PCASED
has been appointed by the United Nations Development
Programme for strengthening cooperation between
PCASED and ECOWAS.

The third challenge is the problem of children in
armed conflict. ECOWAS has recently established a
unit on children in armed conflicts, while cote d'Ivoire
and Mali, in the framework of their common struggle
against child trafficking, have reached agreements on
this question. And cote d'Ivoire, for its part, recently
adopted new legislation designed to fight child
trafficking and to protect children from trafficking,
particularly in the framework of the cocoa industry. For
this reason, continued international support for these
initiatives remains critical to their success. United
Nations agencies, Council members and the
international community should consider implementing
a special package of programmes designed to protect
children in armed conflicts in West Africa, which
would include, inter alia, disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration, education, health, social welfare and
professional reintegration. The countries of the Mano
River Union could be used as a test for the
implementation of this package approach, before it is
expanded to other countries of the subregion.

The fourth challenge is peace, justice and national
reconciliation. Indeed, in many countries of the
subregion, national reconciliation, justice and peace
remain critical factors for sustainable peace. Certain
countries like Togo, cote d'Ivoire, Liberia, Guinea,
Guinea Bissau, Sierra Leone and Nigeria deserve
special mention. In Togo, for three years now, the
political situation has led to an agreement - the Lome
framework agreement - for the organization of
legislative elections, which we are still awaiting, and of
presidential elections, over which there is also much
uncertainty. As for Cote d'Ivoire, I noted earlier the
recently concluded forum on national reconciliation. I
am pleased to add that relations between Cote d'Ivoire
and its neighbours, especially Burkina Faso and Mali,
have considerably improved since the last briefing -
with the discreet but constant support of the Secretary-
General here in New York, and also during the OAU
Summit in Lusaka. We hope that the national forum on
reconciliation in C6te d'Ivoire, which has just drawn to
a close, will be followed, this very day, by statements
by President Gbagbo to ensure social and political
stability, respect for human rights and genuine national
unity. In the three countries of the Mano River
Union - Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea -
important elections will be taking place within the next
year to year and a half. The outcome of these processes
can have a decisive effect on peace and security in the
subregion. We hope that the latest developments in
Liberia will provide an opportunity to galvanize
national reconciliation. The same should apply to
Sierra Leone, but we prefer to draw the Council's
attention to the need to find the necessary funding for
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and the
Special Tribunal for conducting trials regarding
flagrant human rights violations.

The fifth issue that concerns us is the
humanitarian situation. I have already devoted enough
time to this to be able to simply note that the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has
recently launched a Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal
for West Africa, which seeks $160 million to confront
the humanitarian situation in 2002. We hope that the
Council will echo this appeal so as to elicit greater
support from the international community.

As for the issue of human rights, the questions
taken up in the report of 2 May continue to pose
serious problems. This is why the Secretary-General
has envisaged the establishment of a post of Special
Adviser on Human Rights in the framework of the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for West Africa, to ensure that human rights
issues will be an integral part of all initiatives in West
Africa, and, in particular, in the area of conflict
prevention, management and conflict resolution.

The last problem concerns support to the
secretariats of ECOWAS and the Mano River Union.
The talks that we have had with the Executive
Secretary of ECOWAS have clearly indicated the needs
of ECOWAS. Indeed, as regards conflict prevention,
ECOWAS is calling for cooperation with the United
Nations in the development of its conflict-prevention
mechanisms, for its headquarters as well as its early
rapid warning systems. It called for assistance for
information exchange and analysis and also the
establishment of a joint mission of good offices
between the United Nations and ECOWAS. Lastly,
ECOWAS would like assistance from the United
Nations to train its troops for peacekeeping operations.
In light of all these challenges, we can now better
understand the importance of the Secretary-General's
decision to establish the United Nations Office for
West Africa. This Office, which will be the first of its
kind, will be responsible for strengthening relations
with the United Nations system and coherence in its
work in the subregion. It should also serve as a focal
point for liaison and assist ECOWAS and the Mano
River Union with a View to considering the use of good
offices and the special roles that they can play in the
countries of the subregion. Preparations for this Office
have already been taking shape.

In fact, as I speak, a two-person mission is in
Dakar to try to resolve logistical problems in the
implementation of the decision to establish the Office.
It is to be established as of the beginning of 2002, with
an initial mandate of three years, subject to review
after one year of operation. The Office will be
financed, if the General Assembly agrees, from the
regular budget of the Organization.

The mandate of the Office implies for the United
Nations a questioning of the methods and practices
applied, whose main fault is that they consider
countries individually, not the subregion. This is why
the Office will undoubtedly encounter some difficulties
and will need the constant support of the Security
Council. As noted in the terms of reference of the letter
sent to the Council by the Secretary-General, the Office
will develop and implement its mandate taking duly
into account the specific mandates of the agencies of
the United Nations as well as the peacekeeping
operations in the subregion.

As noted in the report of the inter-agency
mission, the Office will also serve as an interface for
cooperation with partners outside Africa and West
Africa. The decision of the European Union to name a
special envoy of the President for the Mano River
Union, and its decision to devise a regional strategy for
West Africa, show clearly that the European Union
reaffirms its commitment to this regional approach. We
are also encouraged by the fact that the Bretton Woods
institutions and the bilateral donors have shown their
willingness to cooperate with the Office. The World
Bank has recently developed an integrated
development strategy for West Africa with the
participation of the countries concerned. The Task
Force on the West African Subregion recently held
preliminary discussions with several other potential
partners for the implementation of the mandate of the
Office for West Africa.
In conclusion, I would like to say that through the
West Africa initiative, the Secretary-General, the
Security Council and United Nations at large have
embarked on a new approach to the action of the
United Nations system in Africa, in line with the global
trend towards regional cooperation with regard to
security, economic development and peace, both at the
level of the subregions of West, Central, East and
North Africa and that of the entire continent. I am
pleased to point out that the initiative for West Africa
is beginning precisely when the continent itself is
transforming the Organization of African Unity into the
African Union and has decided to undertake its action
within the framework of a New Partnership for Africa's
Development. Let us hope that the United Nations will
be a catalyst for international cooperation and
assistance for this new African renaissance.

