Mr. Manis (The Sudan) (spoke in Arabic):
Madam President, I am pleased to address you today.
The Security Council mission has returned from a very
important, significant and historic visit to my country,
which allowed the Council the opportunity to
understand the reality of the situation in the field in
Darfur and in the Sudan in general. The mission has

clearly understood the root causes of the crisis and its
internal and external aspects, particularly since this
visit has come after the signing of the Darfur peace
agreement, which the Council well knows was reached
on 5 May, after a difficult period.

As we listen today to the report of the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), which
reflects very important aspects of the cooperation that
is established with the Government of the Sudan, we
have to affirm that the Sudan has viewed all the
relevant Security Council resolutions on the crisis in
Darfur as issued by the United Nations, of which we
are a committed and active Member. On the basis of
this principle, our commitment is to cooperate fully in
accordance with requirements of these resolutions.

With regard to today's meeting, we should point
out that the Sudanese Government responded
positively to resolution 1593 (2005) and has begun the
process of consulting with the Prosecutor and his
assistants, including through visits by them to the
Sudan. We believe that that communication and
cooperation has had a number of positive results, some
of which we would like to highlight.

The Prosecutor quickly came to an understanding
of the situation. He was briefed on the history of the
Sudanese judiciary, its independence and its capacity,
along with related judicial organs, with regard to
establishing the rule of law. The Prosecutor has
understood the reasons for the deterioration of the
situation in Darfur and the security vacuum which led
to attacks on police stations and the ensuing events,
including tribal confrontations and conflict among
political factions and elements, which led to an
escalation of the situation and the consequent
widespread Violations, of which everyone is aware.

Our police and prosecutors are prosecuting the
perpetrators of those crimes. The Prosecutor learned
about a great many cases that have been decided and
about charges and allegations that have been followed
up since a special prosecutor was appointed to look
into those cases in Darfur. Special courts have been
established and have handed down many criminal
sentences, including execution and life imprisonment.
The Prosecutor also had the opportunity to better
understand how best to deal with security and tribal
problems and disputes.

As it continued its cooperation with the
Prosecutor, the Government gave him the opportunity

S/l'V.5459

 

to put questions to the armed forces. Those questions
were answered, and a delegation from the Office of the
Prosecutor recently visited the Sudan seeking further
details concerning the responses provided by the
Sudanese Armed Forces. During their visits to the
Sudan, the Prosecutor's delegation had an opportunity
to meet representatives of 13 judicial and investigative
mechanisms, including prosecutors and judges dealing
with events in Darfur, among them judges entrusted by
the Government with following up cases to assess
losses resulting from the events, which harmed tens of
thousands of citizens, and the measures taken by the
Government with a view to providing compensation.

The Prosecutor has received testimony from the
National Investigation Commission and has reviewed
its recommendations. He has learned about the
measures taken by the Ministry of Justice and the
Ministry of the Interior in prosecuting those accused of
the events in Darfur. There have been meetings with
many officials from provinces in Darfur with a view to
understanding the general situation and to seeking their
views on how to prosecute the accused, and on how to
establish the rule of law and mend the social fabric.

There is no doubt that a political settlement is the
best possible solution and is the key to achieving
stability, justice and peace in Darfur. With the signing
of the Darfur Peace Agreement, which was sponsored
by the African Union and to which the United Nations,
including the Security Council, the European Union
and many other partners contributed, we now have a
bridge to security and stability. However, as the
Council knows, the Peace Agreement faces many and
various challenges, the most significant of which is the
fact that some armed groups are outside the framework
of the Agreement. In addition, some people in Darfur
have doubts about the Agreement - a matter that
requires encouragement, confidence-building and
reconciliation measures among the various elements of
society in Darfur.

The Darfur Peace Agreement deals in detail with
all of the elements of the question of Darfur. The
parties that have signed the Agreement are trying to
implement their commitments. That endeavour will not
be successful unless it is accompanied by efforts at the
grass-roots level, which is characterized by extreme
tribal intolerance. These could include activating
traditional dispute- and conflict-settlement mechanisms
and bringing about reconciliation - an approach that
has been taken many times in the history of Darfur and
a traditional custom in Africa in general and in Darfur
in particular.

Mending the social fabric through efforts aimed
at reconciliation, amnesty and the satisfactory
resolution of problems among the various Darfur tribes
is necessary and of fundamental importance if peace is
to be established in Darfur. That is an effort that we
hope will enjoy the support and encouragement of the
African Union and the international community,
including the Security Council, in keeping with
paragraph 5 of resolution 1593 (2005).

The Government of the Sudan will continue its
efforts to establish the rule of law and justice through
the courts and other mechanisms set up in Darfur, to
put an end to impunity and to hold accountable all
those convicted of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. Moreover, we now
have a new agreement which requires wise stewardship
and proper implementation so as to ensure that peace
can become a concrete reality among the tribes. That
will require a balanced approach aimed at achieving
the rule of law and establishing peace so that justice
will be merged with amnesty and forgiveness and so
that peace and coexistence will arise spontaneously and
easily among the tribes, which will move beyond the
bitterness of the past. Providing an Opportunity for
social traditions, values and customs is an important
element during this phase, because peace and stability
must come about as a result of the people's will before
there can be an agreement on paper.

We therefore believe that the current political,
security and social conditions in Darfur call for the
Security Council's support for efforts towards an
internal dialogue in Darfur with a View to achieving
peaceful coexistence. That, in line with all that I have
said, is the easiest way to establish the rule of law and
lasting peace.

