Mr. Annabi: As regards the capacity of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) to deploy
and to operate: as I mentioned in my briefing, troops
made available to the United Nations under the new
contingent-owned equipment regulations are expected to
come fully equipped according to the agreed standards,
and to be self-sustaining for a period of at least 60 days.
Now, some contributors sometimes have difficulties in
meeting these requirements, and I have alluded to them.
These shortfalls in equipment affect the operational
capabilities of the troops. We have had to deploy some
of the troops before they were fully ready, at a time last
December when we did not expect to have to deploy
them, because of the withdrawal of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) from certain locations.
We are in the process of working with the contributors to
see how best we can make up, or encourage them to
make up, for these equipment shortfalls. We are also
looking at the possibility of civilian contracts for those
shortfalls that cannot otherwise be met.

 

I will not pretend that we have all the logistic
equipment that we need; there is always a certain delay in
all of our operations. But the main difficulties we are
encountering at this time regarding operational capability
come from shortfalls in the equipment of certain
contingents: equipment which was supposed to be available
to them and which is not.

As regards the expansion of UNAMSIL, we have, of
course, been negotiating actively with a number of
countries which have expressed interest in participating and
which have made offers to participate in the expanded
UNAMSIL. We already have two Nigerian battalions in
UNAMISIL, and we expect another two Nigerian battalions
as well as a motorized company; in addition to those, we
have offers by four other countries, which I understand are
waiting for the adoption of the draft resolution before they
are in a position to confirm their offers formally.

On the requirements for civilian police, the proposal
contained in the Secretary-General's report for 60 civilian
police - as opposed to the six that were there previously,
a significant increase - was worked out in consultation
with the local police authorities as well as with some of the
other international partners engaged in providing assistance
to the local police on a bilateral basis. It was felt that
these numbers should be enough to meet the tasks
foreseen for them, which are limited to advice and
assistance to the Government on the restructuring and
training of the local police forces. In other words, they
are not going to assume direct law and order functions,
but only provide advice on the training and restructuring.
We would also establish a presence at the DDR sites and
at some key population centres, again for the purpose of
providing advice on the maintenance of law and order
rather than for the purpose of assuming direct policing
functions.

