Mr. Maas (Germany): I wish to thank Prime
Minister Rutte for organizing this important debate on
peacekeeping. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing. I am honoured to be here
today, just days after assuming my new office.

Collective action is crucial for United Nations
peacekeeping, as it is in any other policy area. Be it
climate change, migration or economic development;
be it human rights, global health or sustaining peace
and security - we need more collective action. We
need robust multilateral institutions and at the heart of
our rules-based order, we need a strong United Nations.
Where better than in this Chamber to underline that
we need a Security Council that is united in both its
purpose and its responsibility?

The peacekeeper's Blue Helmet stands for help
and protection. It symbolizes peace and security. For
the international community, it is a call to joint action
and shared responsibility. The more than 100,000
peacekeepers helping countries to navigate the difficult
path from conflict to peace deserve our respect, deep
gratitude and support.

The return of violent conflict has caused immense
human suffering at great social and economic cost. Just
one glaring example of this is Syria, where all too often
the Council has been unable to take decisions, or where
its decisions have not been implemented.

The answer to drawn-out crisis situations can be
only a more coherent approach to sustaining peace.
The Secretary-General has laid this out in his reform
proposals, and he has Germany's full support.
Germany is a strong financial and political
supporter of United Nations peacekeeping. We are
helping to strengthen peacekeepers' safety and
security, make policing a core area of peace operations,
and increase women's role in peacekeeping. In order
to support the United Nations in crisis prevention and
follow the Secretary-General's call for a quantum leap
in peacebuilding funding, Germany has tripled its
contributions in these areas.

Our largest United Nations deployment is in
Mali. Our Parliament agreed to provide up to 1,000
peacekeepers and high-end capabilities such as
helicopters and drones. That combined effort will
hopefully help secure lasting peace and stability in
the country itself and in the Sahel region in general.
German support in Mali, South Sudan and Lebanon,
to name just a few countries, is always embedded in a
comprehensive political strategy - both nationally and
within the European Union. As laid out in our recently
adopted coalition agreement, Germany will continue
to build on this engagement in the coming years, as
a candidate for - and hopefully a member of - the
Security Council in the biennium 2019-2020.

In conclusion, I would like to make three points.
First, we need stronger and more effective partnerships
among the United Nations and such organizations
as the African Union, the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Secondly, peacekeeping is not an end in itself. It is a
tool to support political solutions. We need a coherent
political strategy, clear-sighted objectives and realistic
expectations from the start. Thirdly, peacekeeping
will only be as effective as we are willing to make
it. Missions must have the means they need to fulfil
their mandates.

One more thing must be said: at times, peacekeepers
have let down the very people they had sworn to protect,
including through sexual abuse and exploitation. That
is unacceptable. There must be accountability. In order
to further improve peacekeeping, we have taken careful
note of the Secretary-General's proposals. Our words
must now lead to action. We owe this to the people we
are entrusted with protecting.

