The President: I thank Ambassador Murmokaite
for her detailed and insightful briefing.

The Council has before it the text ofa daft statement
by the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today's meeting. I thank the Council members for
their valuable contributions to the draft statement. In
accordance with the understanding reached among
members of the Council, I shall take it that the members
of the Security Council agree to the draft statement,
which will be issued as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/23.

It is so decided.

It is now my privilege to make a statement in my
capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs ofAustralia.

For Australia, there is no more pressing matter of
national and international security than reducing the
threat from terrorism. The threat from the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, the Al-Nusra Front (ANF) and
other Al-Qaida-affiliated groups is more dangerous,
more global and more diversified than ever before.
Terrorists are younger, more violent, more innovative
and highly interconnected. They are masters of social
media, which they use to terrorize and to recruit, and
they are very tech-savvy. They incite each other. They
communicate their propaganda and violence directly
into our homes so as to recruit disaffected young men
and women.

They draw in young people, like a 17-year-old
from Melbourne who grew up in a typical Australian
household and played sport for his local high school.
Recently, he travelled to Iraq and detonated his
explosives vest in a suicide bomb attack in a Baghdad
marketplace, injuring more than 90 people. There were
also the three young brothers from Brisbane. One
became Australia's first known suicide bomber, killing
himself and 35 others at a military checkpoint in Syria.
The second is currently fighting with the Al-Nusra
Front. The third was stopped by Australian authorities
before he got on a plane to join them.

Australians are rightly outraged. We have turned
our outrage into action. We are committed to working
with the Iraqi Government, the United States and over
30 partners to attack and degrade ISIL and take back
Iraqi territory. We are currently conducting air strikes
against ISIL and providing special forces to help build
the capabilities of Iraqi security forces and others
fighting ISIL. I met recently with Prime Minister Al
Abadi in Baghdad. He expressed deep gratitude for
the assistance of Australia and the other nations that
have joined in the fight against the brutalization of his
citizens by ISIL. I conveyed to him Australia's strong
support for Iraq and our determination to stop terrorist
fighters from Australia and prevent them from adding
to the suffering of the people of Iraq and neighbouring
Syria.

We are taking the necessary steps at home. The
Australian Government has cancelled the passports
of more than 70 Australians suspected of planning to
commit a terrorist act or engage in politically motivated
violence overseas. Australia already has in place
sophisticated legal architecture to effectively counter
terrorism, including laws enabling us to implement
those obligations with regard to all Member States
under resolution 1373 (2001). I used those existing
laws last week to freeze the assets of two Australians
who were recruiting for ISIL online. The Australian
Government has now introduced new foreign-fighter
laws to help disrupt the organization, financing and
facilitation of foreign terrorist fighters by enhancing
our ability to track financial transactions of suspected
foreign terrorist fighters, lowering the threshold for
arrest without warrant for terrorism offences, which
will enable our agencies to disrupt terrorist activity at
an earlier stage, and cancelling certain social welfare
payments to cut off the diversion of such funds for
terrorism. Those new laws will enable us to stop
suspected foreign fighters before they board a plane
by allowing us to suspend as well as cancel a person's
Australian passport and enhancing screening and
security measures at international airports, including
through the collection and matching of biometric data.

Those laws will enhance our ability to investigate
and prosecute foreign fighters by introducing a new,
broader offence for advocating terrorism, along with a
new offence for entering, or remaining in, designated
areas overseas where terrorist organizations are
fighting, Without a legitimate reason. We have also
amended the terrorist organization listing provisions to
include the promotion and encouragement of terrorist
acts, requiring that the prosecution must prove that
a person intended to engage in a hostile activity in
any foreign country, rather than a particular foreign
country, and allowing courts greater flexibility
in determining whether to admit as evidence
material obtained from overseas in terrorism-related
proceedings. That is a significant development and will
rely on good information-sharing with Member States.
Moreover, we are now requiring telecommunication
companies to retain metadata, enhancing Australia's
capacity to track, investigate and prosecute foreign
terrorist fighters and supporters of terrorism. The new
provisions will also enhance our ability to manage the
threat from returned foreign fighters by enabling our
police to more easily seek control orders on returning
foreign terrorist fighters and broadening the grounds
on which such control orders can be sought.

Australia is a vibrant democracy. Therefore, this
package of legislation has generated, as it should,
a vigorous national debate on the need to protect the
individual rights of Australians, including their right
to privacy. Australia is preserving those rights by
increasing support for independent oversight. We will
also expand our regional law enforcement capacity-
building efforts. Australia will host a major Global
Counterterrorism Forum conference in December
on air passenger security to help Governments use
INTERPOL databases and implement the United
Nations Al-Qaida sanctions to prevent international
travel by foreign terrorist fighters. We are working with
INTERPOL to deliver training in our region on the
use of technology by terrorists and on how electronic
evidence is gathered, managed and used in terrorism
prosecutions. As President of the Financial Action Task
Force for the next year, Australia will ensure that the
Task Force will act to cutoff funding to terrorist groups
and foreign fighters.

A crucial pillar in the Australian approach is to
work directly with our communities. It seems to us that
the very best way to build resistance to radicalization is
through well informed families, schools, and religious
and local institutions that can influence those at risk to
dissuade them from embracing violent extremism. We
are building targeted early-intervention and counter-
radicalization programmes to identify the most at-risk
individuals and to work with them through mentoring,
education, employment support and counselling.
We must also involve women and girls, and we have
developed leadership training courses with them to
help build community resilience. We are working with
the information and communications technology sector
to reduce the risk posed by terrorists and extremist
groups online through education, promoting alternative
messages and removing extremist content.

ISIL and its ilk are an affront to Islam. All of
us, including Muslim communities themselves, must
do more to negate the violent extremist narratives of
terrorists and denounce radical preachers of hate in
our midst. The international community must join with
them, and the United Nations is uniquely placed to
provide leadership. The hateful ideologies are an affront
to the values of the Charter of the United Nations. We
believe that a United Nations envoy should be appointed
to build a coherent, coordinated and strategic message
to counter the spread of violent extremism and provide
much-needed guidance to States, including through
building their capacity to combat terrorism.

Every country has an obligation to prevent
terrorism. Every country has an obligation not to export
terrorist capabilities. Each one has a responsibility to
degrade the resources of terrorist organizations and to
prevent the spread of their evil propaganda. Resolutions
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014) enhance our framework
to do that. But the road to effective implementation
requires sustained effort, unwavering commitment
and enduring cooperation among States. Today's
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23 builds on those
resolutions. It identifies practical next steps to stop the
recruitment and travel of foreign terrorist fighters, to
ensure that there is no place for their toxic ideologies in
our communities and to disrupt each and every terrorist
organization's funding sources. The statement reaffirms
the international community's unflinching resolve. We

must starve terrorist organizations of fighters, funding
and legitimacy. We must act decisively and together.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

