Mr. Kane: His Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki,
Chairman of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel on the Sudan, would have loved
to address today this important meeting of the Security
Council. Unfortunately, this morning he had to travel
to Ghana for a previously arranged engagement. He has
requested me to deliver, on his behalf, the following
remarks, which I am humbly pleased to do.

"The African Union (AU) High-level
Implementation Panel on the Sudan would like to
thank the Council for giving us the opportunity to
address it once again. Its meeting today provides
an opportunity for all of us once more to
commend and congratulate the people of the
Sudan on the success of the Southern Sudan
referendum.

"Our Panel had the privilege to observe first
hand the people of Southern Sudan as they cast
their votes. Given the historic significance of the
referendum, it was of the utmost importance that
it be conducted in a credible and peaceful
manner. Our own observations, which coincide
with those of the Secretary-General's Panel on
5
the Referenda in the Sudan, led by President
Benjamin Mkapa and other national and
international observers, are that, indeed, the
referendum met all the criteria of legitimacy,
leaving no room for a challenge to its outcome.

"Happily, because of that, the Government
of the Sudan has duly accepted the result. With
the referendum, the people of Northern and
Southern Sudan have decisively put their history
of animosity and conflict behind them. We are
confident that they will never return to war. In
that regard, we once again commend and
congratulate the people of the Sudan, their
political parties and their leaders, including
President Omar Hassan Al-Bashir and First Vice-
President Salva Kiir Mayardit in particular, for
their courage, steadfastness and unwavering
commitment to peace.

"We also reiterate our commendation of the
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission, the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS)
and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Haile Menkerios for everything that they
did to ensure the success of the referendum. We
must also thank the rest of the international
community for the resources that it made
available to help finance the referendum.

"Ten days ago, the meeting of the African
Union Assembly of Heads of State and
Government in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia,
unanimously adopted a solemn declaration on the
Sudan. It included the following words:

'Sudan has the utmost importance to
the African continent. It spans the diversity
of our continent, bringing our peoples
together in a great melting pot. The
achievement of peace, democracy and
development in northern and southern
Sudan promises to help lift the entire
continent. Sudan's ability to overcome the
formidable obstacles in its path stands as a
testament to Africa's capacity to resolve its
conflicts and achieve our common goals.
Conversely, Africa cannot afford to see
Sudan again plunge into turmoil...

'We express Africa's solidarity with
the entire Sudanese people, and welcome
equally North and South Sudan and the

emerging post-referendum situation, as
building blocks for the ongoing project of
African integration. Having achieved peace,
the Sudanese people are now able fully to
participate as effective actors and
beneficiaries in the common African
endeavour of shared prosperity and
continental unity.'

"As part of Africa's commitment to
assisting the Sudanese people to achieve those
goals in the months ahead, our Panel will
continue to facilitate the negotiations to finalize
the outstanding issues in the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA). Those include Abyei,
the demarcation of the North-South border, the
resolution of disputed areas along that border, and
the completion of the popular consultations in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. In all those
matters, we work in exemplary partnership with
UNMIS and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haile Menkerios.

"We also continue to facilitate the
negotiations between the parties on post-
referendum arrangements, which include issues
of economic cooperation, the relief of the
country's onerous and unsupportable debt,
security, citizenship and people-to-people
relations within the context of two viable and
mutually supportive States. We are happy to
inform the Council that the Sudanese parties have
made significant progress towards a final
agreement on these matters.

"The Council will recall that, in December
2009, we spoke in this Chamber (see S/PV.6251)
and informed the Council that the report and
recommendations of the AU High-Level Panel on
Darfur had been adopted by the African Union
Peace and Security Council on 29 October 2009.
One of the most important of these
recommendations, which became African Union
policy for the resolution of the conflict in Darfur,
was that only an inclusive process of negotiations
in which all Darfur constituencies would be able
to participate would produce the necessary
comprehensive and lasting agreement. This
reflected very directly the demand presented to us
by the various Darfur constituencies.
11-22913

"The people of Darfur continue to demand
an inclusive political process that will allow them
to determine their own future, including through
negotiations with the Government of the Sudan.
Indeed, in successive meetings of the Sudan
Consultative Forum in May, July and November
2010, the African Union, the United Nations and
other international partners endorsed this
approach, without dissent. Accordingly, to
implement a decision taken by the African Union
together with the people of Darfur 15 months
ago, we will soon begin the political process,
working with the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), which
will lead to the holding of an inclusive
conference of Darfurians, who will then engage
the Government of the Sudan. In this regard, we
will fully take on board the outcomes of the Doha
peace negotiations.

"Furthermore, in this context, our Panel and
UNAMID have agreed and are working with the
Government of the Sudan to establish the
required environment for the success of the
Darfur political process, as happened when we
engaged the people of Darfur as we prepared our
report and recommendations in 2009. Together
with Joint Special Representative Ibrahim
Gambari, we are determined to do our best to
ensure that a Darfur global political agreement is
concluded before the end of the CPA interim
period on July 9. This is vitally important in
terms of the future of Northern Sudan, and indeed
of both States which will emerge in five months
after the secession of the South.

"Throughout the CPA period, President
Al-Bashir and First Vice-President Kiir have
demonstrated their personal and political courage,
statesmanship and good faith. We have every
confidence that they and their respective
Governments, and the Sudanese people as a
whole, will continue to do everything necessary
to address the various challenges which confront
the Sudan. In this context, we are pleased to
reassure the Council that these leaders and their
colleagues are fully conscious of and sensitive to
the challenges they face, enjoying greater
familiarity with the Sudan than we non-Sudanese
could ever have. Accordingly, our task is to assist
them to the best of our ability as they confront
these challenges. We are very pleased with the
cooperation they have extended to us in this
regard.

"We trust that the Council will also continue
to extend its invaluable assistance to the
Sudanese people as they take their country
through the momentous few months ahead of us.
In addition, we are very pleased that Africa
stands ready to assist the two African States that
will emerge after 9 July as they confront the even
greater challenges of nation-building than those
they face today.

"We further trust that the Security Council
will use its influence to also encourage the rest of
the international community to continue to extend
its support to the peoples of Northern and
Southern Sudan in order to assist them in
establishing two viable States."

