Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the convening of this meeting to
address an issue of the highest importance that affects
the region and in which we believe a principal organ
of the United Nations, such as the Security Council, is
called on to play a fundamental role. We also appreciate
the presence of various ministers of our region and the
briefing by Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs.

As a key element of its foreign policy, Chile
supports democracy as the political system that
represents the appropriate framework for full respect
for the basic rights of all human beings. The values of
tolerance, dialogue, equality of opportunity and social
inclusion and cohesion, as well as the full exercise of
fundamental freedoms, are best ensured in a context
where the rule of law prevails, where there is respect
and balance among the powers of the State and where
public institutions operate effectively. A democratic
culture based on those principles is built day by day
and is a task that requires the participation of society
as a whole.

Unfortunately, today Venezuela is suffering a
profound crisis of its democratic institutions and an
unacceptable deterioration in the living conditions and
fundamental rights of its citizens under an authoritarian
and repressive Government.

The Government of Chile does not recognize the
legitimacy of the elections that took place in Venezuela
last year, as a result of which the Government of
Nicolas Maduro Moros assumed a new term. But it is
not only that. Venezuela's Supreme Court of Justice
declared Maduro's presidency illegitimate. Under those
circumstances, Venezuela's National Assembly, which
is the only democratically elected institution with full
legitimacy, decided, under Venezuela's Constitution,
in particular article 233, to appoint Juan Guaido as
Acting President with a very clear mandate - to
restore democracy in Venezuela by calling for free,
fair, democratic and transparent elections.

In that context, Chile, together with many other
countries of the region, recognizes and has publicly
expressed its full support for the President ofthe National
Assembly, Mr. Juan Guaido, who has become Acting
President of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
through the implementation of constitutional norms.

We support the beginning of the democratic
transition process in Venezuela so that new elections
are held as soon as possible with the participation of
all political actors and with the necessary international
guarantees and standards for a democratic process.
Furthermore, we condemn the acts of violence that
occurred in Venezuela, and we urge that the rule of
law, the fundamental rights of individuals and social
peace be ensured while the transition of Government
takes place.

Chile therefore shares the concerns expressed by
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
about the use of the State's punitive power to criminally
prosecute political dissidents and incapacitate a
number of dissident leaders. In that context, we would
like to refer to resolution 1/2019 of 25 January of the
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, under
which it granted precautionary measures to Acting
President Juan Guaido and his family.

The solution to Venezuela's problems lies in
restoring genuine democratic values. That means
releasing political prisoners, restoring and respecting
the freedoms and human rights of all Venezuelans,
opening a humanitarian corridor to help to mitigate
the crisis due to the lack of food and medicine and,
of course, moving decisively towards full democracy
in Venezuela.

In conclusion, I would like to say that Chile
promotes efforts for the international community to
work together towards the prompt and full recognition
of Acting President Juan Guaido' and to support his
constitutional plan, which seeks to hold elections and
to restore democracy in Venezuela.

