Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank Mr. Eliasson
for his briefing on the latest developments in the
political process in Darfur, Sudan. I should also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
briefing on the progress in the deployment of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).

It has been China's consistent position that a
political settlement of the question of Darfur should be
sought through dialogue and consultation on the basis
of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Sudan. China firmly supports the dual-track
strategy of pushing political negotiations and
peacekeeping deployment forward in a balanced
manner, and looks forward to the central and lead role
to be played by the tripartite mechanism comprised of
the Government of the Sudan, the African Union and
the United Nations. The facts have proven that such a
strategy and mechanism represent the right approach to
the settlement of the question of Darfur and have
already achieved significant results. The international
community should remain confident, pursue
cooperation, consolidate the positive momentum
achieved to date, and push for continued progress
towards an appropriate and comprehensive settlement
of the question of Darfur.

As a hot-spot issue facing the international
community, the matter of Darfur has complex internal
and external causes. A solution will require an
integrated approach that addresses symptoms and root
causes alike. The situation in Darfur currently faces
two major hurdles: the humanitarian situation is

deteriorating and the political negotiations have been
stymied. In China's view, the former is a symptom of
the problem, while the latter is its cause. Without good
faith political negotiations among the various parties in
Darfur, the security situation cannot fundamentally
improve. If various political forces in the Sudan are not
motivated to work towards peace, UNAMID,
howsoever robust it may be, cannot possibly achieve
its objective.

China therefore believes that, by working
vigorously to promote political negotiations,
Mr. Eliasson has taken an approach inspired by a
political vision that addresses the root causes of the
problem. China welcomes the convening of the
meeting in Sirte, Libya, and appreciates the active
efforts of the good offices mission undertaken by the
two Special Envoys of the United Nations and the
African Union.

Regrettably, however, certain rebel groups are
clinging obstinately to their positions and resisting the
process of political negotiation, thus trammelling the
political settlement of the question of Darfur. At
present, the most urgent matter before the international
community is to take effective measures to press the
rebel groups concerned to take part in the political
process. China earnestly urges the groups concerned to
prioritize the stable development of their country and
the welfare of the people of Darfur, respond positively
to the international community's appeals, and make the
right choice to participate in the political process as
soon as possible so as to pave the way for negotiations
towards a comprehensive peace agreement for Darfur
at an early date.

Since the adoption of resolution 1769 (2007), the
deployment of UNAMID has made significant progress
thanks to the common efforts of all parties concerned.
China welcomes that progress and highly appreciates
the efforts made in that regard by the Secretariat, the
African Union and the Government of the Sudan. On
the other hand, as the Secretariat noted early in the
deployment process, the operation is unprecedented in
scale, involving cooperation and interaction between
the Government of the Sudan, the United Nations and
the African Union and the need to address a complex
situation in which certain rebel groups refuse to
provide political cooperation. As a result, the
deployment is likely to run into a number of
difficulties.
The only way out is to continue to strengthen
consultation and cooperation among all parties and to
steadily reinforce mutual political trust in the process
of cooperation and interaction. Mutual political trust is
the lubricant of problem-solving. With such trust, a
solution can be found to any technical problem,
however difficult; without mutual political trust, even
the simplest technical problem can evolve into a major
stumbling block. At present, care should be taken to
avoid politicizing technical questions and letting
emotions interfere in the treatment of such issues. We
urge the parties concerned to agree as soon as possible
on the relevant details of UNAMID's deployment
through dialogue and consultation on an equal footing
so as to ensure the comprehensive and smooth
deployment of UNAMID, in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 1769 (2007).

It needs to be pointed out that deploying
UNAMID reflects the unanimous decision of the
Security Council, which embodies the common
understanding of the entire international community.
China is seriously concerned over recent remarks made
by some rebel groups threatening the safety and
security of peacekeepers. We urge them to follow the
general trend of the international situation, cooperate
with the United Nations and not go further in the
wrong direction.

The question of Darfur, like many other
international hotspot issues, has its roots in
development. While pushing the political process and
the peacekeeping deployment forward, the
international community should pay equal attention to
social and economic development in Darfur. It should
take a long-term view and formulate, at another date, a
development strategy suitable to the region. Only by
improving the livelihood of the people there will it be
possible to gradually resolve the conflict and develop
harmonious relationships among the various ethnic
groups and tribes, as well as between man and nature.

China has been closely watching the
developments in Darfur and has made unremitting
efforts for the appropriate settlement of the question.
The special representative of the Chinese Government
has visited the Sudan many times and has gone to
Darfur to observe the situation on the ground. China
has participated in all major international meetings
held thus far on Darfur and has taken an active part in
the relevant international good office efforts. The first
part of the multifunctional engineering unit contributed

by China to UNAMID arrived recently in Nyala. In
addition, China has provided to Darfur and the African
Union Mission in Sudan humanitarian assistance and
donations on many occasions and has given the people
of Darfur much assistance in areas including
agriculture, education and infrastructure.

We will continue to work with the international
community to make our contribution to an early
settlement of the question of Darfur and to the
realization of peace, stability and development in that
region.

