Mr. Skinner-Klee Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Let me to commend your delegation,
Sir, for convening this open debate, as well as for the
concept note before us (S/2018/324, annex), which
contains valuable information for guiding this debate.
We are also grateful to those who delivered statements
before us.

Experience shows that armed conflicts and
humanitarian crises put populations at risk, in
particular young people, who are the most vulnerable
and consequently the most victimized. In recent years,
however, we have come to see that young people's
participation is an essential element of the process of
conflict resolution, which positively influences the
work of peacebuilding, although it also pains us to see
how young people have been instrumentalized for abject
purposes and ideological causes that are diametrically
opposed to their well-being. It is therefore necessary,
we believe, to underscore the fact that work must be
stepped up to enable young people to assume leadership
roles and, through education, integration and political
participation, to avoid becoming involved in violent
extremism. Accordingly, Guatemala holds resolution
2250 (2015) in high regard, given that young people
make up a majority of its population.

The Security Council has hardly turned a blind eye
to the leadership roles that young people must play, as
evinced in resolution 2250 (2015), based on the premise
that, if we fail to ensure their safety, education and
comprehensive development,youngpeoplewillbeunable
to reach the level of inclusion necessary to strengthen
their capacities and, consequently, to make their
contribution to peace and human rights. My delegation
acknowledges the importance of resolution 2250 (2015)
as it defers to the guidelines and recommendations of
the Peacebuilding Commission on how to ensure young
people's participation during and after armed conflict
within the context of peacebuilding strategies. We have
witnessed how, in various regions, young people have
been drivers of change for social transformation, while
directly affecting their communities and creating new
inclusive models of social development.

The links connecting youth, peace and security are
inextricably tied to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development; hence the important relevance of the
independent progress study on youth and peace and
security (see S/2018/86) for which we are grateful to
Mr. Simpson and his team. Although the world has
made significant progress in making young women
and men visible as strategic development stakeholders,
a gap remains between formal acknowledgement of
such ownership and effectively putting it into action
on the ground. We therefore consider it absolutely vital
to prioritize investment in the education, health and
well-being of young people so as to provide them with
comprehensive services without discrimination or any
form of sectarianism. In that regard, we underscore
the fact that States must ensure the representative
and inclusive political participation of youth, which
will allow that group to position itself at the centre
of development, thereby creating broad consensuses
that will lead to optimum levels of prosperity for the
development of citizens, as well as young people.

In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms its firm
commitment to promoting a culture of preventing
armed conflicts as a means of addressing interrelated
challenges of security and development, as well as
strengthening the capacities of the United Nations
to prevent armed conflicts. In specific post-conflict
situations, youth has always been a vital and positive
driver of helpful changes. In that regard, it is important
that we ask ourselves if we are fulfilling the founding
promise ofthe Organization, which is to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, or ifthat is merely
a rhetorical flourish. As responsible actors within the
international system, we are called on to join efforts
to build and maintain peace, thereby enabling future
generations to learn to live within a culture of tolerance
and respect - while considering lessons learned,
especially those of the two World Wars, so that such
a conflagration shall never again destroy the future of
generations to come.

