Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Allow me at the
start to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this important debate.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement delivered
by Mr. Vygaudas Usackas, European Union Special
Representative for Afghanistan. In addition, allow me
to make the following points.

My first point is on the electoral processes. We
welcome the active engagement of the political parties
and civil society in election-related developments. It is
essential that those elections be inclusive, transparent,
free and fair. Critical preparations for the elections
must be accelerated, including tangible progress in
voter identification and registration.

The adoption of a robust electoral framework with
credible mechanisms for electoral fraud prevention
and dispute resolution is required. The formation of
electoral management bodies must be duly completed
and qualified officials appointed to the Independent
Election Commission. International observation of the
elections should be guaranteed.

We encourage the Electoral Assistance Division
of the Department of Political Affairs, the United
Nations Development Programme and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to continue to provide all necessary assistance in
preparing for the Afghan-led elections.

I would like to recall that in the past the Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) deployed elections support teams
to Afghanistan, one of the OSCE's Asian Partners
for Cooperation. A solid set of recommendations on
improving the electoral framework was presented by the
OSCE in Kabul in 2012. We encourage Afghan officials
to make use of the experience and recommendations
offered by the OSCE.

My second point is on the situation of women and
girls. We appreciate the commitment of the Afghan
Government to empowering women and ensuring
gender equality. Post-Taliban Afghanistan has seen
the appointment of the first female district governor,
Saira Shakeeb Sadat. Women are asserting themselves
as ministers and members of Parliament and of the
High Peace Council. We welcome these developments
and reiterate that women's full participation in the
reconciliation and transformation processes is essential
for the construction of a peaceful, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan.

Much more needs to be done, however. Every
two hours, a woman dies from pregnancy-related
causes. Domestic violence against women and the
imprisonment of women for alleged moral crimes are a
cause of concern, as is the number of women and girls
killed or injured during the past year, which increased
considerably.

We urge the United Nations to continue its support
for systematic monitoring and reporting on the gender
commitments contained in the Tokyo Declaration and
Mutual Accountability Framework.

Thirdly, my delegation remains concerned about
the level of casualties among civilians and the increased
targeting of civilian locations by anti-Government
forces and illegal armed groups. In particular, the
continuing deaths and injuries of children is a cause of
concern. We hope that the action plan for the prevention
of underage recruitment and its annexes on killing and
maiming as well as sexual violence against children will
be fully implemented and that all necessary measures
will be taken to prevent violations of the rights of the
child.

Over 1 million Afghans live within 500 metres
of mine-contaminated areas. As a Mine Action
Programme for Afghanistan donor, Lithuania has
itself engaged in demining and supports the Afghan
mine-clearing efforts. We welcome the progress
achieved and encourage the Afghan Government
to work on mine-action legislation with all relevant
stakeholders and to clear all anti-personnel landmines
by 2013 as part of its obligations under the Ottawa
Convention.

Finally, turning to regional cooperation, the
success of Afghanistan's transition process requires the
active involvement of all regional stakeholders. For the
United Nations and regional organizations to achieve
greater synergies, it is important to better coordinate
their efforts in Afghanistan and the region, including
with countries of Central Asia.

We are heartened by the determination of the
States in the region, through the Istanbul Process,
the bilateral Afghan-Pakistan dialogue and other
initiatives, to address the manifold challenges facing
the Afghan nation. The opening of an office in Doha
for the purpose of negotiations could be a step forward
towards a peaceful, Afghan-led solution to the Taliban
insurgency. Reconciliation has to be an inclusive and
Afghan-owned process. We welcome the Security
Council's readiness to adjust the Taliban sanctions
regime in support of those efforts.

To conclude, we welcome the adoption by the
Council of resolution 2096 (2013), which extends the
mandate of UNAMA for 12 months. UNAMA, with a
strong political role, will be an essential partner to the
Afghan Government during the transformation period.
Let me note that further cuts in the budget of UNAMA
may have a negative impact on its ability to fulfil its core
mandate. Given the magnitude of the challenges facing
Afghanistan and the wider region, a properly staffed
and resourced UNAMA remains key to ensuring the
success of the transition period.

