President Kenyatta: Last weekend, Kenya
commemorated the heinous attack on the Westgate
Mall, which left 67 people, of 13 nationalities, dead.
Half the terrorists who executed that attack were
foreigners drawn from the ranks that have come to fight
alongside Al-Shabaab. Tragically, the pool of foreign
fighters is also being filled from our children in Kenya
and the region.

The alarming rise of the Islamic State of Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) is also driven by the phenomenon of
foreign fighters. It awakens us to the speed at which
terrorist organizations can evolve. No doubt, a greater
risk lies in the fighters returning to their homelands
or finding new operating spaces in which to carry out
their terrorist attacks. Such is the threat that we face
from foreign fighters and operatives, who in the past
have killed hundreds of our citizens.

Our conviction is that strong, enforceable
action must be taken to tackle terror groups and the
phenomenon of foreign fighters. That beliefis informed
by our experience that terrorist groups are continuously
evolving into new forms in response to opportunity.
For instance, the closer collaboration of Al-Shabaab
with Al-Qaida has led to strengthened links with other
Al-Qaida affiliates, allowing for increased movement
of foreign fighters and weapons. It has also renewed
their strategic and communication capabilities.

The risk is growing, and we are all in its path. We
are geographically close to Al-Shabaab's Somali camps.
Our status as a democracy, which terrorists associate
with the West, also makes us a target. Our deepening
democracy and our growing prosperity are anathema to
terrorists.

The fragile security environment in Somalia
continues to afford Al-Shabaab a safe haven in which
to operate. In cooperation with other regional countries
withintheAfricanUnionMissioninSomalia(AMISOM),
as well as with the Somali National Army, Kenya has
continued to undertake campaigns that are degrading
Al-Shabaab's capability. We wish to underscore that
sufficient support to the ongoing AMISOM. operations
and stabilization efforts is integral to securing Somalia
and denying the fighters operational space. In the light
of that imperative, we strongly urge expanded support
for AMISOM, particularly in facilitating ready access
to force multipliers in the form of air and maritime
support.

Even as we take the battle to the existing terrorists,
we need to expand our focus on the radicalization of
youth. That is the pipeline for global terrorism. We must
call attention to the enablers of that process, especially
those providing financing at the grassroots level, where
radicalization is taking place. Those efforts must take
place within a wider strategy that brings in all States.
The East African countries are also deepening security
cooperation in concrete ways, alongside our economic
integration agenda. We in Kenya and East Africa have
taken up our responsibilities in the global war against
terrorists and stand ready to partner with anyone and
all parties willing to eradicate that menace.

