Mr. Salam (Lebanon): At the outset, allow me to
thank the Under-Secretary-General, Ms. O'Brien, for
her valuable briefing.

My delegation would like to emphasize the
importance of resolution 1976 (2011), which
demonstrates the resolve of the Council to assume a
more forward-looking policy aimed at establishing
mechanisms to prosecute piracy and armed robbery off
the coast of Somalia, on the basis of the
recommendations set out in the report of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Legal Issues
Related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, Mr. Jack
Lang (S/2011/30, annex). The resolution further
reflects the need to adopt a holistic approach towards
combating piracy, which constitutes a threat to, inter
alia, human life, development, international navigation
and trade.

The failure to prosecute suspects and incarcerate
those responsible for piracy and armed robbery
severely undermines anti-piracy efforts. The
deteriorating situation, as described in the Special
Adviser's report, particularly given the increasing
number of piracy attempts off the coast of Somalia and
the enduring catch-and-release practice, requires a
strong response from the Council. This is necessary in
order to enable interested parties to set up prosecution
mechanisms before reaching what Mr. Lang has
referred to as a point of no return in the fight against
this serious offence.

We take note of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2011/360) and would like to highlight the following
points.

First, we stress once again the importance of the
incorporation of international law applicable to
combating piracy and armed robbery into the domestic
law of the States of the region. We take note of the
progress described in the report in this respect and look
forward to enhanced assistance to the relevant
authorities with a view to enabling them to adopt
anti-piracy laws.
Secondly, my delegation welcomes the
participation of regional States in the prosecution and
trial of suspected pirates and the enforcement of
sentences and would like to commend those who have
expressed readiness to host potential extraterritorial
Somali courts within their respective jurisdictions. This
does not do away, however, with the need to continue
to give priority to supporting, strengthening and
modernizing Somali courts on Somali lands.

We are also fully cognizant of the concerns of
regional States with regard to security, logistics,
international cooperation and funding. Assistance from
the United Nations and donor countries in this respect
would be crucial for the efficient and sound
implementation of any decision to establish an
extraterritorial Somali court in any neighbouring State
that has expressed its willingness to host such a body.

Thirdly, more avenues should be explored in
order to secure the jurisdictional basis under Somali
law and the laws of any host State, namely the legal
reforms necessary to authorize the required executive
and judicial jurisdiction over suspected pirates. We
encourage the United Nations to assist Somalia and
potential host States in clarifying the pending
jurisdictional matters described in the report. The
United Nations has an additional advantage in this
regard, as it can draw lessons from its rich experience
in the various models of international education it has
set up or assisted States in so doing.

Fourthly, we look forward to further dialogue
between the Transitional Federal Government, as well
as the transitional federal institutions, and the United
Nations, so that an agreement can be reached as to the
most appropriate arrangements and their modalities in
order to bring offenders to justice.

The aim of this meeting is to specifically address
the mechanisms for the prosecution of piracy.
However, we must think of judicial mechanisms as one
tool that should complement others that ensure
economic and social development.

We would also like to recall here that resolution
1976 (2011) importantly highlights the need to
investigate the threats to the health and livelihoods of
Somalis related to illegal fishing and the dumping of
toxic substances off the country's coast.

The international community needs to remain one
stop ahead of the pirates. For that reason, we look
forward to the Council's full engagement with the
affected countries and the relevant United Nations
agencies in order to keep up the momentum in our
collective counter-piracy efforts.

