Ms. Chebbi: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
important theme of peace and security in Africa,
particularly in order to inform the Council on the
contribution of African youth and strategies to mobilize
the United Nations family towards silencing the guns
in Africa.

I wish to express my gratitude to the Republic of
South Africa for this invitation and for its leadership on
the youth agenda. I would also like to thank the African
Union (AU) Silencing the Guns Unit and the Youth for
Peace Africa Programme of the Peace and Security
Department, with which I work closely in mobilizing
for and promoting sustainable peace in Africa, as well
as the Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on Africa and the Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations for their continuous
support and advocacy for all youth agendas.

Please allow me to also congratulate all new
members of the Council, in particular the AU member
States, the Republic of Niger and the Republic of Tunisia,
for being elected as non-permanent members. I also
congratulate Tunisia on organizing early presidential
elections following the death of President Beji Caid
Essebsi. Young Tunisians had their say at the ballot
box, using their power of voting. They campaigned
with zero budget and chose two candidates outside of
the norms. The process, however, remains fragile and
very challenging. We need to equip these young people
and support innovation in our political processes.

In my presentation, I am going to address four
main questions: What are the core issues we need to
reflect on? What is the reality on the ground in Africa?
What are we doing about it at the AU? What can we
do together?

In 2013, my cousin was recruited by Da'esh at
the age of 22. At the time, he had just graduated from
university with an engineering degree. It was a tough
experience for the family to go through. It made me
think about why young people like my cousin choose
this path while I have chosen non-Violent activism,
even though we both come from similar educational
and social backgrounds. That led me to do my thesis on
youth recruitment in violent extremism in a comparison
between Kenya and Tunisia and, together with my eight
years of pan-African activism and my work as the AU
Youth Envoy since November 2018, I want to offer the
Council four main reflections on this topic today.

First and foremost, this is a question of narrative.
Unfortunately, when African youth get the worst
sort of attention from leaders, they are portrayed as
perpetrators of violence, carrying guns, a dangerous
class, members of the unemployed, migrants dying
in the Mediterranean and as a youth bulge. But they
are not spoken about as a generation of peacebuilders
who are changing the course of history, revolutionizing
technology and inspiring new ways of citizen
engagement. African young people do not resign
themselves to the hardships of their situation; they are
using their agency and creativity to build the Africa
we want.

There is a danger of a victimization narrative
taking hold. It is disempowering and overlooks youth
agency. Many young people have internalized the
idea that they are marginalized and now see violent
groups as legitimate fighters, not perpetrators of
Violence. We must therefore value our youth and their
contribution to society. If we do not, they will look for
recognition elsewhere.

Our definition of demographic dividends should
therefore involve peace dividends and youth as the
human capital, talent and the driving force of our
continent. We must transform the narrative surrounding
African youth into one of collective, positive
actors e among the most informed and most resilient
generations in Africa, and, if you do not disagree, Sir,
the coolest generation.

The narrative question is also gendered because
gender stereotypes are reinforced and young women's
voices and unique experiences often go unrecognized.
In this regard, we must also recognize that since 2010
waves of youth-led peaceful change have swept our
continent, demanding legitimate rights peacefully and
creatively. We must see this movement of uprisings and
activism in Tunisia, Senegal, Zimbabwe, The Gambia,
Burkina Faso, South Africa, Algeria, Kenya, the Sudan,
Nigeria and many other countries as an opportunity
to channel that energy into positive social change
and peacebuilding.

I am of the generation that started the first
revolutions of the twenty-first century. We stood up
for our rights and not only demanded but led change.
We moved from being perceived as subjects to active
citizens and change-makers, and I am here today as
testimony to a generation deserving a place at the table.

The second question is about hustling. We have a
generation trapped in a state of waiting for adulthood
because it is in a constant negotiation to find its political
and financial freedom. It is about the livelihoods of
our young people, who are barely surviving and do
not understand the contradiction of our times - to
be the youngest population in the world, 65 per cent
aged under 30, and yet the most marginalized and
most insecure. Young people are hustling, ticking a
young-women empowerment box here and a youth-
participation box there, with a lack of resources and
support and facing the huge challenges of bureaucracy
and limited documentation of their work. They hustle to
sustain the impact of paying annual membership dues,
training costs and in-kind contributions. They hustle
for funding as civil society. They hustle to collaborate
with institutions and Governments. They hustle to
participate in peace processes, and they hustle for
representation. But the real hustle should be to make
sure that we silence the guns by 2020.

The third question is about identity and belonging.
We want young people to give up the guns, but can we
answer the big question in the mind of a 19- or 20-year-
old: "Who am I?" What are we offering them? Can we
give direction and assurance that we will provide the
enabling environment needed for our young people
to thrive? The big question of identity, which we do
not often talked about, focusing only on temporary
responsive measures to fix conflict, is crucial. Our
efforts are informed by our multilayered sense of
identity: young, female, indigenous, refugee, migrant,
with disability, living in post-colonial Africa and so
on and so forth. We need to promote pan-African,
transnational identity and global citizenship. When
young people think pan-African and global, it offers
a place of belonging and frees the imagination of
individuals, communities and of the Africa we want,
which is a borderless, transnational, multilingual and
multicultural community.

Our pan-African policies at the African Union are
creating dynamism through the African Continental
Free Trade Area, intra-African trade, open borders,
the African passport and pan-African universities. The
only way to end violence in our continent is to unite
our young people around a pan-African Vision and
space for exchange, knowledge and solidarity. Even our
education should instil pride and empower the African
child, in its African identity, to combat xenophobia,
hate and exclusion. And we must not forget that there is
no pan-Africanism without feminism.

The fourth and last reflection is that we must
reflect on the nexus with the peace and security agenda.
"Intersectionality" is a trendy word in the youth space.
For us, everything is intersectional. Our analyses,
our challenges, our fluid identities and, therefore, our
solution must be intersectional.

There is a nexus with development; it is not only
smart to increase investment in youth development; it
is strategic.

There is a nexus with governance. We should
deliver the health care, education and services that our
citizens and young people deserve because where such
services are absent, violent groups become economic,
political and social actors.

There is a nexus with inequality because jobs
alone do not address deep-seated awareness and lived
experiences of injustice for young people, who then look
upon violent groups as legitimate fighters. The future of
work needs to be about dignity, because young people
do not just want jobs; they want jobs with dignity.

There is a nexus with climate change. In the words
of African Union Commission Chairperson Moussa
Faki Mahamat, the effects of climate change in the
Sahel have become a threat to peace and security not
only in the region but also worldwide.

There is a nexus with health and disease. Africa's
peace and security agenda faces yet another challenge
in the Ebola Virus. As Council members are aware, a
new outbreak of that deadly virus was reported in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on 1 August 2018;
since then, over 3,000 people have been infected and
more than 2,000 have died. Women and young people
have been hit hardest. African young people may
escape the bullets but end up dying anyway if we do not
act on Ebola. On this front, we need collective action
to fight Ebola and adopt a peace-focused approach to
help curtail the disease's spread by mainstreaming
community and political reconciliation with local
cooperation and building trust and resilience as the
priorities of these processes and our response.

Since my appointment by the African Union
Commission Chairperson, with the support of the AU
Youth Advisory Council, I have been humbled by what
my brothers and sisters are delivering as we speak
with little to no resources, but only courage resilience
and determination, to make Africa a safe and secure
environment for all. Young people did not wait for the
declaration of the year for silencing the guns to act,
and they did not wait for a resolution of the United
Nations or a decision of the African Union Assembly to
make peace possible. I would like to share just a few of
these initiatives.

I undertook a solidarity mission to South Sudan,
where young people like Jok are replacing bullets
with books at the Promised Land Secondary School.
People like him are on the front line of building the
world's youngest State, disseminating the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan of September 2018, which we
need to continue supporting. I met with young people
in Eritrea and Liberia, who are using innovation to
nurture a culture of peace. Youth groups in Kenya work
in informal settlements empowering young women
using art.

The African Youth Action Network in Uganda
trains young refugees in emotional intelligence and
advocacy against hate speech, using social media.
Local Youth Corner in Cameroon is working in eight
prisons to provide repeat offenders with an alternative
to reoffending, positively impacting 5,000 young people
to become "prisonpreneurs".

African young people have demonstrated effective
and impactful change when given opportunities, tools,
knowledge and capacity. African youth also welcomed
the decision of AU Member States to declare the theme
for 2020 as the year for silencing the guns, creating a
conducive environment for development.

The AU Youth for Peace Africa Programme arises
from the relevant decision of the Assembly of the
African Union, especially article 17 ofthe African Youth

Charter, which was adopted in 2006 and recognizes the
contribution of and role of youth in peacebuilding in
Africa. The peace and security, especially on youth,
has always been an African agenda, and it has actually
inspired many of the resolutions adopted in the AU
Peace and Security Council.

On 8 November 2018, we had the first open session
on youth, peace and security in Africa, at which the
Peace and Security Council called on AU member States
to urgently implement Security Council resolution 2250
(2015), with a particular emphasis on the development
of national action plans. The Council also requested the
Commission to conduct a study on youth, peace and
security, which will be presented next month.

The AU also works to end harmful practices, such
as female genital mutilation and child marriage, which
we believe are part of a broader conversation on gender-
based violence and, therefore, an integral part of the
peace and security agenda. That is why the AU Saleema
Initiative and the United Nations-backed Spotlight
Initiative could not have come at a better time. Five
years ago, 278 girls were abducted in Nigeria and youth-
led campaigns like #BringBackOurGirls made concrete
action possible. Nevertheless, 112 girls are still missing
and it is important that the United Nations continue to
prioritize the rescue of these girls, especially because
they come from a region where two of three girls are
married before their eighteenth birthday.

On 16 August, Ijoined forces with the African
Women Leaders Network (AWLN). With the support of
UN-Women and the Office of the AU Special Envoy on
Women, Peace and Security, the AWLN Young Women
Leaders Caucus organized the first intergenerational
retreat on women's leadership in Africa, hosted by
the Government of Kenya. In addition, the African
Union Commission offers robust support to young
women through the AWLN, in close partnership with
the United Nations and civil society organizations. We
will also come back to Nairobi to collaborate with the
President of Kenya, in another milestone, to convene
the first AU youth summit and festival as a pre-African
Union Summit meeting for youth voices to be included
in decision-making processes at the African Union
and to declare their position on the role of youth in the
Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.

Many of these engagements will continue to
take place, but together we can have a greater impact
by moving from policies to their implementation,
because young people want action and progress, not
empty promises. We may not need more and more
recommendations; we may just need to deliver what we
already have. Allow me to offer a few concrete actions
we can take.

First, we should promote and convene
intergenerational dialogues, collaboration and
sustainable partnerships with young people, which will
build trust in Government institutions and mechanisms
and address youth exclusion. It is time to have young
peacebuilders making the headlines.

Secondly, we should enhance the capacities and
leadership of youth through platforms of mentorship,
internship and leadership to facilitate their professional
career development, particularly of those from rural
areas. If there is one thing the United Nations can
change, it is to create more opportunities for young
people in Africa by putting an end to unpaid internships
in the United Nations.
Thirdly, we should use sports, arts, music, dance,
storytelling and film to mobilize the largest continental
campaign on silencing the guns. Those tools have
proven to be effective for advocacy as alternative
peacebuilding approaches. The 600 million young
people on the continent is a huge network of diverse and
innovative minds that are interconnected on the web. In
an instant, young people can spread information, alert
and raise awareness, and their outreach and advocacy
potential is unprecedented with new technologies.

Fourthly, we should invest in civil society and
civic space, provide direct financial and technical
support for youth intervention and provide funds for
youth-led peacebuilding efforts through truly effective
mechanisms that benefit and sustain their work and
social impact, rather than harm them.

Fifthly, we should translate commitments into
action. We trust that resolution 2457 (2019), on silencing
the guns in Africa, and the subsequent mobilization of
the United Nations system by the Secretary-General
through the United Nations task force on silencing the
guns will generate the required support for Member
States, the AU and regional economic communities and
young people to successfully implement the silencing
the guns agenda.

Lastly, if there is one policy framework that we
still need to think through, it would be the intersection
between the women and peace and security and the
youth, peace and security agendas, as highlighted by The
