Mr. Eitel (Germany): Germany of course supports the
statement Italy made on behalf of the European Union, and
I do not wish to duplicate it.

In his last report on UNAMIR the Secretary-General
says:

"When Rwanda emerged from civil war and
genocide with the establishment of the Government of
National Unity on 19 July 1994, conditions in the
country were nothing short of disastrous."
(S/1996/I49, para. 41)

We fully agree with his assessment. It therefore comes as
a relief that the Secretary-General goes on to say:

"Today, conditions in Rwanda are returning to
normal". (Ibid., para. 42)
We also agree with him that this progress has been
achieved essentially through the efforts of the people of
Rwanda.

At the same time, we think it is appropriate today,
when the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda comes to an end, to pay tribute to all
those who have served in and supported this mission. We
also acknowledge the work done by Ambassador Khan,
the Secretary General's Special Representative, and his
staff. The many hours the Council has spent in the past
discussing the situation in Rwanda would not have borne
very much fruit had not the men and women in the field
done their duty, and often more than that.

The relationship between the Government of
Rwanda, the United Nations and the international
community in a broader sense has not always been easy.
After intensive discussions with Rwanda, the Council
decided in resolution 1029 (1995) that UNAMIR should
be withdrawn from Rwanda after 8 March 1996. At that
time it seemed to us that after this date there would not
be much scope for United Nations peace-building
activities in Rwanda. In the meantime, in his letter
(S/l996/176/annex) of 1 March 1996 addressed to the
Secretary-General, the Rwandese Minister of Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation clearly stated the need for what
he rightly calls "post-genocide peace building". Germany
welcomes his statement. It enabled the Security Council
to draft the draft resolution before us, which is based on
Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter.

The draft resolution is a response to the fact, that
despite all the progress made, much remains to be done
in Rwanda, and that the assistance of the international
community continues to be needed in this regard. The
maintenance of a United Nations office will allow the
United Nations to support, in a coordinated manner, what
the Government of Rwanda is doing to promote national
reconciliation, strengthen the judicial system, facilitate the
return of refugees and rehabilitate the country's
infrastructure.

In this context, we stress the importance of the
Human Rights Field Operation in Rwanda, which
constitutes a true confidence-building measure. The
inclusion of the present United Nations radio station in
the United Nations office will also contribute to the
continued dissemination of constructive information. The
present United Nations communications system will
continue to operate in the framework of the United

 

Nations office, and thus offer much-needed support for
those involved in the reconstruction of Rwanda.

Individual Governments and organizations other than
the United Nations are called upon to continue their own
efforts in assisting Rwanda. Germany has in the past made
its contribution, totalling about $200 million. I gratefully
acknowledge the thanks of our Rwandese colleagues.
Germany will also do its utmost to help in the future.

We welcome the fact that remaining elements of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda will, prior
to their withdrawal, contribute to the protection of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda. After their withdrawal
new arrangements will need to be agreed upon.

In his last report on UNAMIR, the Secretary-General
announced, in response to a request made by the Security
Council that he would shortly submit recommendations to
the General Assembly regarding non-lethal UNAMIR
equipment that can be released for use in Rwanda. This
intention is fully in line with the purpose of the draft
resolution; the release of UNAMIR equipment will be a
contribution to the rehabilitation efforts in Rwanda. The
General Assembly will have to decide on the scope of this
measure. This decision will be taken on the basis of
existing rules and regulations. It is our hope, however, that
the decision will also take into account the tremendous
needs of Rwanda in this respect. The German Government
is currently discussing with the United Nations Secretariat
pragmatic options for the release of German equipment for
further use in Rwanda.

Germany will vote for the adoption of the draft
resolution.

