Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We deeply appreciate
the United Kingdom presidency's initiative to organize
this open briefing on the situation in Myanmar. The
United Kingdom's consistent lead on this issue in
the Council has been a source of moral strength for
the millions of Rohingya and others affected by this
humanitarian crisis.

The eloquent testimonies we heard from the
Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees Goodwill Ambassador,
Ms. Cate Blanchett leave nothing much to be added.
Every passing week, there is new information emerging
about the extent of the persecution and dehumanization
the Rohingya had been subjected to, and about the
possible ramifications of keeping the crisis unresolved
for long.

We take a moment to express our gratitude to each
one of the world leaders, United Nations representatives
and personnel, representatives of the media, civil
society and academia, and conscientious global citizens
for their unstinting solidarity, support and advocacy for
what has turned out to be one of the largest displacement
crises in our world today.

"One year of crying. Now I am angry", read one of
the banners carried by the Rohingya men, women and
children who gathered at their camps in Cox's Bazar to
mark the passage of one long, arduous year since they
had been forcibly displaced from their homes across the
border. Their grief and anger have many manifestations,
and we have just heard some of their echoes in the
Chamber. The Human Rights Council's Independent
International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar
released its report yesterday (A/HRC/39/64), and it is
evident what caused such pervasive grief and anger
among the forcibly displaced Rohingya. In no uncertain
words, the Fact-finding Mission concludes that it was
all caused in a premeditated and organized manner,
and that the perpetrators had acted with a "genocidal
intent". These findings largely echo those shared
earlier by, among others, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
the Special Advisers of the Secretary-General on
Prevention of Genocide and Responsibility to Protect,
and a host of other independent entities.

With such conclusions at hand, the Security
Council's custodianship of the issue remains all the
more relevant and pressing. The Council has adopted
presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/22), visited the
affected people in Bangladesh and Myanmar, and
continued to engage with a host of actors, including
the Secretary-General's Special Envoy on Myanmar.
Despite odds and obstacles, the Council has kept the issue
alive and generally managed to speak in a unified voice
in support of addressing the root causes of the crisis.
As a party directly affected, Bangladesh recognizes
the Council's efforts and calls for further calibrating
its response in light of the prevailing circumstances on
the ground and the emerging evidence into the atrocity
crimes committed against the Rohingya.
The five-point agenda presented by Prime Minister
Sheikh Hasina to the General Assembly last year (see A/72/PV.14) essentially captures our expectations of
the United Nations and the international community,
and forms the basis of our engagements going forwards.
A high-powered national task force continues to
remain functional for overall policy orientation
and coordination.

In the immediate aftermath of the crisis, we
had to invest our resources and energy in a massive
humanitarian response starting with immediate
life-saving assistance. Thanks to the overwhelming
support of our people and our many friends and
partners from home and abroad, the humanitarian
situation in the sprawling camps in Cox's Bazar has
largely stabilized. It has been a relief for all concerned
to have been able to avert the worst possible impact of
the ongoing monsoon. There continues to be a small-
scale influx of people from the other side of border,
citing lack of access to food and security in northern
Rakhine state.

It remains crucial for the forcibly displaced people
and the much-stressed host communities to have the
international community's enhanced and sustainable
support for the United Nations response plan for the
Rohingya humanitarian crisis. Pending their voluntary
repatriation to Rakhine state, the Rohingya camped in
Bangladesh need to have improved shelter, health care,
livelihood and education options in the short to medium
terms. Our authorities remain sensitized to some of
the security and law and order issues in the camps,
and continue to work with the Rohingya themselves
to strengthen community-based interventions
and safeguards. We urge continued vigilance and
cooperation on the part of Member States of the region
to help mitigate potential security risks, including those
posed bytransnational actors.

On the overriding priority of the voluntary,
safe, dignified and sustainable repatriation of the
Rohingya, we have concluded enabling agreements and
arrangements with Myanmar, and have already had a
series ofmeetings ofthejoint working groups to identify
and address some of the operational and technical
challenges to implementing the agreed provisions. As
far as Bangladesh is concerned, the initial steps towards
repatriation have already been set in motion with the
handing over of a short list of potential returnees to
the Myanmar side in February. We are currently in
the process of setting up transit infrastructure on our
side, as envisaged in the agreements, and constituting
a technical committee to oversee implementation in
coordination with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other
relevant entities.

It must be made clear, however, that the return of
the Rohingya cannot be begun unless the Rohingya
themselves regain the trust and confidence to voluntarily
opt for repatriation. The Secretary-General and
several representatives have already spoken at length
about the prerequisites on the ground for creating an
environment conducive to their repatriation. It is well
documented that the Rohingya would, at the minimum,
seek guarantees for their safety and security, return
to their homes and property, freedom of movement,
livelihood opportunities, and a clear pathway to their
legitimate demand for citizenship in Myanmar. It will
be entirely up to the Myanmar authorities to build trust
among the Rohingya about their sustainable return and
peaceful coexistence with other communities in the
Rakhine State.

During his visit to Myanmar earlier this month,
our Foreign Minister noted the Myanmar leadership's
commitment across the board to facilitating the
Rohingya's return to Rakhine state. He was briefed
by some on the measures being contemplated for the
accommodation and livelihoods of the Rohingya, and
visited the physical infrastructure built so far, with the
support of some friendly countries of the region. He
invited Myanmar to send a delegation to Bangladesh to
brief the Rohingya first-hand about the arrangements
being made, and to give them assurances about their safe
and dignified return so that they can feel encouraged to
voluntarily put their signatures and fingerprints on the
agreed verification forms.

Meanwhile, as the Secretary-General and others
have mentioned, the Myanmar authorities can consider
a number of demonstrable measures that can evoke
confidence about an enabling situation on the ground.
These include, first, allowing unimpeded access to the
United Nations Development Programme and UNHCR
to all the affected villages and townships in Rakhine
State for necessary humanitarian and development
work, as reportedly envisaged in the memorandum of
understanding concluded with Myanmar; secondly,
managing the safe and sustainable return of the
Rohingya strandedalongthe borderbetween Bangladesh
and Myanmar and, pending their return, providing
humanitarian assistance to them from the Myanmar
side; thirdly, dismantling the camps for internally
displaced persons in Rakhine state in a way that would
allow the people confined therein to sustainably return
to their homes or other places of choice, with their
rights and freedoms restored; and fourthly, promoting
reconciliation and trust among communities in Rakhine
State, and curbing the malicious spread of hate speech
and incitement to violence.

Most importantly, the question of accountability
deserves to be addressed in the right earnest. The
culture of impunity for the alleged crimes committed
against the Rohingya must be brought to a close to
heal their trauma and restore a sense of justice. The
commission of inquiry formed by Myanmar recently
should be allowed to act independently and factor in
the observations made by the Fact-finding Mission.
The international community, including the Council,
has certain specific options and responsibilities
outlined in the Mission's report, and should give them
due consideration.

As a Member State committed to international
criminal justice, and as a State party to the Rome
Statute and other relevant international instruments,
Bangladesh will continue to cooperate with various
international processes and initiatives on the
accountability issue. At the same time, Bangladesh
stands ready to cooperate with Myanmar on any of its
security concerns and other issues of strategic interest
in the spirit of good-neighbourliness.

Over the past year, the international community
has not allowed its concerns over the Rohingya
humanitarian issue to run its course and die down. The
Security Council could help sustain the momentum
by adopting a much-anticipated resolution that would
allow the issue to be featured on its regular agenda. The
General Assembly, at the initiative of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, adopted resolution 72/248,
on the situation in Myanmar, last year; it needs to be
updated this year, not least in the interest of continuing
the mandate of the Secretary-General's Special Envoy.
We look forward to Member States' principled support
for these initiatives.

The outbreak of violence in northern Rakhine State
coincided with the release of the groundbreaking report
of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, headed
by Mr. Kofi Annan. With Mr. Annan's sad demise, the
Rohingya have indeed lost one of their key allies and
guardians - a voice that articulated their aspirations
and charted a way forward in addressing the root
causes of a complex situation. We must do justice to
Mr. Annan's memory and contributions by lending our
continued support to Myanmar in order to ensure the
full, unconditional and non-selective implementation
of all the recommendations he presented to the
Myanmar leadership.

The meeting rose at 5.45 pm.
