Mr. Bamba (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to express its congratulations
to the C6te d'Ivoire Sanctions Committee established
2

pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004), as well as its
Group of Experts, for the outstanding work that has
been done in the six months since the publication of
the report to the Council contained in document
S/2011/642.

In response to the concerns expressed in that
report, my delegation would like to solemnly reiterate
the tireless commitment of the President of the Republic
of Cote d'Ivoire, His Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara,
and of the Government led by the Prime Minister, His
Excellency Mr. Jeannot Kouadio-Ahoussou, to ensure
the full cooperation and assistance of Ivorian
authorities, both when it comes to access to the places
and sources of information and in identifying potential
violations of the C6te d'Ivoire sanctions regime.

Allow me to provide an update on a few key
developments that have occurred since the adoption of
resolution 1980 (2011) - the previous resolution on
the Cote d'Ivoire sanctions regime. A year after the
adoption of resolution 1980 (2011), President Ouattara
and the Government of Cote d'Ivoire took steps to
strengthen security throughout the country, restore
security and the rule of law institutions and deploy
them gradually throughout the country and transfer law
enforcement functions to competent entities.

The security situation in Abidjan and throughout
the country has significantly improved, but major
challenges remain to be overcome, namely, recurring
intercommunity and land conflicts as well as the
precarious security situation in the western part of the
country, in particular in the border zone with Liberia.

All State officials have returned to their posts in
the north of the country, including the security and
defence forces, the prefect corps, the financial police
and public treasury, and customs and tax officers,
thereby making it possible to restore public authority
throughout the national territory.

Major financial efforts have been made by the
State to restore the national road infrastructure and
build new roads, bridges and highways.

The reform of the coffee and cocoa sector has been
carried out, as has that of the mining and the energy
sectors, thereby guaranteeing greater transparency in
managing the financial resources generated by those
important sectors for the economy of Cote d'Ivoire.

National reconciliation is now under way, and
political dialogue with the opposition has begun. That
12-31932
was reflected in the President's visit to the western part
of the country from 21 to 24 April 2012, his first State
visit within the country since his inauguration in May
2011. Along with the step taken by the President to
promote dialogue, forgiveness and reconciliation,
between 27 and 28 April, the Government will begin a
dialogue with all the opposition parties in order to
strengthen national cohesion.

The new National Assembly that emerged from
the legislative elections of December 2011 convened
yesterday for its first regular session, in accordance
with the provisions of the Constitution of Cote d'Ivoire.

President Ouattara is fully aware of the priority of
stabilizing the security situation. In order to signal his
commitment and speed up crucial reforms in the
security sector, the President has now assumed the
functions of Minister of Defence in the new
Government established following the ministerial
reshuffling on 13 March. On 6 April, the President and
Minister of Defence issued decree No. 2, which deals
with the establishment, nature, composition and
operation of the working group on security sector
reform (SSR)

The group's first goal is to undertake an in-depth
discussion on defence and security involving every
sector involved in SSR. Secondly, the group is to
strengthen coordination among all elements involved in
SSR in order to develop a comprehensive and coherent
security sector reform policy and find a lasting solution
to the issue of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR). The working group is to submit
its conclusions in three months.

The inter-ministerial coordination cell for
monitoring the embargo has been set up. This body
serves to underscore the key role played by the Foreign
Ministry and guarantees strict respect of, and
transparency in, the procedures to be followed.

With respect to the Kimberley Process, the
restoration of local and regional administration by the
Ministry of Mines and Energy makes it possible to
have a presence that represents the public authority and
has sufficient means to monitor money activities
throughout the country. That should facilitate the
availability of information necessary to establish
legislation and speed up the process of cote d'Ivoire
becoming a member of the Process.
That is the context in which the Council adopted
resolution 2045 (2012), which renews for a one-year
period the sanctions regime concerning cote d'Ivoire.
My delegation notes that the new resolution renews the
mandate of the Group of Experts for 12 months, until
30 April 2013.

The resolution acknowledges the urgent need for
the Government of cote d'Ivoire to train and equip its
security forces and, in particular, to provide national
and local police with the weapons and munitions
necessary for law enforcement. The resolution
eliminates the embargo on training and technical
assistance. It also eases exemption procedures for Cote
d'Ivoire authorities, from a system of requesting
authorization to one of notifying.

The resolution also calls for a review of the
sanctions in six months, according to the progress
made in SSR and DDR. It also maintains the current
measures on rough diamonds, while waiting for
progress to be made in the Kimberley Process. Lastly,
the resolution maintains individual sanctions.

My delegation would like to express its
satisfaction and thanks to the members of the Council
for having taken into account the efforts made and the
success achieved by my country on the road to
normalization and stability for cote d'Ivoire. My
delegation believes that the resolution sends a very
strong message of encouragement from the Security
Council to cote d'Ivoire to continue its efforts in order
to overcome the remaining challenges. President
Ouattara will have an opportunity to express his
gratitude to the members of the Council during the
Council's next visit to C6te d'Ivoire, from 20 to 22 May.

As I said in my statement before the Council on
26 January (see S/PV.6708), Cote d'Ivoire is ready to
assume once again its role as a locus of stability and
growth in the subregion in the service of peace,
security and international cooperation. President
Ouattara, as Chairman of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), is aware of the
importance of the responsibilities conferred upon him,
and he intends to give Cote d'Ivoire the opportunity to
fully assume its commitment.

As we speak, the heads of State of ECOWAS are
meeting in Abidjan at a special summit meeting to
consider the situations in Mali and Guinea-Bissau.
Important measures are expected to emerge from that
meeting that will contribute to finally resolving the
crises in those two countries, in close cooperation with
the African Union, the United Nations, the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the entire
international community.

Security and stability of the countries in the West
African subregion are threatened by terrorism,
transnational crime, arms trafficking, the illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons, piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea and drug trafficking. My delegation
therefore calls on the United Nations and the entire
international community to increase their assistance to
collective security projects undertaken by the
subregional organizations of ECOWAS and the
Economic Community of Central African States in
order to put an end to those scourges and to be able to
use the resources available to achieve economic and
social development objectives for its populations.

