Mr. Parrulli: I thank the Security Council for
giving me an opportunity to speak on this important day.
The Carabinieri Command for the Protection
of Cultural Heritage is the world's first police unit
specializing in the protection of cultural heritage. Since
its foundation, in 1969, it has been on the front lines
in the fight against trafficking in cultural heritage.
To date, our investigations have led to the recovery of
almost 800,000 works ofart and the seizure ofmore than
1 million archeological artefacts. We have investigated
approximately 35,000 people and detained more than
1,000. Those figures demonstrate the Carabinieri
corps steadfast commitment to defending the world's
collective traditions and history.

More often than not, trafficking in cultural
property is a transnational crime, which requires
a transnational investigative approach. Objects are
stolen from one country, smuggled across the border,
or the borders, of another, and then sold illegally in
another country - perhaps ultimately finding a home
in yet another country. INTERPOL provides pivotal
international police cooperation, but that is not always
enough. The looting and smuggling of cultural property
is a complex crime that requires a specific focus and
unique expertise that goes beyond the usual toolkit of
police personnel. The only way to successfully protect
cultural heritage is through close inter-agency work
across borders.

In that context, the Carabinieri Command for the
Protection of Cultural Heritage serves as a model for
other countries when it comes to engaging international
cooperation at the judicial, law enforcement and
specialist levels. We strongly advocate the setting up
of specialized police units for the protection of cultural
heritage in every country.

In our search for cultural artefacts that have been
exported from Italy, we often end up helping other
countries track down and repatriate their own looted
properties. We have also deployed as part of international
cooperation missions, such as those to Nasiriya, Iraq,
from 2004 to 2005, pursuant to resolution 1483 (2003).

The Carabinieri Command for the Protection of
Cultural Heritage also provides training, in Italy and
abroad, for judges and prosecutors, police officers,
customs officials and experts and practitioners from
culture ministries. We recently signed technical
arrangements with several national and international
stakeholders.

In order to improve international police cooperation
in the protection of cultural heritage, we share
information, best practices and lessons learned. Our
most powerful tool - the database of stolen cultural
artefacts - stores more than 1.2 million images and
files on stolen artefacts, as well as the more than
6 million pictures and descriptions of artworks covered
by our investigations. Originally the world's largest
archive of stolen artefacts, it is now a powerful data
analysis tool for processing data entries and aiding
our investigations.

Our latest initiative, the "Unite4Heritage" Task
Force, made its successful debut in the aftermath
of the terrible series of earthquakes that struck Italy
in late 2016. The Task Force is a team of specialized
Carabinieri Command personnel who work alongside
civilian experts from the Ministry of Culture to
assess the risks and quantify the damage to cultural
heritage in crisis-affected areas and to devise the
necessary action plans, including providing training
courses for local staff, assisting in the safe removal
of transportable artefacts from endangered or looted
sites and strengthening the fight against looting and
trafficking in cultural property.

Together with UNESCO, we are now working
on a stand-by agreement to allow the deployment
of the Unite4Heritage Task Force overseas under the
United Nations flag. Meanwhile, we are liaising on a
bilateral basis with several countries, including, most,
recently Iraq. Ijust visited the UNESCO field office in
Baghdad to identify venues of cooperation to address
archaeological areas devastated and looted by Da'esh.
The Unite4Heritage campaign has raised awareness
of the threats to cultural heritage, mobilized players
beyond the cultural heritage communities and expanded
UNESCO's efforts to coordinate technical work among
various specialized agencies and institutions.

In the light of the experience, success and cutting-
edge work of the Carabinieri Command for the
Protection of Cultural Heritage, I am honoured to be
here today to welcome the adoption of the historic
resolution 2347 (2017). We also welcome the spirit of
the resolution and its effective measures calling for
unified procedures, stronger ties between Member
States and police forces, broader definitions of crimes
against cultural heritage and stricter regulations on the
illegal trade of items with undocumented origins.

