Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would first like to thank Ms. Sandra Honore
for her briefing and her work as Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
and of course to welcome our good friend Ambassador
Denis Regis of Haiti.

I would like to subscribe fully to the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union,
while adding some remarks in my national capacity.

Spain shares the Secretary-General's vision when he
identifies hopeful signs, such as the drop in the numbers
of displaced persons and cholera cases. However, at the
same time we agree with his description ofthe situation
as very worrying and his emphasis on the significant
challenges facing the authorities in the election
processes scheduled for this year and announced by the
provisional Electoral Council. Indeed, in the political
area the challenges are major, since when the planned
elections are concluded and a new President takes over
on 7 February 2016, it will be only the third time that
presidential power in Haiti has been transferred through
the holding of elections, and the first democratic
elections since 1989. That is an achievement that must
be preserved. Spain would like to support Haiti on its
road to consolidating its democratic institutions, and
urges all the country's political actors to be generous
and determined in helping to establish and maintain
a politically and socially stable atmosphere that will
enable the various electoral processes to be conducted
successfully.

I have heard President Martelly say in person more
than once that the old ways of conducting politics in
the country must end. The political classes must act
not to defend their personal privileges and ambitions
but to promote the collective interests of the country
and, above all, of its citizens, who are beginning to be
profoundly disappointed in their political institutions.
To act as they have done in the past, with a limited, short-
term vision, would betray the future prosperity that we,
the friends of Haiti, desire as much as the Haitians do
themselves, and would squander the enormous efforts
that the international community has made to help them
to normalize their political life and achieve sustainable
development. We hope that the Haitian political classes
will stay on top of the situation during this crucial year.

We continue to call for dialogue between the
political stakeholders as the best way to build democracy
and improve the country's political consolidation. In
that regard, I would emphasize the efforts undertaken
by various missions of the Club of Madrid, which
were financed by the European Union and aimed at
promoting the dialogue in the discussions on political
reform.

In the area of development, Council members are
well aware of the firm and generous solidarity of Spain
and the Spanish people with Haiti. From 2010 to 2013,
we were the third largest bilateral donor in the world and
the largest in the European Union. Spain has allocated
more than €250 million to the reconstruction work in
Haiti and today is providing essential cooperation in
such sectors as water and sanitation in the amount of
more than $150 million, for the benefit of 2 million
beneficiaries, and is contributing €15.5 million in direct
budgetary support to the education sector. In short, of
all the countries in the world, Haiti is at present the
main recipient of official development assistance from
Spain.

In the area of security, it has been confirmed that
the situation has undergone major changes since the
decision to reconfigure MINUSTAH was adopted,
in October 2014. Such an assertion is justified, for
example, in the publication of an electoral timetable
by the provisional Electoral Council. However, Spain
believes that instability has significantly increased in
the streets and there have been changes in the security
situation. According to the figures provided by
MINUSTAH, during 2014 there were 838 protests, of
which a quarter were violent. Furthermore, the tension
on the streets has acutely increased in recent months.

Since the publication of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/157), there have been some major
strikes, including a general strike lasting two days,
on 9 and 10 March, as well as demonstrations that
degenerated into serious incidents, such as the invasion
of the Consulate of the Dominican Republic in Port-
au-Prince. There has also been a significant increase
in the number of assaults and robberies, in offices and
headquarters of religious orders and non-governmental
organizations.

Spain wishes to draw attention to those facts,
which constitute a substantive modification of the
security situation that existed a few months ago, reflect
the existence of a very delicate balance and ultimately
foreshadow the difficulties that will have to met as the
political activity linked to the elections intensifies.

Let us talk about MINUSTAH itself. Spain has
always maintained in its statements to the Security
Council that the reconfiguration of the military
contingent should take into account the increase in the
number of personnel and the capacity of the Haitian
National Police forces to arrive at Haiti assuming the
functions of maintenance of public order currently
undertaken by the United Nations Mission. However,
from the information available and the facts to which
I referred earlier, I can deduce that the forces of
Haitian law enforcement lack even the tools necessary
to controlling the situation by themselves and in fact
rely regularly on the logistical arrangements and
military infrastructure of MINUSTAH to do their jobs
effectively.

Spain considers that if the security conditions have
not drastically worsened despite the seriousness of the
facts, it is precisely because of the presence of the work
of MINUSTAH. At this point, I wish to mention the
letter sent by President Martelly last 9 March to the
Secretary-General in which he noted the importance
of the security environment for the proper conduct of
the electoral process, calling attention to the disturbing
increase in violence. In this letter, the President ofHaiti
requested "that the United Nations observe a pause
in the ongoing withdrawal process of MINUSTAH
contingents." Spain supports responding positively to
that request of the highest authority in Haiti.

As members of the Council know, we supported
from the beginning the process ofreflection on the future
of MINUSTAH. We continue to support the Mission
reconfiguration plan, which should take into account
progress in the formation and consolidation of the
National Police and its ability to progressively assume
the functions that MINUSTAH will give up in the field
of security. In the current circumstances, Spain insists
that the Mission reconfiguration calendar be studied in

a flexible manner, on the basis of analyses and forecasts
in the short and medium term and of the evolution of
the political and security situation. We believe that
the role of MINUSTAH is and will be essential for the
electoral process to take place normally, in security
and transparency, and for the international community
to support that process and the establishment of a new
Administration, ensuring a peaceful political transition
that consolidates the achievements of the past few years
in terms of democracy and rule of law. In any case, the
risks cited by the Secretary-General in his report serve
to highlight the need to maintain a rapid reaction force
in addition to the police component, which should,
in our view, be maintained at current levels until the
establishment of the new Government.

I conclude by reiterating our total commitment to
Haiti once again.

