Ms. Bensouda: It is a distinct honour to once again
be at the Council's table to present my Office's eleventh
report on the situation in Libya pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), unanimously adopted in 2011. This honour
is all the more pronounced given that I address the
Council under your presidency, Sir, having just returned
from a most productive official visit to Cairo, where I
engaged with relevant Government ministries on issues
of mutual concern, including the situation in Libya, its
spillover effects and the threat of Da'esh on Egypt and,
more generally, on the Middle East and North Africa.

I would be remiss if I did not benefit from this
occasion to reiterate my sincere appreciation for the
warm hospitality extended to me and my delegation
in Cairo. I assure you, Mr. President, of my Office's
readiness to continue our constructive dialogue with
the Egyptian authorities and to follow-up on the
matters so helpfully explored in Cairo. I am confident
that my Office's engagement with Egypt will lead to
positive results.

The past six months have witnessed significant
developments in Libya's slow and difficult process
towards the establishment of a unity Government. On
17 December 2015, participants in the political dialogue
representing broad segments of Libyan society signed
a United Nations brokered agreement on forming a
Government of national unity. Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon expressed the hope that the signing of the
agreement will put Libya back on the path of building

a democratic State based on the principles of inclusion,
human rights and the rule of law.

It is equally my Office's hope that the signing of
the agreement marks the beginning of the end of the
long period of turmoil and conflict in Libya. Justice,
accountability and the deterrent effects of the law
remain critical components for achieving lasting
peace in Libya and my Office stands ready to work
collaboratively with the Government of National
Accord in its efforts to build a secure, peaceful and
prosperous Libya for all Libyan people.

To that end, I encourage the Government of National
Accord to give priority to devising effective plans and
strategies to address atrocity crimes and to invest in
the relevant national institutions responsible for such
critical work. This will demonstrate, in concrete
terms, that justice and accountability constitute key
Government priorities underpinning efforts to ensure
peace and stability in Libya, and that the victims
will have the opportunity to seek redress through the
Libyan courts.

Similarly, over the same period, my Office's
investigations into the Libya situation have progressed,
albeit at a slower pace than we would have liked due
to a lack of sufficient resources and the prevailing
precarious security situation in the country. Despite
these challenges, our investigations are continuing to
yield positive results, in large part due to the cooperation
of the Libyan Prosecutor-General's Office, from which
my Office has received numerous documents pursuant
to the memorandum of understanding entered into by
my Office and the Libyan Government in 2013.

Notwithstanding limited resources and the inability
at the present time to conduct in situ investigations in
Libya, my modest Libya team has been able to pursue
leads and other avenues for collecting evidence through
our investigations. My Office is continuing to carefully
analyse and assess the evidence in our possession and
to determine whether the requisite legal standards are
met to request additional arrest warrants. In short,
notwithstanding the numerous challenges that we face,
my Office remains firmly committed to its mandate
vis-a-vis Libya and will continue to be focused and
industrious in the fulfilment of that mandate.

As highlighted in my latest report, the situation
in Libya requires collaboration and coordination
between all relevant actors at the national, regional
and international levels. The support of the Council
remains equally crucial. Success in Libya will therefore
depend on the collective determination and will of all
relevant actors to meaningfully contribute to the course
of bringing perpetrators to justice and, by so doing,
help deter the commission of future crimes.

The threat of Da'esh and other groups proclaiming
allegiance to Al-Qaida remains real, and the
consequences are too costly to be ignored. They include
instability and the dire humanitarian situation in Libya,
which in turn result in mass migration and the spread
of terrorism in the country and the region. I reiterate
my previous calls on all national and international law
enforcement agencies that are working on Libya to
contact my Office and join it in its efforts to strengthen
the network of law enforcement agencies that aim to
contribute to bringing an end to civilian suffering and
destruction in Libya.

I remain convinced that increased cooperation
between and among relevant actors, as well as
coordinated investigative activities, are key to tackling
national, transnational and international crimes that
continue to plague Libya and to ensuring that those
responsible for committing these crimes have no safe
haven anywhere. In this regard, I am particularly
pleased by the interest shown and efforts made thus
far by national law enforcement agencies to coordinate
with my Office, with each other and with the Libyan
authorities. The international community has invested
significant capital into restoring security in the country.
While nascent, that growing network is beginning
to take shape as it explores efforts to share essential
information and strategies for tackling criminality in
Libya. Those who finance or encourage the commission
of grave crimes in Libya must understand clearly that
they will be held accountable.

As the Government of National Accord assumes its
duties, we recall that Libya remains under a positive
legal obligation to immediately arrest and surrender
Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) - a fact noted by the Council
in resolution 2238 (2015). We urge the Government
of National Accord to prioritize the transfer of
Mr. Al-Qadhafi to its own custody and facilitate his
surrender to the Court. It is also important for the
Government of National Accord to consult with the
Pre-Trial Chamber on issues relating to the surrender
of Mr. Al-Qadhafi and to seek assistance from the
international community, as deemed appropriate, on
how best to facilitate the surrender of Mr. Al-Qadhafi
to the Court without further delay.

The unique factual circumstances of this case
and the lack of progress also justify the adoption of
complementary, exceptional and innovative measures.
It bears emphasizing that Libya has submitted to the
Court that "Mr. Al-Qadhafi continues to be in custody
in Zintan and is presently 'unavailable' to the Libyan
State". As such, as part ofits ongoing efforts to enhance
prospects for Mr. Al-Qadhafi's surrender, my Office
recently filed a request with Pre-Trial Chamber I for
an order directing the Registry to transmit the request
for arrest and surrender of Mr. Al-Qadhafi directly to
Mr. Al-'Ajami Al-'Atiri. Mr. Al-'Atiri is the commander
of the battalion that is detaining Mr. Al-Qadhafi
in Zintan. The Pre-Trial Chamber is yet to issue its
decision on this request. In the event that the request
is granted, the Office hopes that Mr. Al-'Atiri and the
battalion he commands will cooperate and surrender
Mr. Al-Qadhafi to the custody of the Court to be tried.
Should he fail to comply, the Council should consider
adopting appropriate measures to ensure compliance
with the Chamber's order.

In relation to Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi, the Office
has received a copy of the written judgment of the
Libyan court in relation to his case and has conducted a
preliminary review of the judgement. At this time, the
Office is not in possession of facts that would satisfy
it that new facts have arisen that negate the basis on
which Pre-Trial Chamber I found Mr. Al-Senussi's
case inadmissible. The Office will continue to
review its assessment if and when new relevant facts
become available.

20. While the Appeals Chamber has recognized
that, in the context of admissibility proceedings, the
ICC is not primarily called upon to decide whether
domestic proceedings violate certain requirements of
human rights or domestic law, it is incumbent upon
the Government of National Accord to ensure that the
highest standards for investigations and prosecutions
are met. In this context, I am encouraged that arrest
warrants have been issued for those individuals
suspected of committing crimes, including torture, in
Al-Hadba prison. Follow-up actions for their arrest
and prosecution must be undertaken. I will continue to
encourage and follow the Libyan authorities' efforts to
investigate the allegations of torture at theprison and to
bring those found responsible to justice.

My Office remains concerned about ongoing
civilian deaths, with reported executions by Da'esh
accounting for the majority of these, although civilian
deaths continue to also result from the conflict
between Libya Dawn and Libyan National Army.
Moreover, abductions, detentions and ill treatment in
detention centres continue to be reported on all sides
of the conflict.

The Mediterranean-Libya migratory route to
Europe remains a popular option among refugees and
migrants, who are particularly vulnerable to violence,
sexual violence and ill-treatment in Libya. The
detention of thousands of migrants continues to be a
source of financing for many militant groups in Libya.
We as the international community must take a closer
look at who profits from criminal activities in Libya,
and take coordinated steps to prevent further violations.
This must be a priority for all who are affected by the
criminal trafficking of human beings.

For its part, the Office continues to carefully
evaluate how to best utilize its limited resources to
maximize its impact on the present situation in Libya.
While the Office is continuing its investigations into
officials linked to the former reign of Muammar
Al-Qadhafi, it is also focused on ongoing crimes in
Libya. Despite resource constraints, the Office is
assessing the potential to expand its investigations into
those new crimes, including those alleged to have been
committed by Da'esh and Ansar Al-Sharia. However,
the Office recalls and stresses that States have the
primary responsibility to investigate and prosecute
their nationals who have joined the ranks of Da'esh,
Ansar Al-Sharia and other militias operating in Libya.

I must reiterate that, until my team is able to carry
out investigations in Libya and the issue of resources is
resolved, the Office will simply be unable to advance the
investigations as rapidly as desired. We are optimistic,
however, that in the coming months we will be able to
resume our functions in Libya and to accelerate our
efforts to bring to justice those responsible for Rome
Statute crimes, in coordination with key partners in and
outside of Libya.

I would like to acknowledge and commend the
critically important work being carried out by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
I had the pleasure of receiving the Head of UNSMIL
and Special Representative of the Secretary General,
Mr. Martin Kobler, at The Hague earlier this week,
and I canvassed the many areas where our respective
offices can enhance cooperation in accordance with our
independent mandates. Mr. Kobler and I both agreed
that accountability for grave crimes under the Rome
Statute was indispensable to stability and sustainable
peace in Libya. That recognition and meeting of the
minds must translate into concrete positive changes on
the ground. We are determined to do just that, in close
collaboration with the Government of National Accord.

I greatly appreciate the efforts of all States that
have engaged and cooperated with the Office in support
of our investigations in Libya, including neighbouring
Tunisia and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. I also
encourage all States to intensify their efforts to support
investigations and prosecutions of Rome Statute crimes
alleged in Libya. Finally, I call upon all States that
have not responded to requests for assistance to do so
without further delay. State cooperation with the Office
is indispensable for the success of its work in Libya and
for all other situations under investigation.

Libya and the Libyan people deserve peace and
stability on which to secure and build their future.
They deserve the rule of law and by the law, rather
than lawlessness and the current climate of perpetual
insecurity and flux.

In conclusion, we must continue our work, albeit
under difficult circumstances. Where we work together
in an intelligent, reflective and coordinated manner,
we can help make a difference in restoring stability
in Libya. The Security Council and the international
community must stay committed to Libya and help it
emerge triumphant in the face of adversity.

Nations are not built overnight. But to last and to
withstand the challenges of the twenty-first century,
they must be built on strong foundations. Justice will
always serve as a central pillar.

