Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): The Security Council
has considered the issue of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict for more than a decade. It is time
that we reflect on the achievements and on the
improvements that can bring about greater tangible
results in the protection of civilians affected by armed
conflict. Indeed, the international community has
achieved progress in setting up a robust international
normative framework, provided a wealth of experience
and generated best practices on the issue. However, the
reality on ground remains characterized by the concern
as to whether people are being adequately safeguarded.

One very difficult point in the protection of
civilians is the still-vague meaning and distinction
among armed groups, combatants and civilians.
That lack of clarity has cost civilian lives in various
conflicts by both mistake and design. The situation
is confounded by the proliferation and fragmentation
of non-State armed groups. Some of those non-State
actors reject the premise of civilian protection. Another
key issue is the asymmetric nature of armed conflict
in various regions where the principles of distinction
and proportionality are being violated. Such challenges
underline the need for reinvigorated commitment and
determined comprehensive action in dealing with
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. In that
connection, the Indonesian delegation wishes to make
a few observations.

First, Indonesia is cognizant ofthe fact that the main
failure in the protection of civilians in armed conflict
stems from a lack of compliance and accountability by
parties to conflict with their moral and legal obligations.
Regrettably, vested interests and power politics often
ride roughshod over moral and legal imperatives.

We do note the constructive developments in
favour of strengthening compliance and ensuring
accountability through building national capacities,
which is an essential aspect in effectively preventing
potential atrocities against civilians. It also goes
without saying that all States have the responsibility
to ensure that adequate measures are taken to control
and eliminate non-State armed groups and those
perpetuating organized crime whose threat to people is
often accentuated during conflicts.

Secondly, it is crucial that adequate focus be placed
on developing tools and supporting and strengthening
national capacities and resources, which enables
effective systems for the well-being of civilians. Due
regard should also be taken of the special needs of
women and children.

Member States' role in promoting compliance and
accountability, including through domestic legislation
and legal means, is critical to preventing violations. In
that regard, every State has the responsibility to not only
undertake its requisite national steps but to support the
furthering of a global culture that ascribes the highest
value to the protection for civilians in armed conflicts.

Thirdly, many United Nations peacekeeping missions
have been entrusted with the protection of civilian
mandates. As one of the leading troop-contributing
countries, Indonesia has sent its troops and police to
several United Nations peacekeeping operations with
that mandate. It should be ensured that, in addition
to Blue Helmets being provided with clear goals and
guidelines, they should also be properly equipped and
supported in performing their mission goals.

We appreciate the Security Council's efforts to that
end. An initiative has been undertaken to prioritize
the protection of civilians in decisions concerning
the use of available capacity and resources in the
implementation of mission mandates. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2012/376) has also specified the
challenge posed by the limited degree of cooperation
from host States and their capacity to act, which affects
the discharge of mandates by peacekeepers.

Undertaking continued meaningful consultation
among all peacekeeping stakeholders, including
troop-contributing countries, throughout various stages
of a peacekeeping mission is extremely important to
the effective accomplishment of the mandate. For its
part, Indonesia is committed to enhancing capacities
for training military, police and civilian components.
The newly inaugurated Indonesia Peace and Security
Centre will serve to cater to that important need.

There is indeed nothing better than the prevention of
a conflict. Resolution 1265 (1999) explicitly expressed,
inter alia, the need to address the causes of armed
conflict and to enhance the protection of civilians on a
long-term basis. All international actors must play their
role, cooperate and collaborate to generate the needed
political synergy and support, which equitably mitigates
conflicts and helps conflict-affected countries to take
effective measures to protect civilians.

Finally, I would like to stress that enabling
humanitarian access in a conflict situation is critical.
Parties to conflict should cooperate fully with the
United Nations and other humanitarian agencies to
ensure safe and unhindered access of humanitarian
personnel, supplies and equipment to affected areas.

