Mr. Nambiar (India): We thank you, Sir, for
arranging this public meeting of the Security Council
on an issue of particular importance and relevance to
the United Nations membership.

The adoption of resolution 1526 (2004) in
January this year marked another important step in the
work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the
Taliban. We thank Ambassador Heraldo Mufioz for his
briefing this morning and for his exemplary
stewardship of the 1267 Committee.

The Committee has been proactive in pursuing its
mandate, one that is critical to the interests of the
international community. The travel of the Chair to
selected States will undoubtedly enhance the
Committee's understanding of situations particular to
each State and enhance the cooperation the Committee
can elicit from the States concerned.

We are also confident that the establishment of
the newly constituted Monitoring Team will impart
further impetus to the Committee and increase its
analytical and operational capacities. We believe that
the efforts of the Committee to expand the Taliban/Al
Qaeda list, to increase information-sharing between the
Committees and Member States, to extend assistance to
States in meeting their obligations under the relevant
resolutions, to pursue best practices and to enhance its
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee are
all steps in the right direction.

A few days ago, on 23 May, 33 people, including
a number of women and children, were killed when the
vehicle they were travelling in was blasted along the
Jammu-Srinagar national highway. The banned
terrorist outfit, Hizbul Mujahideen, has claimed
responsibility for the attack. Describing this as yet
another instance of the grave threat terrorism poses to
India's integrity and progress, the Prime Minister of
India, Mr. Manmohan Singh, declared that "while we
will continue to seek a peaceful resolution to all
outstanding problems, there can be no compromise on
our solemn resolve to deal with the menace of
terrorism with firm determination".

It is evident that the scourge of terrorism is
increasing in intensity and spread worldwide. The
increasingly sophisticated tactics and use of systems
and equipment by terrorists, coupled with their
continuing ability to elude the restrictions placed by
Governments on their movements and their access to
arms and financing, suggest that it is time for the
international community to pool its resources and come
up with effective new counter-strategies to combat
international terrorism.

In our view, the development of approaches and
solutions to tackle terrorism has to cater to regional
and national specificities. There is need to adopt a
multi-track approach that takes account of differences
in the stages of development and the use of technology
in different parts of the world. There are likely to be
significant regional variations among Europe, Latin
America, West Asia and South Asia in the handling of
border controls, money transfers, small arms,
counterfeit documents, narcotics and surveillance of
communications. Although such variations are
inevitable, considering the different stages of economic
development and the use of technology in those
regions, international counter-terrorism efforts must
respect and respond to such diversity if they are to be
fully effective and yield results.

We would like to underline the inter-linkages
among different terrorist groups. They support one
another, and their organizations' memberships and
ideologies mutate. Thus they cannot be addressed on
the basis of a segmented approach. We call upon the
1267 Committee to keep in mind this aspect of inter-
linkage as it pursues work related to Al Qaeda and the
Taliban.

The 1267 Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and their operational arms will need to
orient themselves to the different systems and
loopholes that terrorist networks utilize to further their
objectives. Such an approach implies close cooperation
with officials and experts from countries with the
required experience and expertise in dealing with such
situations. The Committee must adjust its policies
accordingly. Likewise, in crafting its resolutions, the
Council must sharpen the instruments available to it for
tackling the varying strategies and techniques
employed by terrorists. By providing, to the maximum
extent possible, complete details of the identification
of the terrorists included in the Al Qaeda/Taliban lists,
the Committee will assist Member States to take timely
and effective action against such individuals.

The cold reality is that the Taliban and Al Qaeda
are far from finished. On the contrary, they have begun
to emerge from the woodwork in different areas and
are adapting and refining their tactics. The 1267
Committee represents a key multilateral component for
containing the threat posed by those terrorist groups.
Much will depend upon the Committee's continued and
focused effort as well as its ability to face the issues
head on, without fear or favour.

The global ramifications of terrorist threats are
unlikely to dissipate in the near future. No country can
claim to be immune from the reach of terrorism. The
international community will have to be united in
sustaining and persevering in its collective campaign to
root out this menace.

