Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We convey sincere greetings to all of the
speakers who are with us this morning representing the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, the Commission
electorale nationale independante, the African Union,
the Southern African Development Community and
the Conference episcopale nationale du Congo, and
we welcome the presence of the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo at this important
meeting. We welcome their interventions, which help
provide us with a full understanding of the situation
under consideration this morning.

We commend and value positively the high level of
determination and commitment of the Government, the
political parties, the Electoral Commission, civil society
and the Catholic Church, but above all the attitude of
the Congolese people, who have demonstrated their
great sense of historical responsibility. We also thank
all the regional and international actors who have
accompanied the Congolese people on the longjourney
that culminated on 30 December with the conduct of
fair, transparent and peaceful elections. The Congolese
people, in spite of alarmist predictions, managed to
overcome the many political, logistical and technical
challenges in an authentic democratic election that the
African continent is proud of and that undoubtedly
constitutes a decisive step towards the consolidation
of democracy, peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the subregion.

In accordance with the official declaration of
the African Union following the publication of the
provisional results of the presidential elections, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea calls on all the political
actors and the general population of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, at this crucial juncture in
the country's political situation, to remain calm and
exercise restraint, prudence and moderation in order
to preserve an atmosphere of peace, tranquillity
and national harmony in this post-election period.
Equatorial Guinea believes that any claim or assertion
challenging the results should be made through the
legal institutions of the country that are competent in
such cases, so that the way to a peaceful transfer of
power to the victorious candidate may be opened, in
accordance with the Constitution of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

In the same vein, we ask regional and international
actors to remain politically neutral and to refrain from
carrying out actions or making statements that could
alter the development of events in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is very important that the
Congolese themselves take the reins of their destiny at
this historic moment.

We believe that, at such a decisive and delicate
moment of its history, all of the Congolese people must
prioritize the supreme interests of their country over
their personal interests in order to guarantee a peaceful
transfer of power in accordance with the Constitution
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
agreement of 31 December 2016. We would also like
to recall that elections cannot be considered as a zero-
sum game, where the winners take all and the losers
get nothing.

We cannot conclude without conveying our best
wishes for calm, tranquillity and peace to the brotherly
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and reminding all political actors to abide by their
commitment to the road map until power has been
transferred effectively, in an atmosphere of solemnity,
pride and national harmony, thereby opening up a new
chapter in the history of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

