Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Let me
thank you, Sir, for honouring us with your presence at
today's meeting, which is taking place at a very
important stage in the history of East Timor. We would
like also to welcome Mr. Mari Alkatiri, who is ably
guiding the work of the Second Transitional
Government of East Timor.

France also welcomes Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello,
who, as always, described with precision and clarity
the current situation and above all the path to follow.
France subscribes word for word to his language. Mr.
Sergio Vieira de Mello is one of those men who do the
United Nations honour. From Cambodia to East Timor,
his entire career is an example of those great servants
of the United Nations who explain why the Oslo jury
decided to confer the Nobel Peace Prize on the United
Nations.

Later in the debate the Ambassador of the
European Union, the Ambassador of Belgium, will
state the position of the 15 members of the European
Union. I will therefore confine myself, as you, Mr.
President, have requested, to a few brief remarks. Also,
since this is a debate and our friend Kishore
Mahbubani enjoys debate, I will respond to Kishore
Mahbubani.

Timor and the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) are clearly
already one of the success stories of the United
Nations. Sergio Vieira de Mello said that we must
remain prudent. He is right. We must get to the very
end of the route. But there are already signs of success.
The elections were perfect. The drafting of the
Constitution by the Constituent Assembly is
progressing well. The declaration of independence, in
friendship and cooperation with Indonesia, is scheduled
for 20 May 2002. I thank the head of Government for
his invitation. I think that the Council will
unhesitatingly be in Dili on 20 May to be at his side on
that great day.

But, naturally, the history of East Timor and
international involvement there will not end on
independence day. We must not, as Kishore Mahbubani
rightly said, repeat the mistakes of the past. There must
be no exit without strategy. The stability of the entire
region depends on it.

Moreover, the enormous investment that the
international community has already rightly made in
East Timor cannot be put at risk. More than a billion
dollars of multilateral aid has been mobilized since
October 1999 to show the solidarity of all our countries
with East Timor. Even today, a quarter of the soldiers
wearing blue helmets deployed around the world are in
East Timor. This means that the international
community's solidarity has been strong, and that of
France, which has no national interest in East Timor or
the region, is exemplary. I wish to state that each
French citizen spends eight times the amount spent by
each citizen of Singapore on nation-building in East
Timor, even though the standard of living of the citizen
of Singapore is higher than that of the French citizen.
That is only one figure among several. It testifies to
France's commitment, because that is how France
judges that its role - not in the Security Council, but
in the service of the United Nations - should be
fulfilled.

But there is a real debate - as is clear from our
interventions - stemming from the complex character
of an operation such as that of East Timor. The truth is
that the United Nations is more and more involved in
operations that are at once peacekeeping and nation-
building.

France has for long considered that to carry out
these operations the Security Council needs to develop
a dual partnership. I said 18 months ago; I have
repeated it since, and I repeat it today, because I
believe it to be important: the first partnership is
naturally the Council's partnership with the troop-
contributing countries. They have expressed frustration
at not being sufficiently involved. I believe that the
Council responded to their concerns in resolution 1353
(2001), and I had the honour, during the French
presidency of the Council, to organize the Council's
first consultations with troop-contributing countries
under the new format, which I believe was a real
improvement. The Council's second partnership is with
the international institutions belonging to the family of
the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and,
naturally, also the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), whose representative I welcome
to this table, as well as other institutions. Good
coordination is essential. I believe that our meeting
today proves that it can exist between what the Council
deems must be done and what the institutions of the
United Nations family, such as the Bretton Woods
institutions, can achieve in close cooperation with the
United Nations.

Now I come to the heart of today's debate, which
is also a recurring debate heard next door, in the
General Assembly. It is a real debate that we should
approach openly. As the Council further develops these
complex operations - Cambodia was the first,
followed by others including East Timor - it can
clearly be seen that the Council's jurisdiction tends to
stretch beyond that strictly prescribed by the Charter:
the maintenance of international peace and security. It
now extends to activities that are more of the nature of
nation-building: the construction or reconstruction of
the economy, of social structures, even of State
structures. Therefore, in the debates, particularly in the
General Assembly, a certain frustration is expressed.
How far will the Security Council expand its area of
competence? What will be left to the General
Assembly if the Security Council becomes more and
more involved in these complex and integrated
operations?

I believe that the Council must be attentive to
these frustrations expressed in the General Assembly.
That is why, in the framework of the preparation of a
presidential statement, on the basis of some noteworthy
recommendations by the Secretary-General, France
wished that the debate be open. It is not a debate on
financing, because, in any case, the financing must be
provided. It must be part of our regular budget,
whether in the United Nations regular budget under the
General Assembly or in the budget for peacekeeping
operations. It is a question of distribution of
competences.

I believe that this is a debate that we should have
not just in today's case, but also with respect to other
complex operations, so that when we are heading
towards success, as we are under the leadership of
Sergio Vieira de Mello, it will be the success of not just
one people, the East Timorese, or one man, Sergio
Vieira de Mello, or perhaps one institution, the Security
Council, but truly the entire United Nations family,
including the General Assembly.

