Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, I would like
to express my congratulations to the United States on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month.

My delegation welcomes the timely convening
of today's open debate. We are particularly alarmed
that in 2012 alone, 121 journalists were killed and
hundreds of others targeted and imprisoned. In fact,
Malaysia too lost a journalist in Somalia last year.
We are also concerned over reports that journalists
were being targeted and killed while covering events
in Gaza during Israel's attacks under Operation Pillar
of Defense in November 2012, as described in recent
testimony to the United Nations Special Committee
to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the
Occupied Territories. In 2012, 147 violations against
journalists were reported.

Journalists are civilians and must be protected
in times of conflict, in accordance with international
law. My delegation also agrees that the perpetrators
of violence against journalists in conflict situations,
such as kidnappings, torture and murder, must be held
accountable and brought to justice. There can be no
impunity whatsoever.

While recognizing the need to enhance protection
for journalists, we must also recognize that journalists
are unique. Their uniqueness stems from the nature of
their job, which is to report on a particular situation.
More often than not, the greater the risk, the higher the
demand for the journalist to report on what is taking
place on the ground. In general, we can say that the
job of a journalist often finds the person in precarious
situations. The more danger he or she faces, the more
credible the story is supposed to be. Because ofthat, the
protection of journalists presents a greater challenge, as
opposed to protecting other civilians.

Malaysia believes that the main responsibility
to protect journalists lies with the States. States are
responsible for ensuring the safety ofjournalists and
should accord protection to them in conflict areas to the
fullest extent of the law. In that regard, my delegation
calls for strict adherence to resolutions 1738 (2006) and
1894 (2009), as well as the relevant international law,
including humanitarian and human rights laws, in the
protection of civilians.

My delegation shares the views reflected in the
2012 United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of
Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, as prepared by
UNESCO. We are appalled at the findings that there
is an increasing trend of targeted killing ofjournalists
worldwide. We condemn the acts of violence that cost
the lives of 372 journalists between 2006 and 2011.
Again, Malaysia believes that impunity must end and
that the acts of violence committed against civilians,
including journalists, must cease. My delegation agrees
that the United Nations has an important role to play in
combating impunity, as reflected in the Plan of Action.
Such measures would include enhancing coordination
amongUnited Nations agencies on the ground in
addressing the issue of the safety ofjournalists.

The advancement of information and communications
technology could play an important part in improving
protection for journalists. We are now accustomed to live
Visual feeds connected Via satellite links from conflict
areas which bring home important developments across
the globe. The same technology could greatly enhance
the safety and security of journalists by allowing them
to report on the situation on the ground without actually
being close to the conflict zone.

Malaysia neither disputes nor questions the
important role of journalists in the dissemination of
information in armed conflicts. The protection of
journalists requires the involvement of States and
the media industry and a better understanding of the
role of the journalist. Journalists are a vital tool for
supporting economic progress, the development of
political consciousness and the intellectual growth
of societies. We call on Member States to uphold the
highest standards of adherence to international law,
including humanitarian and human rights law, in order
to protect journalists.

