Mr. Bessho (Japan): Let me first express my
gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
the heads of the organizations present for their
respective briefings.

In today's world, no nation can maintain its peace
and security in isolation. Therefore, it is critically
important to deepen cooperation between the United
Nations and regional security frameworks, in addition
to encouraging collaboration between allies and
like-minded countries. The key is to build trust and
confidence among nations and regional organizations.

We have been briefed by the three organizations
represented here today on measures for maintaining
peace and security in Europe and in neighbouring
regions. The founding declarations on the charters of
these organizations enunciate their adherence to the
objectives and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Hence, activities by these organizations must
be conducive to building mutual trust and confidence,
not only among their members, but also with countries
from outside that region.

Japan has deep bonds with Central Asian countries
that are members of the aforementioned organizations.
Our goal is to bolster inclusive, stable and independent

development, while also contributing to regional and
international peace and stability. In addition to a wide
spectrum of bilateral cooperation, Japan has held
Central Asia plus Japan dialogues to address regional
challenges, such as anti-drug measures and border
control. We have also promoted practical cooperation
in areas ranging from agriculture to transport
and distribution.

In addition, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is a significant and
more inclusive platform for building mutual trust
and confidence in the region and sharing knowledge
through assistance to institution-building. It has a
very broad European membership that extends beyond
major parties to the three organizations present in
the Chamber and includes Mongolia. Japan believes
the OSCE is an important channel through which we
contribute to security issues in and outside Europe and
Central Asia.

Japan is proud to be the OSCE's oldest partner.
Since 1992, we have deepened dialogue and cooperation
and have contributed both funding and personnel to the
Organization. Japan has sent monitoring missions to
a number of elections in the region and has been the
biggest donor to the OSCE's capacity-building project
for border control officials. We are pleased to play a
bridging role between Asia and Europe, including
through active participation in Asia Contact Group's
group meetings. We look forward to further cooperation
with the OSCE in this regard.

I cannot emphasize enough the importance of
building mutual trust and confidence in maintaining
peace and stability in the region and the international
community as a whole. Japan strongly hopes that
United Nations Member States and organizations in the
Chamber today will redouble their efforts to that end.

