Mr. Winid (Poland): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for convening today's debate, as well as for
Angola's constructive engagement in the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region.

Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union. We would like,
however, to provide some additional remarks from our
national perspective.

It is widely acknowledged that the Great Lakes
region possesses enormous, and largely underdeveloped,
potential for growth, which desperately needs to be
tapped in order to improve the livelihoods of the
peoples of the region. In that regard, Ijoin my colleague
from Morocco in welcoming today's launch of the
United Nations Great Lakes Strategic Framework for
2016-2017, which should contribute to that goal.

One of the issues Poland considers central to our
debate is how best to transition from the initial phase
of sustaining peace to long-term socioeconomic
development. Key challenges to development in the
Great Lakes region are well defined. Poland, with its
complicated history, can be a good example of how
to conduct a transformation - in our case, from a
foreign-imposed communist regime - to democracy,
a market economy and an open society. We know what
it means to lose independence, what it means to fight
for freedom and what it means to rebuild an economy.
We are sharing our experience through our special Go
Africa programme, which was developed as a bridge
between Poland and African continent.

Poland remains committed to support all United
Nations activities aimed at conflict prevention and the
promotion of dialogue instead of violence. The most
pressing concerns have to do with the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially in
the face of the difficulties following the scheduled
electoral process. At the same time, we welcome the
positive signals from the Central African Republic,
which proves that transition and conflict mitigation
can be attained with the consistent involvement of the
international community.

We support United Nations efforts with regard to
the protection of civilians in the region and beyond.
One example of such efforts was the establishemt of a
dedicated pillar within the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In the context of the protection of civilians,
Poland recognizes the great importance of the Kigali
Principles, adopted in 2015 and aimed at protecting the
most vulnerable. We intend to sign on to the Principles
in the near future.

We take note of the leading role of the pan-African
and regional organizations in conflict prevention and
pledge our full support. Regional organizations are
important stakeholders in United Nations activities
to address conflicts. It is therefore crucial to explore
ways to address issues of a regional dimension, as well
as modalities for cooperation and joint programming
between regional organization such as the African
Unioin, the East African Community, the Souther
African Development Community, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development.

In conclusion, let me stress that we favour the
approach of African solutions for African problems.
At the same time, we encourage our African
friends to increase their involvement in different
initiatives and activities within the African Peace and
Security Architecture.

