Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti,
which includes Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
France, Guatemala, Peru, the United States of America,
Uruguay and my country, Canada.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing today's important debate on the first day
of your presidency to discuss the first six months of
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH). We welcome the Secretary-General's
most recent report (S/2018/241). The Group would also
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
insightful and comprehensive briefing.

(spoke in French)

I would like to thank my colleague Ambassador
Denis Re'gis for his relevant and very useful comments
on behalf of the Haitian Government.

(spoke in English)

The Group of Friends reaffirms its solidarity with,
and commitment to, the people and the Government
of Haiti in their pursuit of stability, socioeconomic
development and democratic consolidation. Haiti
continues to face multiple challenges that require
the implementation of structural reforms. Progress
remains essential in many areas, including on human
rights, such as prolonged pre-trial detention and prison
overcrowding, sexual and gender-based violence,
greater participation of women in decision-making
processes, reform and strengthening of the justice
sector and enhancement of social services. While
much still remains to be done, nevertheless the
Group acknowledges and welcomes the important
and necessary steps that the Haitian Government has
already taken to achieve greater security, stability and
prosperity in Haiti.

The Group of Friends would like to stress
the importance of strengthening the fight against
corruption, putting an end to impunity and ensuring
accountability in Haiti. Strengthening the rule of law
and democratic institutions is key to achieving long-
term stability and prosperity in Haiti. In that regard,
the Group of Friends welcomes the commitment of the
United Nations to support the consolidation of previous
gains and peacebuilding goals, which is creating space
for the promotion of greater stability and sustainable
development in Haiti.

The Group of Friends recognizes the important
work undertaken by MINUJUSTH since its creation,
including assisting the Government of Haiti in further
developing the Haitian National Police, strengthening
rule-of-law institutions and engaging in human rights
monitoring, reporting and analysis. To succeed in the
long term, that work must continue in close coordination
with the Government and through national ownership.
The Group of Friends also encourages continued close
collaboration between MINUJUSTH and the United
Nations country team.

From my own personal observations on the ground
in Haiti, I would like to underscore that it is important
for MINUJUSTH to focus on strengthening the legal
infrastructure, as was stated by my colleague who
spoke on behalf of the European Union, so as to create
the right conditions for attracting investment to the
country. Haiti is in dire need of investment to boost
economic development. We know that investment will
be made only if the rule of law is improved. Given the
vital importance of the work it undertakes, the Group of
Friends encourages and recommends that the Security
Council support the extension of the mandate of the
Mission for another year at the same level of resources,
notably for its police component and with the intention
to review the need for renewal as necessary.

We take note of the draft resolution's request
to further refine the benchmarked exit strategy for
MINUJUSTH. The Group looks forward to hearing
more about the progress achieved in the related
benchmarks. We would like to stress the importance of
continued and close coordination and consultation with
the Government of Haiti on those efforts. We underline
the importance of carefully reviewing conditions on the
ground and the importance of adjusting the Mission's
presence accordingly to preserve the progress that Haiti
has achieved in collaboration with the United Nations
and the international community.

Finally, the Group of Friends of Haiti would like
to draw attention to the progress that has been made in
reducing the number of cases of cholera transmission
and cholera-related fatalities in Haiti. Although
promising, we encourage all Member States to continue
to support the efforts of the United Nations to combat
cholera in Haiti. The Group of Friends wishes to thank
the Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Josette Sheeran,
for her continued efforts to mobilize support for this
vital aspect of United Nations engagement in Haiti.

