Mr. Dogan (Croatia): Allow me at the outset to
thank the Polish presidency for convening today's
debate on such a pivotal topic. The protection of
civilians in armed conflict should remain at the very
core of the agenda of the United Nations. In that
regard, we welcome the action-oriented report by the
Secretary-General (S/2018/462), as well as increased
efforts by the Security Council towards making a real
difference on the ground.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union. I will make some
additional remarks in my national capacity.

In the First World War, the ratio between military
deaths and direct civilian deaths was 10 to one; in
the Second World War, the number of civilian deaths
surpassed the number of soldiers' lives lost on the
battlefield. That remains the case in almost every
war that has been fought since. War is becoming
increasingly urban in character, making the victims of
modern armed conflict much more likely to be civilians
than soldiers.

It is truly disheartening that, in some contemporary
armed conflicts, due to the disproportionate and
indiscriminate use of force in populated areas, more
than 90 per cent of casualties are civilians. Equally
alarming is the fact that we are witnessing an increasing
trend in the number of attacks against hospitals and
schools. Not only is that a clear and blatant breach of
international humanitarian law in times of conflict, but
it also leaves lasting consequences on societies, which
are unable to provide their children with safe spaces for
the fulfilment of their right to education.

We therefore value the opportunity given to us
today to deliver a joint message that this cannot be
tolerated any longer.

All parties to conflicts, including non-State actors,
must fully comply with international legal obligations
to protect civilians and to prevent human rights
violations and violations of international humanitarian
law and norms. Those who pay the highest price when
all standards of humanity are disrespected or violated
are those who are most vulnerable, such as children
and women.

Most important, there must be no impunity for
perpetrators of atrocities such as war crimes, crimes
against humanity, and genocide. No State can be
absolved of its primary responsibility to investigate and
hold perpetrators accountable, with a higher cause of
providing victims of atrocities with a sense of justice.
Justice for victims is, beyond doubt, an indispensable
precondition in achieving peace and reconciliation.

Furthermore, there is an inextricable link between
efforts to protect civilians and ensuring unhindered
humanitarian access. We are disturbed by practices of
limiting humanitarian access and the delivery of aid as
methods of war. We call on all States to ensure that
impartial humanitarian organizations face no obstacles
in fulfilling their mission, as well the safety and
security of those risking their lives to help others.

The dire humanitarian situation of refugees and
internally displaced persons in Iraq, Syria and their
neighbouring countries is of our utmost concern,
as is the situation of the Rohingya in Myanmar and
Bangladesh. As a country that has experienced conflict
on its own territory, we strongly advocate that all efforts
be made to ease their enormous plight.

Croatia is still in the process of establishing the
fate of 1,945 Croatian citizens and 150 citizens of other
neighbouring countries who remain missing since
the Homeland War in the 1990s. We view the issue of
missing persons in armed conflict primarily through a
humanitarian lens, and wish to convey support to the
four-year project of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, as also highlighted in the report of the
Secretary-General.

We must continue to place prevention at the
core of all our efforts to protect civilians and ensure
the integration of protection objectives at the core of
peacekeeping mission mandates. We must also bear in
mind the reform of the peace and security architecture
envisaged by the Secretary-General. In that respect,
Croatia ascribes great importance to, and is glad to
organize courses for, predeployment education and
training for both military and civilian personnel in
United Nations peacekeeping missions.

It is similarly of paramount importance to focus
on further integrating a gender perspective in United
Nations peacekeeping efforts, particularly in the
context of sexual and gender-based violence, which
continues to be widely used as a tactic of war and
torture. We therefore strongly support a more gender-
balanced composition of peacekeeping operations,
which would undoubtedly strengthen their reach and
impact on the ground.

In conclusion, we encourage the Security Council
to continue keeping the protection of civilians in
armed conflict high on its agenda. We must translate
our normative and policy progress into concrete action
to protect human life and reaffirm the principles
of humanity.

