Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First of all, I would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Danilo Tiirk for
his detailed and very comprehensive report. I would
also like to highly commend the personnel of the
United Nations Political Office (UNPOB) in
Bougainville and its head, Mr. Noel Sinclair, for the
outstanding work they have accomplished.

I would also like to congratulate the people of
Papua New Guinea and Bougainville for the
achievements reached thus far. The parties must be
aware now that they are fully responsible for the
process and thus have to increase their efforts in
implementing the provisions of the peace Agreement.

The peace process, in our view, is now at a
critical turning point. The mandate of the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville and of its
head, Ambassador Sinclair, will expire at the end of
this year. The departure of UNPOB, in our opinion, is a
logical next step on the way to a self-reliant
Bougainville. It is time to further increase the
ownership of the peace process by the people of
Bougainville and Papua New Guinea and to move the
focus from peace-building to post-conflict capacity-
building, ensuring the rule of law and social and
economic development.

Therefore, it is crucial that the remaining tasks of
peace-building, in particular the constitutional process
leading to the election of an autonomous Government
of Bougainville and the destruction of all collected
weapons, be completed without further delay. In that
context, we warmly welcome the agreement in
principle by former combatants to destroy their
weapons. We deeply wish that the tenor of the
agreement will be confirmed by the Peace Process
Consultative Committee meeting this week. In our
View, the weapons have to be destroyed immediately,
without any further conditions.

As the Government of Papua New Guinea pointed
out in its recent letter to the Secretary-General, the
progress made in the last half of this year has been
slower than expected. Therefore, tasks originally
designated to be fulfilled by UNPOB still remain to be
done. However, in our view this does not require the
extension of the mandate in its current form for another
year. We would rather welcome the presence of United
Nations personnel on a smaller scale and for a shorter
period of time. We therefore endorse and fully support
the compromise recommended by Assistant Secretary-
General Turk.

The peace process, we feel, is now largely self-
sustaining. An interim observer mission comprising
fewer United Nations personnel would be able to meet
the remaining demands. The parties to the peace
process have to understand that they have to move on
expeditiously and finalize the peace-building process
within the coming six months. Elections should follow
on as soon as possible.

In conclusion, I would like to commend the
United Nations specialized agencies and international
donor support and to stress the important role they play
in returning the region to normalcy and achieving
sustainable peace there. In that context, I would like to
reiterate that Germany will continue to contribute to
the further development of a functioning civil society
in Bougainville within the framework of the European
Union.

