Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We also
thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his valuable briefing.

Peru notes with regret the serious situation of
vulnerability that the civilian population is experiencing
in various areas throughout Syrian territory. That is
occurring despite the professionalism and sense of duty
of personnel from the United Nations and humanitarian
agencies, such as the Red Cross and the Red Crescent,
among others deployed in Syria. We are especially
alarmed by the increasing number of internally
displaced persons - 200,000 since 9 October - and
the precarious conditions that they have been facing,
which have been exacerbated by the harsh winter.

It is precisely the risks and suffering that Syrian
citizens face on a daily basis that make immediate
and unrestricted access to humanitarian assistance
imperative, through the efficient use of all available
modalities, including cross-border assistance. In that
regard, Peru highlights the sophistication and security
offered by the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism
for the Syrian Arab Republic at designated border
crossings, in terms of strictly controlling and verifying
humanitarian deliveries. Those guarantees, together
with the lack of real alternative means of accessing the
more than 4 million people served under that modality,
lead us to support the extension of the provisions outlined
in resolution 2165 (2014) and subsequent resolutions.

We hope that this crucial issue will be addressed in
the coming weeks from the perspective of alleviating
human suffering. To that end, we believe that the
Council must remain attentive to developments on
the ground with a view to maintaining an effective
ceasefire in the north-west of the country, while
promoting its extension throughout the Syrian territory.
We also believe that it is crucial to continue prioritizing
the sustained meeting of the basic needs ofthe civilians
who remain in Al-Hol and Rukban, as well as promoting
comprehensive solutions to ensure their voluntary,
dignified and safe return.

Accountability is essential to preserving
international legality, just as it is essential to the
prospects for sustainable peace in Syria. We therefore
welcome the start of the work of the board of inquiry
established by the Secretary-General, which we hope
will help to clarify the facts and responsibilities in the
attacks perpetrated on facilities covered by the system
to prevent attacks on humanitarian targets.

I conclude by reaffirming that only the achievement
of a political solution, on the basis of resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex),
will make it possible to overcome the humanitarian
disaster that continues to affect Syria, with full respect
for its sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity.

