Mr. Prendergast: Since the Secretary-General's
Special Adviser on Cyprus, Alvaro de Soto, last
briefed the Council on 2 April, a lot has happened. I do
not intend today to go into detail. Time is needed for
the dust to settle from the referendums of 24 April. The
full implications of the outcome of those referendums
may take a while to become apparent. Meanwhile,
Mr. de Soto, who left the island today, is paying
farewell calls in Ankara and Athens before returning to
New York over the weekend. He will brief the
Secretary-General next week, and the Secretary-
General, in turn, will report in writing to the Council in
due course.

Following the finalization of the Foundation
Agreement in Burgenstock on 31 March, the parties
returned to Cyprus and prepared for the conduct of
separate, simultaneous referendums on 24 April.

At the same time, with the active assistance of the
United Nations, the parties continued work in a number
of areas, including making technical corrigenda to the
plan, as well as finalizing work related to future federal
property, federal Government buildings, and the entire
structure of the proposed federal Government. Up until
the last day, these efforts continued. The authenticated
text of the plan was sent to the parties on 23 April, and
the original is deposited with the Secretary-General.

Also during April, the Secretary-General received
from the guarantors the commitments required of them
to authorize the submission of the plan to referendums,
and, subject to its approval and completion of their
internal ratification procedures, to sign into force the
Treaty contained in the plan.

On 7 April, Mr. Tassos Papadopoulos, the Greek
Cypriot leader, in an address to the nation, called on
Greek Cypriots to reject the Secretary-General's
plan - indeed, to "send a resounding no" to the Annan
plan, as he put it. The reasons Mr. Papadopoulos gave
were wide-ranging and far-reaching.

Mr. Papadopoulos' rejection of the plan meant
that he joined company with Mr. Rauf Denktash, who
also gave wide-ranging and far-reaching reasons to
reject the plan.

Paradoxically, each leader claimed that the plan
as finalized threatened the security and safety of his
people, and gave in to all the key demands of the other
side.

There were, however, a number of political
leaders on each side who stood in favour of reunifying
Cyprus in accordance with the Secretary-General's
plan. They included Mr. Mehmet Ali Talat, who
strongly advocated a "yes" vote, and who, together
with Mr. Serdar Denktash, led the Turkish Cypriot
negotiating team in Burgenstock and has done so since.
Another important party leader on the Turkish Cypriot
side, Mr. Mustafa Akinci, also strongly supported a
"yes" vote.

On the Greek Cypriot side, Mr. Papadopoulos'
two immediate predecessors - Mr. Glafcos Clerides
and Mr. George Vassiliou - and the leader of one of
the two largest political parties, Mr. Nicos
Anastasiades, strongly advocated acceptance of the
plan, as did a number of other important figures.
However, the other main political party, the
traditionally pro-solution AKEL party, led by
Mr. Dimitris Christofias, called for a postponement of
the referendum so as to give more time to explain the
plan to the people, and also to seek certain
clarifications and assurances. However, no request was
made by Mr. Papadopoulos, nor by any other formal
party to the process, for postponement. AKEL later
indicated that if certain unspecified security guarantees
were given by the Security Council in advance of the
referendum, this would enable AKEL to support the
plan.

The Council will recall that the Secretary-General
reported to it in writing on 16 April, asking that the
Council take decisions as foreseen in the plan,
including on security issues. While this procedure was
long foreseen, it took on added importance when
security and implementation issues came to the
forefront of public concern in the run-up to the vote.

In the event, following the outcome of
consideration of the matter by the Council, AKEL
called for a "soft no" vote, as they put it, but expressed
the hope that this would in due time translate into a
significant "yes" vote in a second referendum on the
plan.

Now is not the time to go into detail about what
information was or was not made available to the
people during the referendum campaign, or to elaborate
on unfounded concerns generated about job security
for public servants in the proposed new structures, or
to comment on the issue of access to the media by
international figures from the United Nations and the
European Union who were ready to explain the plan
and the commitments of the international community.
However, concerns on those points were raised directly
by Mr. De Soto with Mr. Papadopoulos. Members of
the Council will be aware that they have also been
raised in other forums.

In the event, the Foundation Agreement was not
approved in the 24 April referendums. In the Greek
Cypriot referendum, the result was 24.17 per cent of
votes to approve it, and 75.83 per cent of votes not to
do so. In the Turkish Cypriot referendum, the result
was 64.91 per cent of votes to approve it, and 35.09 per
cent not to. Since the plan required approval by each
side in the referendums, the Foundation Agreement
will not enter into force.

The Secretary-General respects the outcome of
the referenda. At the same time, he regrets that a
unique and historic opportunity to resolve the Cyprus
problem has been missed. It means that the objective of
the Secretary-General's efforts over the last four and a
half years, namely to reunite Cyprus in time for
accession to the European Union on 1 May, has not
been achieved.

The Secretary-General remains convinced that
the plan submitted represents a fair, viable and
carefully balanced compromise - one that meets the
minimum requirements of all concerned. The plan
conforms with the long-agreed parameters for a
solution and with the Security Council's vision for a
settlement. The Council will recall that, in resolution
1475 (2003), the Council gave its full support to the
Secretary-General's "carefully balanced plan" as a
"unique basis for further negotiations".

Mr. De Soto briefed the Council on 2 April on the
package of improvements made to the plan during the
finalization process, in accordance with the agreement
of 13 February. Contrary to claims made during the
campaign, changes were made to meet, to the extent
possible, the core concerns of both sides, and those
changes were within the parameters of the plan. It is
widely accepted by pro-solution forces on both sides
that the final version of the plan was significantly
improved for both the Greek Cypriot and the Turkish
Cypriot sides, while its overall balance was preserved.

In the light of the afore-mentioned, the result of
the referendum by the Greek Cypriot electorate, which
had been strongly encouraged by Mr. Papadopoulos,
raises serious questions. The Secretary-General hopes
that the Greek Cypriot community may nevertheless
arrive at a different View in the fullness of time, after a
profound and sober assessment of their decision and of
its potential consequences.

The Secretary-General applauds the Turkish
Cypriots, who approved the plan notwithstanding the
significant sacrifices that it entailed for many of them.
In arriving at their decision, the Turkish Cypriots were
no doubt encouraged by the strong leadership of
Mr. Talat and the clear and unequivocal backing for a
"yes" vote by the Government of Turkey. The
Secretary-General regrets that the Turkish Cypriots
will not equally enjoy the benefits of European Union
membership as of 1 May. He hopes that ways will be
found to ease the plight in which the people find
themselves through no fault of their own. He welcomes
recent steps by the European Union in that direction.

For his part, the Secretary-General has begun to
give careful thought to the implications of the result
and what it means for the future. While the result of
last Saturday's vote is disappointing, the United
Nations has nevertheless come closer than ever before
to resolving one of the most delicate and complex
conflicts on its agenda. That achievement must be
preserved, pending, one hopes, a fundamental re-
evaluation on the Greek Cypriot side.

I do not wish to pre-empt what conclusions the
Secretary-General might come to on the various issues.
Nor do I believe that he will want to rush the matter.
What matters, rather, is to arrive at a careful and
accurate assessment of the full implications for the
United Nations of last Saturday's outcome and to make
appropriate recommendations. As I have already
indicated, the Secretary-General will want to send a
detailed written report to the Security Council in due
course. It will then be for the Council, in turn, to
consider the implications of the point that has now
been reached.

