Mr. Holliday (United States of America):
Following your guidance, Sir, I will submit a fuller
statement to be circulated as a document of the
Council. I would like to highlight a few key points.

First, I would like to thank all three Chairpersons
for their presentations. Each Committee is engaged in
important work to fight terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. The fact that we are
holding this meeting in this format demonstrates
genuine progress towards enhanced coordination and
cooperation among the Committees and their staffs
a factor crucially important to achieving the Council's
counter-terrorism and counter-proliferation goals.

 

Regarding the Counter-Terrorism Committee, let
me begin by thanking Ambassador Denisov and his
staff for their able conduct of Committee business.
Under Ambassador Denisov's chairmanship and the
able stewardship of Ambassador Ruperez, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate
have made important progress towards enhancing
monitoring of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). The first site visit occurred and was a notable
success. Building on that success will require follow
up. We are confident that Chairperson Loj will
continue to lead us successfully in those efforts.

We look forward to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee's producing best-practices guidelines to
assist States in the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). We hope that the Security Council will soon be
able to endorse the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF) special recommendations on terrorist financing
and money-laundering as best practices, which States
should consider following in taking action against the
financing of terrorism.

That point relates also to the work of the 1267
Committee. Fundamentally, the best way the Counter-
Terrorism Committee can contribute to the struggle
against terrorism and help those on the front lines of
that fight is by helping States to implement resolution
1373 (2001) and by holding those that fail to do so, or
that will not do so, accountable.

Regarding the 1540 Committee, we commend
Chairman Motoc for his leadership and the work of his
delegation as well. The 1540 Committee plays an
important role in efforts to stop the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. Reporting to the
Committee in a timely and complete fashion is
important to its success. We and other States are ready
to help those Governments needing assistance in that
area.

Regarding the 1267 Committee, we thank
Chairman Mayoral for his leadership and would
highlight that the United States is devoting substantial
resources to combating terrorist financing. We again
emphasize the importance of the FATF best practices as
guides for all States in that endeavour. We encourage
States to submit names for inclusion on the
consolidated list and remind States that they need to
provide identifying and background information
demonstrating the association of individuals or entities
with Al-Qaida or the Taliban.

In conclusion, let me emphasize what we all
know. None of our collective counter-terrorism efforts
will succeed unless States make implementation of the
resolutions the high priority it must be. We need a
standard of accountability and compliance against
which the efforts of individual States can be measured.
Many States and organizations are ready and willing
provide assistance to States needing help, and none
should hesitate to ask for such help.

