Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Abou Moussa
for his comprehensive briefing and for presenting
the Secretary-General's report (S/2013/67l) on the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) and on the areas affected by
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA).

The complex political, security and humanitarian
crisis in the Central African Republic continues to have
an adverse impact on the stability and security of the
entire Central African subregion. We note with serious
concern the deteriorating situation in the country
due to increasing violence, widespread criminality,
the circulation of weapons and rising numbers of
refugees and internally displaced persons. The negative
impact of the crisis on the region and various regional
processes, including efforts to address the threat
posed by the Lord's Resistance Army, require the
swift implementation of all transitional arrangements
and the urgent restoration of the rule of law and the
reinstatement of constitutional order in the country.

We commend the mediation efforts ofthe Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) aimed
at solving the crisis, and the support that other regional
institutions have provided to ECCAS. Azerbaijan
welcomes the decision of the African Union Peace
and Security Council to authorize the deployment of
an African-led international support mission in the
Central African Republic, as well as resolution 2121
(2013), adopted by the Security Council last month.

The multifaceted challenges destabilizing the Sahel
region require a comprehensive and multidimensional
response at the national, regional and international
levels. The United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel creates a solid framework for addressing the
drivers of chronic instability in the region. Special
emphasis must be placed on enhancing coordination
and mobilizing resources to promote inclusive
economic growth in the Sahel. We therefore welcome
the Secretary-General's continuing engagement,
including through his recent mission to the region,
aimed at galvanizing international support for the
affected countries.

Piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea
represent another serious threat to the security and
economic development of the Central African subregion.
We fully subscribe to the Secretary-General's call for
implementing the decisions adopted at the Yaounde
Summit of Heads of State and Government on Maritime
Safety and Security on 24 and 25 June, which will pave
the way for strengthening subregional and interregional
cooperation in order to enhance maritime security in
the region.

We note with concern the growing menace that
poaching and illicit trading in ivory pose to sustainable
peace and stability in Central African States. Such
cross-border criminal activities, which have reached
alarming levels, are among the major sources of
financing for various transnational criminal networks
and armed groups, including the LRA. The military
and other radical measures taken by individual ECCAS
member States against wildlife traffickers should be
complemented by stronger regional collaboration and
international assistance.

We welcome the overall progress in combating the
Lord's Resistance Army and the decrease in its attacks,
owing to resolute action by LRA-affected countries and

to operations carried out by the African Union Regional
Task Force, as well as the continuing international donor
contributions. Nevertheless, the group remains a serious
threat and a source of insecurity in Central Africa. The
goal of totally eradicating that menace necessitates the
full and uninterrupted implementation of the United
Nations and African Union LRA-related initiatives.
The attention of the Governments concerned, and the
international donor assistance, should continue to focus
on strengthening individual and collective response
capacities, addressing long-term development needs,
providing humanitarian assistance to the affected areas
and promoting return and recovery programmes there.

I wish to conclude by expressing our full support
for UNOCA's activities and underlining its important
contribution to the advancement of peace and security in
Central Africa. Its increased cooperation with regional
and subregional arrangements is critical to tackling the
problems and challenges engulfing the region.

