Ms. Plassnik (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).

The signing of the Darfur peace agreement, last
Friday, represents a major step forward for Darfur, for
the Sudan and for the entire African continent.
Throughout the process, the European Union fully
supported the efforts of the African Union (EU). At the
sixth EU-Africa ministerial troika meeting, held
yesterday in Vienna, we agreed on a joint final
communique. We acknowledged that the Darfur peace
agreement paves the way for the rapid improvement of
the humanitarian and security situation on the ground,
including the protection of the civilian population, the
unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance and the
restoration of lasting peace and reconciliation in the
region. We expressed appreciation to the African
Union and the Nigerian facilitation for their efforts, as
well as to the international community for the support
it provided to the African Union throughout the
negotiation process.

I would like to focus on four aspects that the
European Union regards as crucial in connection with
the Darfur peace agreement that were broadly shared
during our talks in Vienna yesterday by the African
ministerial troika.

First, it is of the utmost importance for all parties
to the conflict to subscribe to the Darfur peace
agreement. We strongly urge the Justice and Equality
Movement and the Sudan Liberation Army/Movement
faction led by Mr. Abdul Wahid to sign the agreement
before the deadline of the next meeting of the AU
Peace and Security Council, which is currently
expected to be held on 15 May. The leaders of those
movements have a historic responsibility to contribute
to securing peace in Darfur. In the longer term, we also
look forward to the possible contribution of the
planned all-inclusive Darfur-Darfur dialogue in that
respect.

Secondly, as Mr. Minawi said at the signing
ceremony at Abuja last Friday, the goal of the Darfur
peace agreement is to establish peace on the ground,
not just on paper. The European Union reminds all
parties to the conflict of their responsibility to
implement all provisions of the Darfur peace
agreement in good faith and in full. In that context, I
would like to reiterate the EU's support for making full
use of the measures set out in resolution 1591 (2005)
against those who are impeding the peace process.
Thirdly, there is an urgent need to strengthen the
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) in order
to enable it to fully carry out the critical role assigned
to it in the implementation of the Darfur peace
agreement until such time as a United Nations force
can take over those functions. We fully support the
convening at an early date by the Secretary-General
and the AU of a pledging conference to support the
strengthened AMIS.

Fourthly, the European Union believes that the
agreement reached at Abuja opens the way for the
establishment of a United Nations peacekeeping
mission in Darfur. It is imperative that the necessary
preparatory steps now be undertaken without delay.
Chief among those is the dispatch of a joint United
Nations-AU assessment mission to the Darfur region,
in order to enable United Nations planners to get a
clear picture of planning needs. In that respect, we look
forward to the Secretary-General's detailed planning
proposals for a United Nations operation in Darfur, and
we encourage him to hold early consultations with
potential troop-contributing countries for such an
operation.

The European Union's support for the African
Union will not waver over the coming months. We
have recently decided to contribute another €50 million
from the African Peace Facility to AMIS, in addition to
the €l62 million already provided. We are also ready to
continue to provide technical and logistical support to
AMIS. Furthermore, the European Commission
recently pledged €100 million for a humanitarian and
initial recovery package. We are confident that other
partners will continue their strong support for the
Darfur peace process as well.

We must insist that all parties involved live up to
their commitments contained in the Darfur peace
agreement. The tragic events yesterday in the camp for
internally displaced persons at Kalma are just another
reminder of how dire the situation bas become, and
that the humanitarian and security situation needs to be
urgently improved. After the terrible years of war and
violence, we have a responsibility towards the people
of Darfur: to give them hope and to make peace in
Darfur a reality.

