The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Cuba, Israel, Lebanon, Pakistan,
Slovenia, the Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber

The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
19 March 2008 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2008/184 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council which will
be held on Tuesday, 25 March 2008, regarding
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and previous practice in
this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Russian): I welcome the
presence of the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, at this meeting and give him the
floor.


