Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to begin by thanking New Zealand for
having organized this meeting as part of the activities to
commemorate the shame and the pain of the twentieth
anniversary of the genocide in Srebrenica. We also
grateful for the briefings made by the Deputy Secretary-
General and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.

Chile condemns all crimes against humanity, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. As it is an
ethical imperative that such issues be brought to the
collective conscience and to acknowledge those cases
where the United Nations system has failed, we will be
unfailing in our participation in any act commemorating
mass violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law

Every society has the right to truth and memory.
Consequently, the international community must
reiterate and reaffirm its solidarity with all victims
and their families, while at the same time denouncing
crimes that can be classified as genocide - regardless
of the context and circumstances. The Council is
in no position to judge any State, but rather serve to
acknowledge grave facts, the consequences of which
still affect us in the present. We are also here to identify
concrete ways of contributing to the prevention and
eradication of crimes of this nature - through the
mechanisms afforded us by international law. The
Dayton Peace Accords mapped out a future in which all
the participants in this painful conflict could promote
tolerance, justice and reconciliation in order to continue
forging the necessary conditions for stability and peace,
conditions to which the Council is committed.

Ten years after recognizing the responsibility
to protect, we reiterate that States bear the primary
responsibility to investigate and prosecute crimes of
that nature. The international community must work
with and support Member States that - either on their
own volition or because of their inability - fail to meet
that obligation.

Firmly committed to the preventive nature of
the responsibility to protect, Chile endorsed and
participated in the fifth Annual Meeting of the Global
Network of Focal Points on the Responsibility to
protect, held in Madrid last June.
Whenever faced with the need to prevent such
crimes, it is essential that we remember the Secretary-
General's Rights Up Front initiative. We should also
look to the work of the Special Advisers on Prevention
Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect, as well
as make use of the framework of analysis for atrocity
crimes. Another core tool available to us are the
mechanisms and/or international tribunals, which
ensure accountability and the avoidance of impunity
and act as a deterrent tool or as a prevention of future
crimes. In that regard, we would like to point out the
key roles of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Court.

The Council must support the referral of situations
to the International Criminal Court by taking the
actions that would facilitate the successful carrying out
of investigations, without interfering in matters that are
the sole preserve of international justice. The Security
Council is in a position to make a contribution to
prevention through education, the strengthening of the
internal capacity of countries and the exchange of good
practices, which enhance early warning. In this vein,
we would like to reiterate our call upon those countries
that have the right of the veto to refrain from using it
in situations of crimes against humanity, war crimes,
genocide or ethnic cleansing. Otherwise, the Council is
left powerless to defend the values and principles that
are the most fundamental for humankind. We urge the
Security Council, in particular its permanent members,
to assume that responsibility.

Memory, truth and justice are core aspects of
non-repetition that must be in place to make a reality
of our - as yet unfulfilled - hope of "Never again"
and to make progress in processes of comprehensive
reconciliation and the fight against impunity.

