Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like to thank
you, Sir, for being here and presiding over our meeting.
We also express our gratitude for the presence of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands and
Ukraine. We also express our gratitude for the briefings
provided by the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo; the Chief Monitor
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
and the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Ms. Ursula Mueller.

We express our concern about the continued
tension in the region and call upon all parties to cease
hostilities immediately, abide by the ceasefire, allow
unconditional humanitarian access and facilitate full
and safe access for the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine so that it can fully complete its
monitoring tasks on the ground.

We see that, despite the joint statement on 2 March
by the Trilateral Contact Group where the parties
reaffirmed their full commitment to a sustainable
and unlimited ceasefire from 5 March 2018 onwards,
there was once again incompliance with that pledge.
In that regard, we call for the parties to abide by the
prohibition of the use of heavy weapons and to strictly
abide by resolution 2202 (2015), which endorses a
package of measures for the implementation of the
Minsk agreements. The Minsk agreements continue to
be the basis upon which the international community
has committed itself to seeking lasting peace in
eastern Ukraine. All of this is in line with the Security
Council press statement of31 January 2017 (SC/12700).
Likewise we call for them to abide by the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and to
fully abide by international humanitarian law.

We believe that compliance with the stipulations
of those agreements and the development of
confidence-building measures are crucial to consolidate
the efforts the parties must make to seek a political
outcome to the crisis. In that regard, we call upon the
Trilateral Contact Group and the Normandy quartet to
resume the diplomatic process towards implementing
the Minsk agreements.

Successive violations of the ceasefire have had a
devastating effect on the lives of millions of civilians.
According to statistics from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, approximately
4 million people have been affected by the crisis,
around 3 million of whom require humanitarian
assistance. Moreover, attacks on urban areas and
civilian infrastructure have affected 60 per cent of
those living along the so-called contact line, which is
457 kilometres long and which is reportedly rapidly
becoming one of the most mine-contaminated areas
in the world. Such circumstances are exacerbated by
harsh winter temperatures.

In that regard, we call on all parties to comply with
resolution 2365 (2017), on anti-mine action, which urges
all parties to armed conflicts to bring an immediate and
definitive end to the indiscriminate to use of explosive
devices in violation of international humanitarian law.
It also urges them to protect civilians, particularly
children, from the threat posed by landmines, explosive
remnants of war and improvised explosive devices.

Along the same lines, we call on the parties to
strictly adhere to their obligations on the protection
of civilians, including resolution 2286 (2016), in
compliance with international humanitarian law.
We strongly condemn any act of violence, attacks or
threats against civilians, hospitals, schools, health-care
facilities and water and energy infrastructure, as well
as attacks against humanitarian personnel, including
doctors, who are risking their lives to help civilians.

Furthermore, we commend the high-level meeting
between the leaders of Russia and France on 24 May,
where it was agreed to re-establish the joint working
groups. We also applaud the meeting held between the
leaders of Russia and Germany on 16 May to continue
seeking a peaceful resolution to the conflict. Likewise,
we firmly support the endeavours of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission, which is conducting important
work in difficult circumstances. We encourage it to
continue with its monitoring activities.

With regard to the possibility of creating a
peacekeeping mission in eastern Ukraine, we believe it
is imperative for the Security Council to remain united
when establishing its mandate, if such a deployment
were considered appropriate.

Finally, I wish to state that there can be no military
solution to this conflict. The international community
and the Council must make every effort to achieve a
lasting peace, which will, in the long term, be beneficial
for the region. Above all, it must be the parties who
resolve their differences with the assistance of their
regional organizations.

