Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to congratulate Minister Jose' Manuel Garcia Margallo
on his delegation's assumption of the presidency during
this month of October. We are confident that the work
of the Council will be successful in this period of
escalating developments that are having a serious and
negative effect on the Middle East.

Since the beginning of this month, the situation in
holy Jerusalem, in the occupied Palestinian territories,
particularly aound the Al-Aqsa Mosque and Haram
Al-Sharif, has deteriorated quickly and is threatening
to worsen. After decades of occupation and suffering
and the frustration of their hopes to establish an
independent Palestinian State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital, the Palestinian people find themselves in a
painful situation. They are still under Israeli occupation
and have to deal with the shortsighted security policies
of the longest occupation in history, with no prospects
for a decent life in the near future. Statistics indicate
that the unemployment rate among the young people
in Jerusalem is approximately 68 per cent, and 44,000
housing units are in danger of collapsing.

In addition to the violence committed by the
settlers and their attacks on the dignity and physical
safety of the Palestinian people and the confiscation of
Palestinian land, particularly the holy sites, which are
extremely important to more than 1 billion Muslims
around the world, there are ongoing attempts to change
the spatial and temporal character of all Islamic holy
sites. That is an extremely dangerous attack, not only
on the occupied Palestinian territories but also on the
Middle East as a whole. It kills hope and removes any
prospects for settling this issue.

Egypt strongly condemns all violence committed
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
in Jerusalem, by the Israeli side and its use of
incommensurate and oppressive means in dealing with
the situation, which has led to deaths and injuries,
including among children and women. It considers the
actions committed by the settlers against Palestinians
to be crimes that can only fuel feelings of hatred and
dissension. The situation requires serious consideration
by the Council. The international community as a
whole, and the Security Council in particular, are under
a serious obligation to take the necessary action as soon
as possible to address those threats to peace and security
in the Middle East. The Security Council should uphold
its responsibilities, in accordance with the Charter ofthe
United Nations, given the many important resolutions
that have not been adopted so far. The reasons for that
failure to act are known to all and include attempts by
certain parties to protect the Israeli occupation, even
though it is morally and politically unjustifiable. The
failure to act prevents the Palestinians from receiving
protection, and that threatens further escalation of
tensions in the near future.

In order to safeguard its credibility, the Security
Council must to adopt the necessary resolutions and
adopt a firm approach in applying principled diplomacy,
so as to reach the desired objective of settling the
Palestinian question. That should be carried out within
the context ofa peaceful process that takes into account
all important aspects, including the approaches to a
final solution, which have been under consideration for
more than two decades. There is no need to reinvent
the wheel, and the Council should tackle the situation
immediately, so that Israel does not have more time to
continue devouring Palestinian territories despite the
condemnation of the international community. Egypt
believes that the Palestinian people have the right to
establish an independent State with East Jerusalem as
its capital, and that is the only way to achieve stability
in the Middle East.

We therefore support all efforts, particularly
those of Jordan, aimed at addressing the Palestinian
question, in particular efforts to contain the current
crisis at the holy sites, stop the fighting and discourage
any provocative incitement to violence. We call upon
the Israeli Government to take history into account,
particularly in Jerusalem, and put an end to all attacks
on Islamic holy sites and give priority to resuming
negotiations, the freezing ofwhich has led to the current
serious escalation.

The Palestinian question is the most important issue
for the Arab world. Any additional procrastination will
further complicate the crisis; the time to deal with it is
now.

