Mrs. Sweeb (Suriname): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados,
Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad and
Tobago and Suriname.

At the outset, I welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Jorge Arreaza Montserrat, Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

The countries for which I speak continue to follow
closely the current unsatisfactory and increasingly
volatile situation in the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela. It is with grave concern that we also follow
the highly polarized and polarizing circumstances
surrounding Venezuela at this time, as well as the
deteriorating situation in that country. In all of this, we
are most concerned about, and motivated by, the plight
of the people of Venezuela.

The countries for which I speak do not choose one
side or the other. Instead, we choose principle 4 the
principle that led to the founding of the United Nations
and the inclusion, in the Charter of the United Nations,
of Article 2, paragraph 4, which calls for Member
States to refrain from the threat or use of force. That
principle gave rise to Article 21 of the Charter of the
Organization of American States, which recognizes
territorial inviolability and the principles of human
rights, international law, the rule of law, the sanctity
of national sovereignty and the pivotal principles of the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the pursuit ofpeace,
dialogue and compromise to ensure the preservation of
the dignity and worth of the human person.

Those principles form the root of
multilateralism - indeed the very foundation upon
which the United Nations was built. Today we reaffirm
our adherence to those principles. Also critical for us
is the maintenance of the area of the Caribbean and its
wider regions as a zone of peace. We remain steadfast
in our view that economic strangulation and military
intervention not only run counter to those principles
but will also exacerbate the already great suffering of
the people of Venezuela.

It is our position that there must be a political
solution that is crafted and owned by Venezuelans
themselves and their leaders. We support and call for
a pathway to peace - forged not by threats but by
dialogue, not by escalating tensions but by cooling
them down, not by marksmanship but by mediation
and not by the suffocation of sanctions but by the tools
of diplomacy.

Those of us who wish for the peace of Venezuela
and the prosperity of its people must actively encourage
dialogue in which both sides sit, talk and listen so that
common ground on which they can move forward may
be found. It is in pursuit of that broad objective that our
heads of Government have offered their good offices
to facilitate dialogue among all parties with a view to
creating apeaceful resolution to the deepening deadlock.

Our countries fully support and endorse the
Montevideo Mechanism, which has four main phases.

The first phase, the dialogue phase, creates
conditions for direct contact among the actors involved
in an environment of security.

The second phase is the negotiations phase,
which provides a strategic presentation of the results
of the dialogue phase, as well as opportunities for the
relaxation of positions, finding common ground and the
identification of potential agreement.

The third phase is the commitments phase,
which fosters the construction of, and subscription
to, agreements that are based on the results of the
negotiations phase.

Finally, the implementation phase sees the
materialization of the commitments assumed in the
commitments phase, with international support.

Four distinguished citizens of recognized
international experience and competence from Latin
America and the Caribbean have been identified for that
purpose. They will act as honest brokers and assist in
actualizing the Montevideo Mechanism by supporting
attempts to bring the contending parties to the table of
dialogue and diplomacy. We urge all parties, inside and
outside Venezuela, to give the Mechanism the time and
space it needs to work for the benefit of the well-being
of the people of that country.

From the painful experience of history, both
ancient and recent, the United Nations knows the
high and awful price of military intervention and the
scourge of war. Ancient and recent history have also
taught us that peace and prosperity are indivisible. The
people of Venezuela have already suffered enough.
They deserve to live in peace. They deserve a future
that offers prosperity. We urge all sides, difficult and
complex though it may be, to enter into a constructive
dialogue and work together to build a pathway to peace
for the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

I would now like to make a few remarks in my
national capacity.

First, we would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.

The Government of Suriname follows with
increasing concern the situation regarding the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. Reports of humanitarian aid
efforts aggressively being carried out at the Venezuelan
border, while stability and tranquillity seem to remain
in that country, are particularly alarming, as such
actions undermine the principles of independence,
impartiality, neutrality and consent, which should
govern all humanitarian operations.

Suriname restates its strong commitment to the
principles of international law as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as in our own
Constitution. Suriname therefore denounces all acts of
aggression that violate those principles.

Given that international concern should first and
foremost be directed to the welfare of the Venezuelan
people, my delegation rejects the politicization of
humanitarian aid offered without the consent of the
legitimate Government of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.

Suriname reiterates its call for meaningful and
inclusive dialogue, such as the Montevideo Mechanism,
as the only way to reach a peaceful and lasting solution
to the internal conflict that has arisen in the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. We again implore all the parties
concerned to engage in such a dialogue in order to
secure and sustain our region, Latin America and the
Caribbean, as a zone of peace.

