Mr. Tiirk: At the last briefing, on 6 August 2003,
the Council was informed of the completion of stage II
of weapons disposal in Bougainville. As a result, the
Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA) and the
Bougainville Resistance Force (BRF) put more than
1,900 pieces of weapons into 16 containers and 68
trunks, each secured by two locks, with one key held
by the relevant commander and the other by the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB),
pending a final decision on the final fate of these
weapons. The achievement of this important
benchmark allowed the national Government to enact
the constitutional amendment and the Organic Law on
Peace-Building in Bougainville. This also expedited
consultations among the parties on the making of a
Bougainville constitution, the delegation of police
powers and functions to the Bougainville Interim
Provincial Government, and other arrangements needed
to be put in place prior to elections for a Bougainville
autonomous government. The completion of stage II
moved the parties closer to making a decision on the
final fate of the contained weapons, that is stage III of
weapons disposal.

Today we are happy to report progress in most of
the aforementioned areas, and I wish to update the
Security Council on recent developments.

I would like to start with the constitutional
process. In the wake of quite harsh criticism of the
delays caused by the Papua New Guinea Attorney-
General, the Attorney-General finally presented in
October his long-awaited comments to the national
Government on the second draft of the Bougainville
constitution. Officials of the two sides are currently
engaged in resolving their differences relating to
consistency between the second draft of the
Bougainville constitution and the Papua New Guinea
constitution. On 5 December, the National Executive
Council - the cabinet of the Papua New Guinea
Government - reaffirmed its firm commitment to
honour the letter and the spirit of the Bougainville
Peace Agreement and to implement the corresponding
laws. It is expected that in the very near future the
Papua New Guinea Government will provide to the
Bougainvillean leaders its comments on the second
draft of the constitution.

After overcoming the remaining constitutional
differences, the way will be cleared for the
Bougainvilleans to pursue the task of developing the
third and final draft of the constitution. It is expected
that the Bougainville constitution could be officially
adopted around February or March 2004 and endorsed
by the national Government by July or August 2004.
Immediately after that, the constitution would enter
into force. Following the Government's endorsement of
the constitution, it is estimated that six months would
be needed to complete preparations for elections.
I would like now to move to the question of
weapons disposal and report on the joint position on
stage III of weapons disposal by the Bougainville
Revolutionary Army and the Bougainville Resistance
Force.

At their inter-factional meeting held on 30
November 2003 at Nissan Island in Bougainville, the
Bougainville Revolutionary Army and the Bougainville
Resistance Force adopted a resolution which declared
that the final fate of the contained weapons should be
their destruction. According to that resolution, the
destruction should take place "as soon as the essential
components of the peace process have been finalized".
The components or conditions include the coming into
force of the Bougainville constitution, the resolution of
outstanding issues with the Me'ekamui Defence Force
(MDF) and reconciliation between MDF, and BRA and
BRF, the two Bougainvillean armed factions. The
achievement by BRA and BRF of a unified position on
weapons destruction bodes well for the next meeting of
the Peace Process Consultative Committee, on 16 and
17 December 2003. At that meeting, the Papua New
Guinea Government and the Bougainville leaders are
expected to meet or modify some of the conditions
enunciated by the Bougainville factions, thereby
facilitating the adoption of the stage III decision on the
final fate of the weapons.

In accordance with the Peace Agreement, a
decision on the final fate of the contained weapons -
as I said, about 1,900 pieces of weapons - should be
made before 21 December 2003. Since the national
Government favours destruction, it is not expected that
there would be disagreement on points of substance.
Where implementation of the eventual decision is
concerned, UNPOB has prepared, for the benefit of the
parties, a statement of the administrative and technical
issues that need to be addressed before that process of
destruction can begin. Those factors are expected to
have an impact on the timing and implementation of
the decision.

Nevertheless, despite the need for consultations
on this matter among all the parties, the way is now
cleared for those individuals, or entire districts, that
wish to do so, to begin destroying weapons at their
discretion. However, the destruction of the bulk of the
contained weapons seems unlikely to take place until
next year. In that connection, the United Nations
Political Office is grateful for the offers of technical
support pledged by regional partners for facilitating the
destruction process. The BRA/BRF weapons-related
decision is an important first step in the process of
creating a weapons-free Bougainville, and in fostering
the kind of climate which the Peace Agreement
contemplates for the holding of elections.

I would like now to brief the Council on the issue
of delegation of police powers. The process of creating
the climate which is necessary for the holding of
elections is reinforced by police-related developments
which will enable Bougainvilleans to take legal control
over law and justice. The National Executive Council
decided to delegate police powers and functions to the
Bougainville Interim Provincial Government. The
formal handover ceremony is expected to take place in
Buka in the coming days: on 16 or 17 December 2003.
Meanwhile, arrangements are being finalized for
further strengthening the law and justice capacity of
Bougainville through the deployment of 30
Bougainvillean police from the mainland and the
recruitment among Bougainvilleans of the first 50 of
100 cadets for police training.

I would like to say a few words about the so-
called "no go zone". While some progress has been
achieved in the area controlled by Francis Ona, he
continues to refuse to contain the weapons of the
Me'ekamui Defence Force. His position on this issue
could have an impact on the pace and timing of the
implementation of the BRA/BRF decision to destroy
their weapons. The supporters of Francis Ona still
maintain roadblocks that prevent the delivery of
Government services and development assistance to the
so-called no-go zone. We believe that the
Bougainvilleans will be able to reconcile their
differences on this matter. It is a process that will take
some time. Meanwhile, the United Nations should
stand ready to provide its good offices with respect to
the initiatives in this area.

Now I would like to briefly refer to the
outstanding issues of the peace process. The expected
decision on the final fate of the contained weapons
within the stage III framework should justify the
termination of UNPOB's current mandate, which
expires on 31 December 2003. Its termination would
also comply with the Council's decision last year on
the matter.

The United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB) is mindful of the date set by
the Council for its closure and withdrawal. However,
by 31 December 2003, the peace process will not have
reached its logical and complete conclusion, that is, the
establishment of an autonomous government. That is
why we share the view of the Papua New Guinea
Government, as expressed in the letter of the Foreign
Minister Rabbie Namaliu, dated 11 December 2003,
addressed to the Secretary-General, and of the
Bougainville parties in general, that a United Nations
political presence in Bougainville is still required. At
the same time, we are mindful of the need expressed by
the Council to not keep the United Nations mandate in
Bougainville open-ended and of the need to tie this
mandate to specific benchmarks.

We fully appreciate the support of the Council for
the Secretary-General's recommendations in the past to
extend the Bougainville mandate without major
staffing or budget modification. This time, we believe
that the maturity of the peace process and the limited
scope of the tasks that remain to be completed warrant
a significant down-sizing of the United Nations office
in Bougainville. We strongly believe that this could
send a very potent message of encouragement to the
parties and support for the Bougainvilleans to
increasingly take over the handling of their own affairs.

Given the withdrawal by the end of the year of
the Bougainville Transitional Team comprising
personnel from Australia, New Zealand, Fiji and
Vanuatu, a continued political presence by the United
Nations would also contribute to building confidence
among the parties in the peace process and
consolidating the considerable investment that the
Organization and the international community have
made to the process. It would give the autonomous
government that will be established a fair chance of
starting out in an environment that provides a
reasonable prospect for the continued strengthening of
peace, security and stability on the island.

On this basis, we are proposing a new mission. In
light of the above, the Secretariat is of the view that a
successor to UNPOB, a United Nations observer
mission in Bougainville (UNOMB), should be set up in
order to carry out the following functions: first,
chairing of the Peace Process Consultative Committee;
secondly, reporting on security and the subsequent
destruction of the contained weapons; thirdly,
monitoring the constitutional process leading to the
adoption of the Bougainville constitution; fourthly,
verifying and certifying substantial compliance by the
parties with the weapons disposal plan, thereby making
it conducive to holding elections; and fifthly,
performing other good offices as appropriate or when
requested to do so by the parties.

Since the observer mission is expected to play a
more limited role in the ongoing peace process, we
suggest that UNPOB's substantive staff be reduced by
50 per cent. Currently, UNPOB comprises a head of
mission, two political advisers, one military advisor
and two support staff. The proposed downsized
successor to UNPOB would comprise a head of
mission, one political advisor and two support staff.
The new staffing structure and modified mandate are
expected to result in substantial savings.

In addition, the mission would continue to work
in close cooperation with the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and other United
Nations bodies on practical aspects of peace-building
in Bougainville. However, it should preserve its
independent status, since the mission's mandate would
have a clearly defined political character. Meanwhile,
the Department of Political Affairs has already started
consultations with the UNDP office in Port Moresby
regarding the sharing of office space in both Buka and
Arawa. If successful, it could further reduce the
operational cost of the new office. In parallel, UNDP is
working on the second phase of its rehabilitation
programme for Bougainville, which would include
assistance in agriculture, capacity-building and other
areas.

In conclusion, I would like to express our hope
that the Council will support the recommendations of
the Secretary-General regarding the establishment of
UNOMB for a period of six months, starting on 1
January 2004. Should the Secretary-General's
recommendations be endorsed, the Secretariat will
continue to report to the Council on this matter in the
first half of next year.

