Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
The French delegation supported the draft resolution that
has just been put to the vote. This resolution will enable the
Secretary-General to create, with the agreement of the
Rwandan authorities, a political office that will succeed the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UN AMIR),
whose mandate is ending today.

France would like above all to pay tribute to those
who have served the Organization within this operation,
which lent valuable assistance to the Rwandan Government
in its task of reconstruction and rehabilitation of the
country. We salute those who lost their lives in the service
of the United Nations in Rwanda.

Since the tragic events of 1994, Rwanda, after a long
period of unrest, seems gradually to have regained calm and
stability, as testified to by the Secretary-General in his last
report. We welcome this development.

Of course, much remains to be done. National
reconciliation is still essential. We noted with particular
interest the repeated references made by the representative
of Rwanda to this urgent need for national reconciliation.
This is a crucial effort, for we believe that Rwanda will
know peace and stability only when it has found a way of
involving in the life of the country all the Rwandans who
were devastated by the events of 1994.

In this spirit, the refugee question must be resolved as
soon as possible. A country cannot look to the future as
long as a quarter of its population is living on its borders,
in camps where some are plotting revenge. The Rwandan
Government must convince those who could return home
to do so, and ensure that they have the security they
expect.

It is urgent that the war criminals be brought before
the International Tribunal. Thousands of men and women
are now in prison, and the suspicions surrounding them
must be checked. Sentencing the perpetrators of genocide
should make it possible to exonerate many of them.
To carry out all these tasks, the Government of
Rwanda wanted the United Nations to maintain only a
political office there. We would have preferred,
naturally - as the Secretary-General outlined in his
report (S/ 1996/ 149) - that these tasks should continue to
be entrusted to UNAMIR, as we feel that the United
Nations operation still had a useful role to play in
Rwanda. Through its presence, it could have contributed
to accelerating further the return of refugees, a task which
has seemed more important with every passing month.

The presence of a political office in Rwanda,
however, will enable the United Nations to continue to
give assistance to the Government of Rwanda in the areas
which we have just mentioned, for the Government of
Rwanda will have to go on building up its efforts.
National reconciliation in Rwanda implies dialogue with
Rwandans outside the country who wish to return,
although not, of course, with the perpetrators of genocide.
However, there will be no real security in the region
either unless all the humanitarian and political problems
of the region find an overall solution.

We had this fact in mind when we welcomed the
meeting in Cairo of the Heads of State of the countries in
the region. We are pleased that the Tunis meeting
involved the United Nations as an observer. We continue,
for our part, to feel that a Conference on Peace, Security
and Development in the Great Lakes Region, under the
auspices of the United Nations and in cooperation with
the Organization of African Unity and bringing together
the countries of central Africa and donor countries, would
be useful. We hope that this will be the outcome from the
negotiations of the group of Five at Tunis.

