Mr. Motoc (Romania): My delegation, too,
commends Chairman Volcker and his team for the
impressive work carried out in record time to review
the management of the oil-for-food programme, the
most complex humanitarian programme ever entrusted
to and managed by the United Nations.

In April 2004, the Council proceeded to adopt
resolution 1538 (2004), expressing support for the
Secretary-General's initiative to appoint this panel. On
the one hand, we were guided at that time by what we
perceived to be a common interest of us all: to achieve
maximum clarity and to shed light on delegations'
concerns related to the management of the oil-for-food
programme. On the other hand, we trusted that the
outstanding credentials of Mr. Volcker and his
colleagues would ensure the high standards of
impartiality, independence and professionalism that
one would expect from that truly exceptional inquiry.

We have read the executive summary of the
massive report and we have noted that the overall
investigation has come to "unambiguous conclusions".
We cannot be expected, however, to have become fully
acquainted with the findings of the final report, the
grounds for those findings and, least of all, the entire
range of political, legal and organizational implications
of those findings. I will therefore make only a couple
of preliminary points based on aspects that appear to be
manifest already at this early juncture.

First, as highlighted in the previous interim
reports, several key factors combined to produce
shortcomings and failures in the management of the
oil-for-food programme: the primary role of the former
Iraqi regime in turning the programme to its own
advantage; the endemic corruption prevailing on the
ground; the absence of an adequate checks, controls
and auditing mechanism within the United Nations
system; individual acts of corruption and malfeasance
within the Secretariat; and the imperfections of the
Security Council-imposed sanctions, as well as their
uneven implementation by Member States. However,
we should not overlook the fact that the programme did
achieve positive results in a difficult attempt to
reconcile and balance tough sanctions with the needed
supply of humanitarian goods for the Iraqi people.

Secondly, the final report indicates that the
Organization and the Secretariat "were simply not fit to
meet the truly extraordinary challenges presented by
the oil-for-food programme or even programmes of
much lesser scope".

Thirdly, the inquiry has, in our view, held the
Organization to very high and egregious standards of
accountability. Of course, we cannot settle for anything
less for an Organization that is expected to be a beacon
of our joint endeavours in the world. We cannot, on the
other hand, be unfair and overlook the very complex
context in which the reported failures occurred, just as
we cannot overlook the unprecedented nature and
magnitude of the oil-for-food programme.

The findings of the Inquiry Committee signal
once again the urgent need for United Nations reform
to embrace the need to establish new organizational
ethics and standards within the Organization. Although
preliminary, the look we are now taking at the report
before us conveys a strong argument for keeping up the
momentum for United Nations reform, including with
respect to the issue of the Organization's internal
management. It is true that that is not within the sole
purview of the Security Council, and it is up to the
United Nations system as a whole to draw upon the
findings of the Volcker report.

The findings do, however, have evident
implications for the future undertakings - both
political and operational - of this important body. My
delegation is prepared to further pursue the
examination of the full range of implications deriving
from the important document now in our hands. In
doing that, we feel bound to bear in mind a very
precise definition of what the Security Council stands
for within the United Nations system and of its
responsibilities and connections with regard to both the
oil-for-food programme and the investigation just
concluded.

