The Secretary-General: At last month's summit,
world leaders supported a stronger relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
as envisaged in Chapter VIII of the Charter. We need
only look at the reality of contemporary peace
operations to see why.

Over the last decade, there has been a dramatic
growth in the range of partnerships between regional
organizations and the United Nations in support of
countries emerging from conflict. In peacekeeping,
those partnerships have taken many different forms.

There have been transitions from regional
operations to United Nations operations - as we saw
in Liberia with the Economic Community of West
African States - and from United Nations operations
to regional ones, as we saw in Bosnia and Herzegovina
with the European Union (EU).

The United Nations and regional partners have
coordinated separate missions side by side, as with the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization in Afghanistan and
Kosovo. In Kosovo, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the EU were also included
as part of the structures of the United Nations Mission
in Kosovo.

Regional organizations have provided support
within the context of a United Nations-led mission, as
with the Organization of American States engagement
in Haiti.

Regional operations have provided bridging
support until United Nations peacekeepers received
reinforcement, as we saw with the EU operation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2003.

And finally, as in Darfur recently, the United
Nations has provided support to a regional operation,
in that case deployed by the African Union (AU).

The same trends are evident in our peacemaking
operations and efforts. On important occasions, the
United Nations has provided critical support to
regional processes, as in Sudan, where the United
Nations assisted the effort, led by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, that
secured the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, and is
now supporting the AU-led efforts on Darfur. On other
occasions, regional organizations have provided Vital
political and technical support to United Nations
efforts, as we saw with the wide-ranging EU support
for the recent United Nations peacemaking effort in
Cyprus.

In short, we are increasingly drawing on the
resources and legitimacy of a network of multilateral
mechanisms - regional and global - to provide
collective responses to the peace and security
challenges of today.

That is why the Security Council has stressed the
need to increase collaboration between the United
Nations and regional organizations and has established
the practice of meeting with them annually. To support
those efforts, the high-level meetings between the
United Nations Secretariat and regional organizations
have now also been made an annual event, and a
Standing Committee has been set up to maintain
strategic direction and offer broad guidance on action
at the working level. The world summit gave new
backing to those efforts.

The task now and the task ahead of us is to make
sure that our cooperation mechanisms work as well as
possible. They must be effective, efficient and
mutually reinforcing. They must be flexible and
responsive to our rapidly changing and integrating
world, and they must be consistent with the Charter
and advance its principles and purposes. I hope we can
make progress in four broad areas.

The first is the need to strengthen capacity. The
demands for peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are high and seem likely to remain so for
the foreseeable future. Increased regional activity,
within the framework of the Security Council's
primary responsibility for international peace and
security, will be an important component of improved
international responses to conflict.

This is particularly true in Africa. We in the
Secretariat see our partnership with the African Union
in peacekeeping as a strategic priority, and I welcome
the commitment made at the world summit to support a
10-year programme to strengthen the capacity of the
African Union. We now look forward to an open and
productive dialogue with the African Union and other
regional partners on how to implement this
programme.

Second, we should exploit our comparative
strengths. Each of us may have particular capacities in
responding swiftly or robustly, or in undertaking
activities that are resource intensive or require long-
term engagement. Let us make sure that we
complement each other, rather than compete with each
other. I hope that, through regular dialogue on our
specialized competencies, we will gain a clear picture
of who can bring what to the table. We should reflect
our understandings in formalized agreements, as
envisaged in the summit outcome document. Some of
these could be signed even at the operational level of
our respective organizations in order to move forward
pragmatically and maximize results.

Third, we should deal with conflict in a holistic
manner. We must focus not just on peacekeeping and
peacebuilding but also on conflict prevention and
resolution. The United Nations is looking to strengthen
its mediation capacities as envisaged in the summit
outcome document. And the stronger our capacity is,
the more we can assist non-United Nations mediators,
particularly partners in regional organizations. We
must also focus on the broader social and economic
components of peace, using the new Peacebuilding
Commission to draw together the contributions of
many actors, including regional organizations, in
support of common peacebuilding strategies.

Fourth, and most important, we should reinforce
a collective approach to security. The United Nations
partnerships with regional organizations must provide
the means to meet, rather than to avoid, our
responsibilities under the Charter to provide an
effective international response to violent conflict
wherever it occurs.

At times, a regional response may be the best way
to end conflict or build peace. But on other occasions,
the direct involvement of the United Nations, either
alone or with regional partners, may be Vital. When it
is, the Organization must be willing and able to act. In
that spirit, I warmly welcome the world summit's
recommendation that regional organizations consider
placing their conflict prevention and peacekeeping
capacities within the framework of the United Nations
Standby Arrangements System.

Likewise, the best-equipped troop contributors
should remain ready to deploy where needed around
the world, either through, or in support of, regional
organizations or directly through United Nations
peacekeeping. That would be a tangible demonstration
of our collective commitment to partnership.

May I conclude by thanking the Government of
Romania for the strong interest it has shown on this
issue during its tenure on the Council. I hope that the
torch of leadership will pass to another Council
member, so that we build on the momentum that has
been generated in promoting cooperation with regional
organizations in service of the peoples of the United
Nations.

