Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Let me thank
Ambassador Holmes for briefing us this morning. I
must say that the Under-Secretary-General has been
very courageous in shining light on areas of the world
that are facing great difficulty and we truly appreciate
that.

The region that Mr. Holmes visited is the one that
poses the biggest challenge at this stage for the
international community. Beginning with Somalia, we
are truly concerned about the situation in Somalia and
often worried, because it does not seem to be getting
any better. The Under-Secretary-General mentioned
that there are currently 230,000 internally displaced
persons (IDPs) who are dispersed along a 15 kilometre
stretch of road between Mogadishu and the town of
Afgooye and have been left to fend for themselves. For
that reason, we continue to hope that on another day
we will revisit the request for the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to speed up
their assessment of whether it would be possible to
deploy a peacekeeping operation to Somalia to assist
the people of Somalia. The briefing by the Under-
Secretary-General proves beyond a doubt that the
situation is not improving at all, thus the international
community cannot afford to leave the people of
Somalia to fend for themselves.

As the Under-Secretary-General said, the delivery
of humanitarian aid to people in inaccessible areas is
now proving even more difficult than it has been and
the continued weakness of the Transitional Federal
Government does not help that situation. We truly hope
that the Security Council will revisit the region of
Somalia and working together with the Secretary-
General, find a stronger solution.
07-62908
We are pleased that the Under-Secretary-General
again visited Darfur - another place that is a
challenge to the international community. My
delegation continues to underline that all of us truly
need to work together - the Government of the Sudan,
the African Union and the United Nations - in the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) as soon as
possible, because without UNAMID on the ground the
lives of the people in those camps is becoming more
precarious by the day.

We also need to deploy UNAMID in order to
address the safety of the humanitarian personnel, as the
humanitarian personnel are clearly now at the mercy of
the marauding rebels, who are hijacking cargo and
attacking the workers, who are there to assist the
people in the camps. We hope that with the deployment
of UNAMID we will then have a force on the ground
of sufficient strength that could begin not only to
protect the people in the camps, but also to protect all
of the people who are so important to the survival of
the people in the camps.

Once again, we appreciate Mr. Holmes coming
before us and we appreciate his ability to go to those
areas that are still in great need of help and especially
the fact that his briefing comes to us at Christmas time
when everybody is thinking about those who have less
than we do, and we very much appreciate his work.

