Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan Staffan de Mistura for introducing the
Secretary-General's report on that country (S/20ll/590).
South Africa also welcomes and appreciates the
participation at this debate of Mr. Zalmai Rassoul,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan.

At the outset, allow me, on behalf of my
delegation, to extend our sincere condolences to the
Afghan Government and people following the
assassination of Mr. Burhanuddin Rabbani, former
President of Afghanistan and Chair of the High Peace
Council. We join other members of the Council in
condemning that assassination in the strongest possible
terms - a malicious attack that is an unfortunate
setback to efforts aimed at political reconciliation.

We note that the report of the Secretary-General
paints a bleak picture, as violence has increased over
the past year. Although Afghanistan has begun its
journey to peace and stability, a number of challenges
remain. Those challenges, in our view, are not
insurmountable. With the committed assistance of the
international community, Afghanistan can finally chart
its own path through its own leadership in a process
that is Afghan-led and Afghan-owned.

On the political front, South Africa welcomes the
relatively positive developments that have taken place
over the past few months, especially the announcement
of the swearing in of the nine new members of the
lower house of the Afghan National Assembly. That, in
our view, lays the foundation for the stabilization of the
political process in Afghanistan. We are pleased to note
that the Afghan Government has committed itself to
resolving all outstanding issues within a legal and
political framework. South Africa continues to
welcome efforts to strengthen political outreach
activities. Political dialogue and reconciliation are
critical for the Afghan people and their Government.

The situation of children, youth and women
should continue to receive the highest attention during
this transition. South Africa commends the advocacy
work led by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) within civil society aimed at
involving women in decision-making structures. Our
view is that women have a critical role to play in the
political, economic and social development of the
country.

As we have stated previously, our delegation
continues to believe that there is an inextricable link
between development and security in Afghanistan. We
are pleased that the Afghan Government continues with
its commitment to address the socio-economic situation
facing the country. In that context, we encourage the
Government to increase its efforts aimed at improving
its institutional capacity to offer viable alternatives to
poppy cultivation and narcotics.

National ownership and leadership remain crucial
to political security and socio-economic progress in
Afghanistan. The international community should
continue its supportive role in the country's transition
from conflict to stability and prosperity. South Africa
therefore continues to support the presence and the role
of UNAMA in Afghanistan.

