Ms. Miguel (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines congratulates the
Dominican Republic, a member of our Caribbean
family, on raising this important discussion in the
Security Council

We would like to align ourselves with the statement
delivered by the representative of Barbados on behalf
of the Caribbean Community, and with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Belize, on behalf
of the Alliance of Small Island States.

We reaffirm that the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change is the primary body for
addressing climate change, while also recognizing that
we need a multi-pronged approach to fight it. Those
two ideas are not mutually exclusive. The dire need for
economy-wide carbon reduction makes climate change
an irrefutably political matter, and its effects make it
an existential matter of the highest order, it goes to the
very existence of our country.

In all of that, we must admit that some have far
more responsibility for those assaults on our shores
than others. As ironic as it is, those least responsible
suffer the most, for example, small island developing
States and the Sahel. In effect, major emitters that
fail to set and honour ambitious mitigation pledges
are committing a direct act of hostility against small
island developing States, and we ought to resist their
recklessness against our interests. We draw a direct,
causal connection between any such abdication and
the future death and destruction that island States
face as the result of increasingly frequent and intense
weather events.

The climate threat is unique, unprecedented and
urgent. Because ofthat, it is often difficult to deal with.
But that is no reason to sweep it under the rug. The rise
of climate change as the existential threat of our era has
not replaced the persistent peril of armed conflict across
the globe. The human suffering in Syria, Yemen and
Myanmar demands greater international attention and
action. Similarly, the potential threats to international
peace and security posed by tensions on the Korean
peninsula, among the Gulf States and in the State of
Palestine require persistent and prioritized diplomacy.
Moreover, the historical injustices done to Africa must
be made right as we navigate the myriad and complex
peace and security issues on the continent. However,
we must be careful not to present a false choice among
those issues. We have to deal with them all, no matter
how inconvenient climate-related security may be.

We raise our voice in this organ to call on carbon
emitters to make deep cuts to stop the causes of climate
change, and we echo the call to make the Security
Council more aware of, and more sensitive to, the
terrible consequences for international peace and
security. If we first recognize climate as a security
threat and then work in solidarity to protect all people
from it, we are on the right track. Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines would be honoured and humbled by the
opportunity to bring principled analysis and problem
solving to this issue in the Security Council and to
build bridges to that end.

