Mr. Omer (Somalia): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on New Zealand's stewardship of
the Security Council in the month of September. I am
grateful for this opportunity to brief the Council today.

There is a new dawn in Somalia. As I am speaking
here today, many aspirant parliamentarians are
returning to their constituencies to win over voters so
that they can represent them in the next Parliament.
Billboards and campaign material for the presidential
hopefuls are all over the city as the candidates seek to
win the hearts and minds of the Somali people ahead of
the election. That is a truly historic leap forward in terms
of democratization in Somalia, and clear evidence of
the spirit and values of democracy that are taking shape
in our country. It is Clear how much progress has been
made, and Somalis are justly proud of the steps they
have taken to establish institutions, lay the foundations
for an inclusive federal State and rebuild their country
from the ground up. And the direction is upwards. It
may not be as rapid or as smooth as we would like, but
Somalia is making progress.

Somalia faces the dual challenge of advancing
development and reform initiatives in a complex
environment. With the support of our brave national
security services and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), we are successfully fighting
a war against international terrorism. The threat is
indeed international, because today no country, no
matter how powerful, can insulate itself from terrorism.
Al-Shabaab, Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham, Boko Haram and others are a threat to all of us,
wherever we are, simply because we refuse to conform
to their futile, violent ideology. Terrorism is truly an
evil without purpose or geography and can be defeated
only in partnership across all sectors internationally.

Over the past four years, the Somali National
Army and AMISOM. have regained key towns and
cities. Today, Al-Shabaab controls less than 10 percent
of the country's territory. In recent months, many of
its key leaders have been eliminated and others have
defected, and their violent ideology is truly shunned by
the Somali people.

The Somali national forces and AMISOM. have
proved that Al- Shabaab is vulnerable and divided and
can be defeated through coordinated military action
time and again. Owing to the success of the joint
operations of the Somali National Army and AMISOM,
Al-Shabaab has turned to small-team asymmetric
warfare tactics to conduct higher-impact terror attacks
against soft targets in Somalia and, increasingly, in
neighbouring countries.

In response, our Government is working with
partners and neighbours to enhance security cooperation
so as to enable us to respond to the threat together and
swiftly. The Somali Federal Government and the Somali
people are grateful to the troop-contributing countries
within AMISOM. for their support in stabilizing our
nation. We fully recognize the great sacrifices that
their soldiers have made and continue to make in the
service of our country and our people's future. Their
courage and service will never be forgotten, and their
memories will always be honoured by us.

In the long term, it is fundamental that the Somali
national security forces be in a position to take over
the entire security responsibilities of Somalia and for
Somalis from AMISOM. This is the only way we can
truly achieve sustainable peace and development both
in Somalia and across the region.

In order to achieve this, there is agreement on and
full understanding of the importance of an inclusive
political agreement on the future of Somali security
arrangements and the urgency of building up effective
security-sector reform in Somalia, ahead of the agreed
AMISOM. drawdown in 2018.

The best evidence of our Government's
commitment to leading on our national security is that
the security forces training and integration process is
ongoing and the new policing model has been endorsed
by all stakeholders. In addition, we are ensuring that
our national security forces work closely alongside
AMISOM. to ensure that they put their training to
effective use and actively participate in liberating the
few remaining areas of the country held by Al-Shabaab
as soon as possible.

Furthermore, at the last National Leadership
Forum meeting last week, the national security policy
was endorsed. This will be our blueprint and guide to
ensuring a safer Somalia, region and world through
partnership and joint action. Last week's National
Leadership Forum underscored the importance of
protecting our electoral process from terrorist spoilers
in all areas where elections are scheduled to happen.

On this matter, it was also agreed, during the historic
twenty-eighth Extraordinary Summit of the Heads
of State and Government of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), held in Mogadishu
last week, which was attended by the Presidents of
Uganda and of Kenya, the Prime Minister of Ethiopia
and delegations from Djibouti, the Sudan and other
IGAD member States, that the Somali national security
forces and AMISOM. would work even more closely to
meet this need. While our commitment to defending our
country and taking full responsibility for our national
security is ironclad, there is still a need for further
training and mentoring for the national security forces
within a coordinated framework between the Somali
Federal Government and donors. In addition, there
is also a need to adequately equip our national forces
so that they can effectively respond to the AMISOM
drawdown in 2018. Therefore, the continuing financial
and technical assistance of valuable international
partners to the national security forces in a timely and
responsive manner is a must.

In this regard, we welcome the communique
of the special event for Somalia on security held in
London and co-hosted by Tobias Ellwood, the United
Kingdom Minister for the Middle East and Africa, and
Mike Penning, the Minister for the Armed Forces, on
7 September 2016, in which many of our partners were
also present and actively participated.

That being said, we recognize the concern that
delays in the electoral process raise for our partners,
and we are not blind to the need to demonstrate our
commitment to holding a credible, timely and inclusive
electoral process. I would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate the commitment of President Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud, the Federal Government of Somalia,
the National Leadership Forum and all political
stakeholders in Somalia to this process.

The Federal Government of Somalia has worked
tirelessly in the past four years to reduce key threats to
peace, security and stability in Somalia. I would like
to reassure the Security Council of the unwavering
commitment of the Federal Government to holding a
credible and inclusive electoral process in 2016. The
Somali people are excited by this positive move towards
democracy, and the different electoral commissions,
as well as the Somali people in general, are working
tirelessly on the implementation of the electoral
mechanism in line with the new agreed timelines.
We are fully engaged in working to ensure that more
Somalis than ever before can have a say in the future
governance of their country and that Somalia's positive
trajectory can be maintained.

This includes reserving 30 per cent of the seats in
the Upper and Lower Houses of Parliament for women,
as their representation and political participation is
central to our national progress. This is notjust rhetoric.

To ensure there is no further delay to the electoral
process, the presidents of the existing and emerging
federal member states will be expected to submit the
names of candidates for the Upper House of the Federal
Parliament by 5 October. While the parliamentary
elections will be held from 23 October to 10 November,
the presidential election will now take place on
30 November.

The election of speakers of both houses of
Parliament will be held on 23 November. The Federal
Indirect Electoral Implementation Team also announced
a breakthrough on the electoral venue for the Hiraan
and Middle Shabelle regions, following negotiations
with traditional elders representing the two regions.

The electoral oversight team also called for the
speedy deployment of the African Union Mission
and the Somalia troops to Galmudug, the capital of
Cadaado, to bolster the security of the electoral process
in that federal member state. The Federal Indirect
Electoral Implementation Team also signalled the need
for an immediate solution to the issue of Somaliland's
representation in the Upper House in order to ensure its
participation in this electoral process.

The transition from conflict to stability is a long-
term endeavour. The electoral process in 2016 is an
essential step in the transition towards a democratic and
stable Somalia, and we are grateful for the support of
our partners and the Security Council in implementing
the process. The Somali people are ready and waiting
for this process to be completed. The Somali leadership
is committed to doing so, and the only game in town
is the electoral process. While it has not happened
as quickly or gone as smoothly as we hoped, it will
happen, and it will happen within the new timeline we
have set out. 1 ask the Council to continue to support
us; in return, we will uphold our commitments to the

timeline in 2016 and forward to universal elections in
2020. We appreciate the Council's support.

