Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would like to express our
gratitude to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her excellent briefing
on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
with only six weeks remaining before the holding of
elections. We also wish to recognize and express
gratitude to Ms. Josephine Mbela of the Congolese
Association for Access to Justice for her briefing.

Having read and analysed resolution 2439 (2018),
concerning the recent outbreak of the Ebola virus, we
commend the efforts made by all humanitarian and
health personnel on the ground, including the World
Health Organization (WHO) and its partners in the
Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network, as
well as all other front-line agents involved in response
activities. In that regard, we commend the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for
supporting the efforts made by the Government, WHO
and other actors to respond to the Ebola outbreak amid
a complex environment.

In that regard, we also wish to commend the capacity
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for its leadership in responding to the Ebola
outbreak, and in particular for providing free health
care in the affected areas, as well as for the daily updates
on the status of the outbreak. We urge the members of
the Council and the international community in general
to increase their financial and humanitarian assistance
through reliable organizations in order to respond to
the urgent needs of the population.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reiterates that it
attaches the utmost importance to the events unfolding
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, given the
strong bonds of brotherhood and friendship that unite
us and given that we are both States members of the
same subregional institutions. We once again reiterate
that stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
crucial to the stability of the wider subregion, of which
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea is part. We value
the efforts deployed by the country to achieve stability
in the build-up to the triad of elections to be held in
the country on 23 December, namely, presidential,
legislative and provincial elections. That is a key aspect
for the future and definitive stabilization of the country.

In that regard, it is worth noting that considerable
progress has been made to date. Preparations are
advancing in line with the electoral calendar, including
the publication of the voting roll in accordance with
legislation, the casing of political tensions and dialogue
among all parties, particularly on the use of voting
machines. We are also pleased to note that, as indicated
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the Government has made a significant amount of
money available to the Independent National Electoral
Commission to guarantee the successful holding of the
upcoming elections.

It is for those reasons that we continue to
encourage the Government, the Electoral Commission,
the political parties, civil society and all national
stakeholders concerned to continue strengthening
the electoral process so that all citizens are able to
exercise their right to vote in the best conditions, as
well as to raise awareness among the population on
how to exercise that right to vote. It is important that
they continue working to peacefully carry out political
activities and do everything possible to ensure that the
23 December elections are credible, transparent and
inclusive and that they take place in an atmosphere of
peace, harmony and security, with the full and safe
participation of women. Compliance with the Saint-
Sylvestre agreement of 31 December 2016 is the best
guarantee for the satisfactory holding of the elections
and the subsequent peaceful transfer of power, which
are key aspects for the legitimacy of the authorities
that are elected and, above all, for the stability of the
country and the region.

The casing of political tensions, implementing the
recommendations of the International Organization
of la Francophonie, which we previously referred to,
and ensuring dialogue among all parties on the use
of voting machines are also important aspects. In
that regard, we welcome the meeting of the various
political stakeholders in the country that took place on
29 September.

One of the lessons learned from the Security
Council's most recent visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was that for the definitive and
resounding success of the upcoming elections and in
order for them to be a turning point for the Congolese
people, all possible post-election scenarios must be
clearly analysed and appropriate measures must be
implemented in order to guarantee the building and
consolidation oflasting peace in the country.

We reiterate our satisfaction at the public statement
made by President Joseph Kabila Kabange on 19 July
before a joint session of the National Assembly and the
Senate, in which the President reiterated his intention to
respect his country's Constitution and underscored that
his Government remained firm in its intention to fully
shoulder the responsibility to finance the presidential,
legislative and provincial elections, as well as his
intention not to run as a candidate in the upcoming
elections. Those gestures represent a legitimate exercise
of sovereignty and independence, illustrating President
Kabila's determination and commitment to his country.
The international community should continue to support
the Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the electoral process, while
respecting the principle of non-interference, as well as
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the country.

The security situation in the east of the country,
especially in Beni, must be closely monitored in
the days leading up to the elections, due to the
challenges that it poses. In that regard, we encourage
the Government to continue to implement measures
to address the security situation and the activities of
armed groups in various provinces, as well as to protect
civilians, with the support of MONUSCO. We also urge
all of the parties concerned to act responsibly so as to
promote social cohesion, especially during the electoral
and post-electoral period, and we call for the cessation
of hostilities on the part of the armed groups. We also
encourage the Congolese authorities to continue to fight
impunity to ensure that those responsible for crimes
and gross violations of human rights and humanitarian
law are brought to justice.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea strongly
condemns the pillaging and exploitation in conflict
zones and the transfer of raw materials to other regions,
actions that serve to underscore the double standards
observed during conflicts and, at times, explain the
reasons for them. Without a definitive solution to
that problem, the possibility of achieving a genuinely
successful outcome to it will decrease considerably.
The illegal exportation of the natural resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo generates
astronomical economic benefits that do not go to
benefit the Congolese people, but other actors instead.
It is therefore important to take steps to put an end to
that situation and, if necessary, impose sanctions on
those who do not comply with international standards
in that regard.

Equatorial Guinea strongly believes that
the assistance provided by various international
organizations, including the United Nations, in close
collaboration with the European Union, the African
Union, countries of the region, the Southern African
Development Community, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and the Economic
Community of Central African States, is essential to
facilitate political dialogue in the Democratic Republic
of Congo and throughout the region and in the quest
for a lasting solution to the political situation in that
country. To that same end, Equatorial Guinea would
like to echo the call made by the African Union Peace
and Security Council to establish a coordination
mechanism that includes all of the actors I mentioned,
with a view to ensuring effective and consistent support
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Equatorial
Guinea also calls for the guaranteed implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
signed on 24 February 2013 in Addis Ababa. We urge its
signatories and guarantors to take the necessary steps
and redouble efforts to ensure its full and effective
implementation. It is therefore crucial to neutralize the
armed groups operating in the east of the country.

Let me conclude by inviting all parties involved in the
process to continue along the path of internal inclusive
dialogue and avoid any violent acts that could lead to a

disruption of the process. We also take this opportunity
to spiritedly call on the international community to fully
support the Government, MONUSCO, the Electoral
Commission and other parties directly concerned in
the process to foster confidence-building measures so
as to ensure an environment that is conducive to the
holding of peaceful elections and the commitment to a
road map towards the peaceful transfer of power in an
environment of peace and national harmony.

