Mr. Christian (Ghana): We wish to join others in
thanking Mr. Jan Eliasson, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing and to take this
opportunity to congratulate him and his African Union
(AU) counterpart, Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, on
successfully convening the Darfur peace talks in Libya
last month in the face of serious obstacles. My
delegation is also grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his statement.

We were particularly pleased that, through the
firmness of the Special Envoys and their determination
to forge ahead, the meeting was not derailed by the

vicious attacks launched at a delicate stage in the
preparations by some armed elements against
peacekeepers of the African Union Mission in Sudan
(AMIS) at their base at Haskanita in Southern Darfur.
My delegation is anxious to learn the facts surrounding
that unfortunate incident - an incident that once again
underlined the urgent need for the parties to adhere
faithfully to their obligations under relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolutions 1591
(2005) and 1769 (2007).

Ghana looks forward to the next round of talks
and trusts that the progress made in Sirte, especially
the invaluable lessons learned, will serve as a road map
both for effective preparations and for the conduct of
the talks. In this connection, we commend the Special
Envoys for reaching out to grass-roots parties and
seeking to involve them directly in the talks.

That innovative approach has demonstrated that
the people could indeed be empowered to claim
ownership of the Darfur peace process and thereby
push their leaders along the path to lasting peace. It is
our hope that that lesson was not lost on those rebel
leaders who refused to attend the Sirte meeting,
contrary to the wishes and expectations of the
international community. All sides in the conflict must
understand that the ultimate goal of the Darfur peace
process is to secure the well-being of the people.

Therefore, no useful purpose can be served by
any more fragmentation of the rebel groups, whether
induced by their own internal dynamics or by external
factors. In the current circumstances, no one side holds
all the cards, and it is imperative for the Sudanese
people to rally around their shared interest in a united,
peaceful and prosperous country.

In spite of the setbacks to the Sirte talks, Ghana is
of the view that the meeting marked a significant step
forward in the peace process. The renewed momentum
for dialogue has been greatly strengthened by the
much-welcomed declaration of cessation of hostilities
by the Government of the Sudan. We commend the
Sudanese authorities for this bold decision and call on
the rebels to reciprocate the Government's gesture and
actively participate in the dialogue in order to address
the root causes of the conflict.

Admittedly, it will not be easy for the parties to
find common ground on the core issues of security,
power-sharing and wealth-sharing without the
willingness to compromise. On the other hand, we
cannot ignore the fact that at present the deteriorating
humanitarian situation is a matter of life and death for
millions of displaced persons. Therefore, we must work
relentlessly to ensure that there is an uninterrupted
flow of relief material to the needy and that steps are
taken to facilitate the safe return of all displaced
persons.

In the meantime, everything must be done to
preserve the cessation of hostilities announced by the
Government of the Sudan, through the timely
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). My delegation
welcomes the ongoing preparations towards that end.
At the same time, we are concerned that the process
appears to be falling behind schedule because some
key issues have still not been resolved. It is in the
interest of all concerned that UNAMID be deployed
without further delay, and we urge them to be mindful
of their obligations under resolution 1769 (2007).

In conclusion, my delegation believes that recent
developments have brought into sharp relief the
elements that are required, at this stage, to advance the
peace process on all fronts. It will become evident in
the coming months whether or not sufficient political
will exists to fuel the progress towards lasting peace
and stability in Darfur.

