Mr. Tiirk: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and other members of the Security
Council for the kind words of recognition addressed to
the Secretariat for its contribution. Let me also assure
the Council and Mr. Dahlgren that the Secretariat will
remain engaged in the Stockholm Process. There is, of
course, a fair amount of work to be done in the future,
and the Secretariat will try to do its best in that context.

We have taken due note of the various comments
that were made, and we will think about them and do
whatever is possible to improve the work of the
Secretariat with regard to our support for the sanctions
committees. We also took note of the recognition of the
need to strengthen the capacity of the Secretariat, and
obviously we would welcome any additional resources
that could be provided in order to make that
strengthened capacity a reality.

I would also like to make brief remarks regarding
one or two matters that were raised in the discussion.
Several speakers referred to the points that I made in
my introduction regarding the preventive effects of
sanctions and the need for that dimension to be further
explored. We certainly will further explore it. At this
point we would like to say that the work based on
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1455 (2003) has already
had an important preventive effect. Certainly, practice
in that context will provide important guidance for the
future.

The general points which were made today about
improved coordination were, of course, also highly
relevant in the context of prevention, because both the
patterns of violation and violators are often identical,
and that has a cumulative effect. On the other hand, the
cumulative effect of activities in the area of sanctions
can be preventive if they are properly organized,
coordinated and made effective.

We also took note of the point made in the
discussion that sometimes a threat of sanctions can be
an effective tool. This is an interesting and important
point which requires further thought. Certainly the
question of how to translate an idea into policy is
among the more difficult questions, and we will
continue to think about it and see whether the
Secretariat can be of any help.

Finally, I would like to recall that the Security
Council has adopted resolutions which deal with the
issues of the prevention of armed conflict in a very
comprehensive way, and it might perhaps be useful if
in one of the reviews on those resolutions the aspect of
sanctions were given some attention in order to see
how it could fit into the overall policy of prevention.

