The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.

Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia) I thank the
Uruguayan presidency for its choice of the theme
of this open debate, as well as for the concept paper
(S/2017/365, annex). We also thank the Secretary-
General and the briefers for their analyses.

The latest report of the Secretary General
(S/2017/414) of 10 May is alarming. The overall number
of people globally displaced reached 65 million in
2016. Civilians are routinely killed. The number of
children directly affected by conflicts has been rising.
Attacks on humanitarian and medical personnel remain
widespread. Recently, more medical personnel have been
killed or injured. More journalists have been attacked
and killed. Equally disturbing are the observations
about the growing fatigue in addressing the suffering
of civilians in conflicts, as well as perceptions of the
inevitability of civilian losses in armed conflicts. Such
disturbing realities should serve, first of all, as a call
for renewed determination to take decisive action.

We support the in-depth analyses and
recommendations of the Secretary-General, as
contained in his report, for specific measures along
the three priority pillars of protection. Furthermore,
full compliance with obligations under international
human rights law and international humanitarian
law, in particular the Geneva Conventions and the
Additional Protocols of 1977 and 2005, is critical for
the protection of civilians and of humanitarian and
medical personnel. However, universal ratification
of the Additional Protocols has not been achieved.
Unimpeded humanitarian and medical access must be
fully secured, while the arbitrary withholding of consent
to impartial humanitarian and medical assistance
must be confronted vigorously. The principles of
humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence in
humanitarian action must be fully respected.

The Security Council plays a key role in addressing
crisis situations and the protection of civilians. We
attach equal importance to a comprehensive and
consolidated approach of the entire United Nations
system in addressing the challenges of protection.
Our global agenda for development and the promotion
and protection of human rights bear direct relevance
to effective measures aimed at averting conflicts
in the first place. We recognize the value of such a
comprehensive approach as outlined, for example, in
One Humanity: Shared Responsibility, the Report of
the Secretary-General for the World Humanitarian
Summit (A/70/709).

We attach considerable importance to actions at the
regional level. The division of labour, coordination and
non-duplication of efforts and activities are the building
blocks of an effective utilization of the capacities
of regional organizations in conflict prevention and
conflict resolution.

Armenia has been a consistent advocate of and
a contributor to the current strong and credible
prevention architecture. We are convinced that in order
to be effective and serious about our determination to
protect, the primary role should be assigned to early
action on warning signs of deteriorating situations
that could potentially result in conflicts, atrocities
and human suffering. Crises, atrocities and genocides
do not occur overnight, they are detectable and
predictable. Early warning, early action, prevention
and conflict resolution should take precedence over
crisis management.

The Safe Schools Declaration, initiated by
Argentina and Norway, aims at the protection of
educational facilities from attacks and military use.
Armenia has recently endorsed the Declaration, thus
becoming the sixtieth country to assume the political
commitment to advance those principles.

The civilian population of Nagorno Karabakh
and the bordering regions of Armenia have been
consistently exposed to serious humanitarian risks. The
aggression against Nagorno Karabakh in April 2016
was accompanied by grave violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, including
barbaric acts commensurate with war crimes and
crimes against humanity. That aggression inflicted
losses on the civilian population, including children
and the elderly. Ceasefire violations continue to date.
The latest statement of 18 May of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Minsk
Group co-Chairs was explicit in identifying the party
that initiated the violations. The risks of the escalation
of the conflict must urgently be averted. Armenia
urges an immediate implementation of the agreements
reached at the Vienna meeting on Nagorno Karabakh
and the trilateral summit on Nagorno Karabakh, held
in St. Petersburg in May and June 2016 respectively, in
order to create conditions conducive to the advancement
of the peace process.

In conclusion, Armenia, once again, expresses
its deep appreciation to the international community,
to the Council and to Secretary-General Guterres
for their continued and unwavering support for the
efforts of the OSCE Minsk Group co-Chairs, the only
internationally agreed format for negotiations for the
peaceful settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict,
in the hope that a lasting settlement can be reached as
soon as possible.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.


