Mr. Covic' (Serbia and Montenegro) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I
am duty-bound to make some additional remarks on
certain issues that have been raised by representatives
here.

I am grateful for this discussion and wish to say,
on behalf of the Council of Ministers of Serbia and
Montenegro and the Government of the Republic of
Serbia, that we support the report of Ambassador Eide
and consider it to be a very important document.
Neither I, nor the Government of the Republic of
Serbia, nor the Council of Ministers of Serbia and
Montenegro has ever endorsed the idea of partitioning
Kosovo and Metohija. We believe that the future of
Kosovo and Metohija lies neither in partition nor in an
independent Kosovo. There will be no future for
Kosovo and Metohija if over 200,000 people are
prevented from returning to their homes. They have
waited for the moment of return for almost five years
now and I do not know which institution will end up
paying the price for the fact that the twenty-first
century has come but they have yet to do so.

We fully support the idea of Serbian participation
in truly multi-ethnic institutions in Kosovo and
Metohija, and I believe that the Security Council has
seen that in practice. The Serbs participated in the 2001
and 2002 elections; representatives of Kosovo Serb
ethnic communities have been outvoted in the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and have
had to be escorted to the Assembly in armoured
vehicles. This is not about obstruction or an
unconstructive approach. We have fought very hard for
Serb participation in those institutions.

I must make it very clear that no Kosovo Serb has
the right to participate in the creation of an
independent Kosovo, but, after five years of stagnation
and of being prevented from returning to its homes, the
Serbian ethnic community has no reason to believe
certain statements made by members of the
international community. As to the future status of
Kosovo and Metohija, the optimal solution will not be
one that gives everything to one ethnic community and
deprives another of everything else.

Since I began working on the Kosovo issue in
2001, I have sat in on seven of these meetings. I have
cooperated closely with Mr. Haekkerup, Mr. Steiner
and Mr. Holkeri and am prepared to do the same with
Mr. Jessen-Petersen, who recently assumed his new
post. I have seen and heard a great deal of
comprehensive and constructive reports, but violence
nonetheless erupted on 17 March. The situation in
Kosovo is not good and we are eager to help the
international community improve conditions there, but
the cooperation must be reciprocal. We cannot accept
the idea that everything that comes from Belgrade is
not good because it comes from Belgrade. I will never
hesitate to claim responsibility when there are solid
grounds for doing so, but I cannot allow some people
to misrepresent the truth unchallenged. If some say that
stating the truth is taking the emotional path, then so be
it. The fact is, some very bad things are happening
under the protection of the international community.

We are fully prepared to cooperate with the
international community. I am pleased that the Council
finds the elections to have been a great success, but
they were a failure from the ethnic point of View and I
regret that fact. Belgrade could have urged the Serbs to
participate in the elections, but I am afraid that the
turnout would have been no higher. I encouraged them
to participate in 2001, but I assure the Council that we
would have been unable to repeat the performance this
time.

With regard to economic development, we are
fully prepared to cooperate, but we urge the
international community to implement a privatization
process that is fair, fully respectful of property rights
and implemented in an ethnically unbiased manner.
With respect to the accusation concerning certain
measures taken by the Serbian Orthodox Church, I
assure the Council that the Church has always been
most cooperative. The situation is extremely complex,
particularly when some people are trying to deny that
this is the Serbian religious heritage and some people
are trying to call it something different. I hope that,
working together, we will be able to rebuild those
religious sites. As the Council is aware, we condemn in
the strongest possible terms setting fire to the mosques
in central Serbia.

With regard to the way to proceed on
cooperation, we must go back to the Working Groups.
We must also raise the question of who will have the
authority to decide whether or not there has been
enough progress. It cannot be only the international
community or the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, because, you understand, Kosovo is
formally part of Serbia and Montenegro, so we must
have a word in this.

We fully support a constructive approach but we
also believe that any attempt to nominate individuals of
questionable militant background is not a good way to
proceed. It would make dialogue much more difficult.
My concern is that by trying to nominate such people
for these high positions, someone is trying to obstruct
further resumption of the dialogue. We are more than
interested in including the Serbs in the dialogue, but
not as window-dressing, but in an efficient and
constructive way.

I would like to assure you that the international
community and Mr. Petersen, like all his predecessors,
will have full support from Belgrade in his efforts.
However, I also urge you to bear in mind that
Belgrade's situation is as complicated as Pristina's. I
hope that by working jointly we will be able to make
real progress for the whole region.

