Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate, which is enhanced by the
presence and participation of the Secretary-General. I
also thank Ms. Amos, Mr. Simonovie and Mr. Spoerri
for their briefings.

Much has been accomplished since 1999 in the
area of the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
in particular in the humanitarian sphere and in
peacekeeping operations under such a mandate. We
welcome those positive developments, which must be
built on. The report of the Secretary-General of 22 May
(S/2012/376) rightly underscores the importance of
adopting a comprehensive approach that combines the
legal, humanitarian and security aspects in addressing
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The
protection of civilians is a complex and multifaceted
task. In order to better protect civilians and to mitigate
their suffering, it is incumbent upon us to strengthen
respect for international humanitarian law and to
give United Nations peacekeeping operations that are
mandated to protect civilians the financial, logistic and
human resources to do so.

The year 2012 is one for assessing civilian protection
strategies developed within peacekeeping operations.
Implementing civilian protection mandates needs better
coordination and a greater synergy with Headquarters, in
particular the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. The transition from the pilot stage to that of
an ongoing assessment requires sustainable logistical
resources, which are, unfortunately, still lacking in
many missions deployed in large areas requiring a high
mobility on the part of peacekeepers. The year 2012 is
also one for strengthening the national capacities of a
host State for it to be able to discharge its primary task,
namely, the protection of its own civilians.

In that respect, it is important to deepen
consideration of the relationship between security
sector reform and the protection of civilians by
Governments. National ownership must not remain
a slogan. It requires developing coordination
mechanisms between peacekeeping missions and the
various national and local actors from the deployment
phase to the withdrawal of the mission. The experience
of the Peacebuilding Advisory Office in developing
mechanisms for national ownership could be useful in
that regard.

The training of staff leading peacekeeping
operations is also an important aspect on which we
need to capitalize. In that respect, it is necessary to
mainstream the use of predeployment and training
modules for peacekeeping missions by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations in close cooperation with
the troop-contributing countries, without forgetting the
linguistic imperative.

In peacekeeping operations mandated to protect
civilians, the ultimate goal is to facilitate a peace
process by establishing an inclusive political process
and by ensuring transition towards a lasting peace. In
that respect, the transition topic merits more in-depth
consideration of the relation between security and
development with the challenges associated with
the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
Moreover, since the protection of civilians is inextricably
linked to successful security sector reform, it is
crucial to carry out disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. In that regard, we believe
that an additional effort should be made to finance
the crucial reintegration phase and to strengthen the
capacities of States in post-conflict situations.

Meanwhile, as Ms. Amos underscored earlier, the
protection of civilians requires enhancing international
disarmament efforts, given the human cost of a poorly
regulated arms trade, as well as arms smuggling and
related activities, in particular in areas in conflict
situations.
At the Security Council debate of 10 May 2011 (see S/PV.6531), Morocco called on the Council to address
the challenge posed by non- State actors and their lack of
respect for international legal instruments. In particular,
my country draws attention to the militarization of
refugee camps, which makes it difficult to distinguish
between combatants and non-combatants, and thus
prevents humanitarian actors from accessing camps in
order to carry out their work and to provide care and
assistance to vulnerable people there.

We welcome the attention given by the 23 May
report to that issue and in which the Secretary-General
reiterates the need for non-State actors to better respect
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and to allow access with full security to those who
need assistance. The control of civilian populations
by non-State actors, and sometimes even the lack of
a distinction between civilian and armed elements
in the refugee camps, are major challenges that the
international community must meet. The stranglehold
over civilian populations by armed groups is a denial
of the elementary right to protection and a failure in the
duty to assist people in danger.

The Council it is seized of conflict situations in
which civilians are deliberately targeted on a large
scale. The use of artillery against urban zones, and
the shelling of buildings and social edifices such as
hospitals, schools and places of worship, are not only
contrary to international humanitarian and human rights
law but are, above all, unjustified and unjustifiable. It is
our collective duty to put an end to it.

Finally, I cannot conclude without paying due
tribute to the work carried out by the Blue Helmets,
other peacekeeping troops and humanitarian workers,
who are always ready for the ultimate sacrifice to
protect civilians in conflict areas.

