Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General for
his briefing. I also thank the other two speakers for
their statements.

I think that it is obvious that the ongoing violence
on Gaza's borders has made the past weeks particularly
challenging for all ofus who are committed to pursuing
a revived Middle East peace process. The United
Kingdom is deeply concerned about the recent increase
in violence and the resulting high number ofPalestinians
killed and injured. We continue to strongly urge Israel
to show restraint in their response to the protests and all
actors to abide by their obligations under international
law. In particular we, along with Ambassador Haley,
reiterate the importance of protecting minors.

That said, it is crystal clear that Hamas and its
operatives have been exploiting those protests for their
own benefit. Israel has the right to secure itself against
Hamas and other terrorist groups. Given the importance
of accountability, we support an independent and
transparent investigation. We therefore welcome Israel's
commitment to investigating the conduct of operations.
We urge that its findings be made public and if wrong
doing is found that those responsible be held to account.

The immediate concern must be preventing further
violence. We urge all parties to show maximum restraint
and to do their utmost to prevent further escalation and
loss of life. In particular, we urge Israelis to reconsider
the use of live fire and we urge the Palestinian
leadership to maintain its calls for non-violent protests.
Palestinians have a fundamental right to protest
peacefully, but those with influence over Hamas must
make clear that the use of violence and aggressive
tactics is unacceptable and will do nothing to further
the Palestinian cause. The violence has, sadly, put
added strain on the already dire humanitarian situation
in Gaza. That is particularly true of the health sector,
which was already operating far beyond capacity.

The parties must do all they can to address
the underlying causes of the dire economic and
humanitarian situation. We look to Israel to lift its
movement and access restrictions on people and goods,
including by urgently granting medical permits. While
we welcome last week's brief reopening of the Rafah
crossing, we urge Egypt to open it on a more permanent
basis in order to ease the suffering of ordinary citizens
in Gaza. Hamas must decide whether or not it is
prepared to work for the good of the Gazan people and
join efforts for peace, or whether it will continue to use
terror and neglect the basic needs of Gaza's population.

The international community has an important
role to play in improving the humanitarian situation.
That includes continued support to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, which provides essential services to some of
the most vulnerable Palestinian refugees. We believe
that the situation in Gaza could be radically improved
through the return of the Palestinian Authority. The
United Kingdom remains strongly supportive of a
Hamas-Fatah reconciliation, which would see the
Palestinian Authority resuming Government functions
in Gaza and restoring effective and accountable
governance. We welcome Egypt's facilitation role and
would like to encourage it to help the parties discuss the
most difficult issues, such as security.

The Special Coordinator, Mr. Mladenov, has
shown outstanding leadership on both reconciliation
and on progressing access and projects to improve the
situation in Gaza. As ever, I would like to reiterate that
the United Kingdom stands ready to assist him.

Like many worthwhile things, the process towards
peace requires much patience. But we know from history
that violence will not help us to achieve that ultimate
goal and that the conflict will be resolved only through
a political process to a two-State solution. There is an
urgent need for renewed negotiations that can end the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict and deliver peace and safe,
secure and sovereign homes for Palestinians and Israelis
alike. The United Kingdom, again, will be committed
to doing all we can to support that goal.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict cannot be seen in
isolation from the many other conflicts in the Middle
East. Israel's security, let alone its existence, should
not be put at risk by any United Nations Member
State. The missile build-up in Syria and elsewhere
offers a clear risk of escalation, and a slide into further
violence in Israel and the occupied territories would
have a significant detrimental effect on stability in the
wider region.

Since the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) agreement was mentioned by the Israeli
Ambassador, I would like to recall that the United
Kingdom's position on it remains clear. We believe
that it is a crucial agreement that makes the world
safer and contributes to regional and global security
by neutralizing the threat of a nuclear-armed Iran, and
we engage all partners as we take discussions on the
JCPOA forward.

