Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you and your
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of August and to
reaffirm my delegation's intention to support you in
your work. I wish also to thank the delegation of
Viet Nam for its excellent work during the month of
July.

I thank Mr. Pascoe for his briefing. Also, I thank
Ambassador Wolff of the United States for his
statement on behalf of the Multinational Force, and I
thank the Permanent Representative of Iraq for his
statement.

Costa Rica welcomes the improvement of the
still-delicate situation in Iraq. We acknowledge the
endeavours of the Iraqi Government, with the support
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) and the Multinational Force. In that regard,
my country supports the renewal of the mandate of
UNAMI and welcomes the fact that this will take place
on terms satisfactory to the Government of Iraq.

In our view, the United Nations presence has
been decisive in the progress that has been made. We
recognize and value the relations that UNAMI
maintains with the Government of Iraq and we
advocate its continued strengthening. The extended
mandate of UNAMI, the leadership of Special
Representative De Mistura and the commitment of his
staff have made it possible for UNAMI to become a
facilitator of solutions, an agent for change and an ally
in the peacebuilding and sustainable development of
Iraq. The natural role of the United Nations in Iraq is to
be a promoter of development, a facilitator of change
and a catalyst for the improvement of the living
conditions of the Iraqi people.

Iraq's problems can be solved only through
reconciliation and understanding among Iraqis without
exclusion. The immediate attention that must be paid to
the security situation must go hand in hand with a
process of extending the legitimacy of the Government
and its institutions. It is for the international
community to support all endeavours to promote
inclusive and meaningful political dialogue, as
indicated by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2008/495).

In the tasks of dialogue and reconciliation, of
particular importance is the process of electoral
preparation being carried out in Iraq with a view to the
provincial elections. Here, we urge the adoption of the
necessary legislation providing guarantees to all
political configurations for the important process in
October and conferring all the necessary legitimacy on
the result of these electoral processes.
Sustainable peace is the result of a delicate
combination of factors that can provide the certainty of
achieving a better future through effort and discipline.
In that regard, Costa Rica wishes to emphasize the
need to pay special attention to two aspects.

First, there is a need for public investment,
particularly public investment that is more dynamic,
broader and effective for development. There is also a
need to ensure that the security situation is not
improved at the expense of fundamental freedoms, the
protection of the civilian population and the human
rights of all. With regard to public investment, we
believe that Iraq should exploit and invest as quickly as
possible the profits from its considerable oil income.
That which, for countries like Costa Rica, represents an
economic burden can and must be an opportunity to
promote the development of the people of oil exporting
countries, and in this particular case the people of Iraq.

The second aspect that we would underline as an
indispensable ingredient for peace is the necessary
balance to be struck between public security,
fundamental freedoms and the enforcement and full
enjoyment of human rights. Costa Rica joins in the
Secretary-General's call on all security forces in Iraq,
including the Iraqi Security Forces, to continue to do
everything possible to avoid harming civilians and the
disproportionate use of force.

Political dialogue, reconciliation, strengthening
the legitimacy of the Government and its institutions,
the necessary improvement in the security situation
without undermining the rule of law, and increasing
investment in the people and their welfare are the keys
to a promising future for the Iraqi people. The United
Nations has a fundamental role to play in
accompanying these complex processes.

