The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United States.

We would like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for
his briefing and his leadership of the Committee. We
appreciate his efforts to ensure that the Committee
remains active in carrying out its mandate.

The Council meets today as P5+1 talks continue
on Iran's nuclear programme. The representatives of
those countries are negotiating a comprehensive plan
of action that, once implemented, would ensure that
Iran does not acquire a nuclear weapon and that Iran's
nuclear programme is exclusively peaceful. They seek
to finalize such arrangements by 24 November of this
year. We wish the negotiators well.

In the meantime, the Council and its Iran Sanctions
Committee must ensure the continued implementation
of United Nations sanctions. We have been troubled to
hear reports of confusion as to whether the sanctions
remain in effect during the period of negotiations.
Although the P5+1 offered Iran some limited and
reversible sanctions relief as part of the joint plan of
action, the plan included no changes to United Nations
sanctions. On the contrary, only the Security Council
has the authority to tighten, relax or otherwise modify
the measures imposed under resolutions 1737 (2006),
1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010). Similarly,
only the Security Council may change the mandate of
the Committee and its Panel of Experts. In the absence
of such a decision of the Council, the important work of
enforcing the sanctions must continue. The Committee
and the Panel should continue their vital efforts. More
should be done to help States understand and implement
their obligations under such resolutions.

We urge the Committee and the Panel to devote
special attention to the long-standing problem of illicit
Iranian exports. Resolution 1747 (2007) prohibits Iran
from exporting all arms and related material to any group
or country around the world. Yet just this spring, Iran
was caught smuggling tons of arms aboard the vessel
Klos C. We are grateful to the Panel for researching
that incident in great detail and for shining a light on
Iran's prohibited arms shipments. We encourage the
Committee to consider follow-up action to ensure that
those that violate Security Council resolutions face the
consequences.

In that vein, Iran's arms smuggling to groups in
Gaza has been especially pernicious and should be a
focus of the Committee's work in the coming months.
Iran's pipeline of arms and military equipment to
extremist groups in Gaza makes it harder to find
solutions that could enable Israelis and Palestinians to
live in peace.

In the coming weeks and months. the Committee's
work will remain vital. We therefore encourage the
Committee to support full enforcement ofthe Council's
resolutions for as long as the resolutions remain in
effect.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose a! 3.50 p.m.
