Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Since the
current crisis began, France has worked towards a
solution promoting the stabilization of a democratic
Ukraine in which the rights of all communities are
respected and which is part of the broader European
family. This was the aim ofthe mediation efforts carried
out by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Federal
Republic of Germany, Poland and France. It was the
aim of the agreement of 21 February, which the Russian
Federation refused to support at the time.

The situation before us today is not a modern-
day geopolitical spat. This is not a situation in which
Ukraine is being forced to choose between East and
West, which would go against all of the values on
which the European Union is founded. I recall that the
Union's very existence is based on the rejection of such
practices of another age, which twice left our continent
in ruins in the course of a single century.

The authorization given by the Council of the
Russian Federation to deploy troops in Ukraine could, if
acted upon, be seen as a threat to the territorial integrity
of the country and would be a dangerous development
for peace. In the Ukrainian crisis, France will continue
to strive for a political solution that meets the needs
of the Ukrainian people and preserves the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of that country.

We therefore call on all parties involved to show
their sense of responsibility. We call on the Ukrainian
authorities to take all measures necessary to ensure
civil peace and intercommunal coexistence, to restore
the country and to take the legitimate interests of the
Russian Federation into account. We expect all of
Ukraine's neighbours to assist it in this difficult task.

France and the European Union stand ready to
contribute to the peaceful settlement of the crisis. The
President of the French Republic has called for swift
and coordinated action from the European Union,
which will be determined at the Foreign Affairs Council
meeting on 3 March.

