Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset to thank General Cisse and the
representative of the World Bank, Robert Calderisi, for
their briefings.

China is concerned about the serious political,
economic, social and security situation in the Central
African Republic. We are particularly worried about
the stalemate in the political dialogue, the deteriorating
financial situation and the serious, worsening, security
and humanitarian problems in that country. China
believes that the international community should assist
the Government of the Central African Republic in its
efforts to tackle problems in the following three areas.

First, the political situation should be stabilized.
Political dialogue between the Government and the
opposition should be restored as soon as possible. This
is critical to stabilizing the situation there. It is
encouraging that the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in the Central African Republic
(BONUCA) has come to understand the importance of
political dialogue and is making efforts in this regard.
Secondly, assistance to the Central African
Republic should be reinforced. We have learned that
since mid-August the World Bank has suspended its
assistance to the Central African Republic because that
country has not been able to make its payments. We
would like to express our concern in this regard, and
hope that the two sides can resolve the problem of the
arrears as soon as possible.

We call upon the Bretton Woods institutions and
the international community to continue to provide
emergency assistance to the Central African Republic.
Given the current situation, we call upon the donors to
fulfil their pledges. China will continue to provide the
Central African Republic with assistance, within its
means, through bilateral channels.

The Parliament of the Central African Republic
recently adopted new investment laws. This is an
important step by the Government, aimed at improving
the environment for investment. We believe that it will
be of benefit in creating an environment for
international partners to provide the Government with
the means, including funds and technical assistance,
that it needs. Furthermore, the Government has also
adopted three action plans in the areas of the economy
and humanitarian affairs. We hope that donors will
respond favourably to those plans.

Thirdly, efforts for restructuring the armed forces
and disarming illegal armed elements should be
accelerated. Since the coup attempt in May, the number
of illegally owned arms inside the Central African
Republic has been increasing. The security situation is
worsening. This situation has seriously hampered the
recovery efforts of the Central African Republic. Given
the limited capacity and resources of the Government,
we hope that the relevant partners will continue to
provide funds, technology and experts to assist the
Government in its efforts to disarm the armed
elements, restructure the armed forces and train the
police force and gendarmerie.

The Central African Republic is enjoying an
increasingly close relationship with neighbouring
countries with regard to security and refugees. It is
wise and appropriate for the Security Council to take a
regional and comprehensive approach in considering
this question. In this context, we would like to
commend the Secretary-General for his decision to
strengthen the cooperation between United Nations
representatives in Kinshasa and Bangui, and we
encourage those two institutions to take concerted
action aimed at restoring peace and stability to the
region. At the same time, we hope that the Government
of the Central African Republic will make an effort to
improve relations with its neighbours.

Finally, I would like to say that in principle China
supports and endorses the recommendations of the
Secretary-General to strengthen BONUCA and revise
its mandate. We hope that BONUCA, while
comprehensively implementing the strategy to
consolidate peace, will pay due attention to priorities
and that it will assist, and work in coordination with,
the Government of the Central African Republic so as
to fulfil the mandate given to it by the Security Council
in an organized manner. China will, as always, support
the efforts of BONUCA and of General Cisse.
