Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): I am grateful for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council about my visit last
week to Sierra Leone and Liberia.

I undertook that visit in my capacity as Chairman of
the Sierra Leone sanctions Committee, and the Council will
recall that, in its follow-up to the Secretary-General's report
on Africa, it recommended that those of us who chair
sanctions committees ought also to visit the areas we deal
with in these committees from time to time for the purpose,
of course, of obtaining better information at firsthand, but
also to show a presence and to make it clear that we who
impose sanctions by adopting resolutions in this Chamber
are also actively engaged in their implementation and in
making sure that they are enforced.

So my primary assignment during that visit was to
study the implementation of the sanctions that are currently
in place against the rebel forces in Sierra Leone. These, as
members know, include an arms embargo on the
non-governmental forces, as well as a travel ban for the
members of the military junta. Yesterday we had an
informal meeting of the sanctions Committee to talk about
some conclusions, in some detail. But, of course, I also
came back with some general impressions regarding the
crisis in that country, about which I would like to say a few
words today.

It has been said that one of the first victims of war is
the truth. And it may be important to mention at the outset
that the absence of accurate and verifiable information in a
civil war situation such as the one in Sierra Leone should
serve as a warning not to rush to conclusions. Absolute
facts are hard to come by - in particular regarding
Violations of sanctions - but one thing is indisputable, and
obvious even to a visitor who stays there for less than a
week: the situation in Sierra Leone is tense, and as we
heard from Under-Secretary-General Miyet, it has not got
any better lately.

Although Freetown is liberated together with other
parts of the country, Sierra Leone is still plagued by a civil
war and the rebels have proved to be a very tough target.
Their activities, which we all know bring immense human
suffering in their wake, are both highly mobile and
unpredictable: defeated in one part of the country, they
have been able to remobilize and to increase their terror
in other parts. Right now, we understand there is intense
rebel activity in the north-western part of the country, and
that has raised tensions in the capital even further. Of
course, this has made it difficult for the people of Sierra
Leone to return fully to normal life. This applies, above
all, to the more than half a million people who are
internally displaced persons or refugees in other countries.

The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) is generally
seen to be doing a good job at promoting stability and
helping extend safety to the people of Sierra Leone.
However, logistical restraints do remain, and during our
talks with the Force Commanders, we were asked directly
to transmit requests for stronger international support.

The acts of terror committed against civilians by the
rebels in Sierra Leone are absolutely horrendous. It is
hard to find words strong enough to describe these
atrocities; they even use mutilation to spread their terror,
simply cutting off parts of the body of their victims with
large knives. They cut off arms and legs, even noses and
ears. They burn men, women and children alive.
According to the United Nations Observer Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) more than 4,000 people have
been either summarily executed or mutilated since April
this year. Pictures of maimed children are now circulating
in world media, and when one has learned about these
gruesome acts at first hand, it is not hard to understand
the strong calls for an international criminal court that are
arising out of this situation.

The humanitarian situation is also serious, and of
particular concern, as Under-Secretary-General Miyet
emphasized, is the fact that parts of the country remain
out of reach for humanitarian organizations, and therefore
we do not know the full scope of the tragic situation. We
did hear some complaints about ECOMOG and the Civil
Defence Forces (CDF) sometimes having made
humanitarian access difficult. I therefore found reason
during my Visit to share with the relevant actors, in my
national capacity, our View of the importance of showing
respect for humanitarian law and of reaching out to
civilians in a crisis such as this.

Of particular concern when looking into this conflict
is the extreme burden carried by the children of Sierra
Leone. They have become victims on both sides, and we

 

know that, unfortunately, this is not a new problem in this
region. Many of these young children were abducted long
ago into the ranks of the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF), and they are now - some of them perhaps at the
age of only eight or ten - some of the fiercest fighters in
the war. Of course, they are heavily traumatized, fed
violence and destruction for a large part of their lives, and
I think one of the biggest challenges ahead will be to
integrate the surviving children of Sierra Leone into a
society where identity is based on respect and common
norms, and not on carrying a loaded rifle. These children
should be able to go to school and to play with their
friends. They should be able to be with their families and
not grow up with fighters as their role models. I would like
to plead, in the strongest possible terms, that special
attention be given to the situation of the children of Sierra
Leone in the international support provided for the
reconstruction of the country. And I think it is proper, also
for the sake of the children, to plead with the Government
of Sierra Leone to continue to make very serious efforts at
national reconciliation. That is the only way to provide a
sound and secure future for the country - and the children
are our future.

It is hard to see that any military solution to the
conflict can provide a lasting peace in Sierra Leone. In that
context, it is also difficult to find Viable alternatives to
initiating a dialogue. Attempts to reach out towards a
peaceful solution are now being made by the Government,
and I strongly believe that this should be encouraged and
that no effort ought to be spared to get the rebels to lay
down their arms and surrender.

As we have seen in the report of the Secretary-
General, there is quite a discussion in Sierra Leone these
days about executions: those that took place earlier this fall
and a number of further death sentences that have been
handed down and which have all been appealed. Speaking
not for the sanctions Committee but in my capacity as
Sweden's representative to the United Nations, I pleaded
with the authorities in Sierra Leone, including the President,
not to make further use of the death penalty - for reasons
of principle to us, but also for the sake of succeeding in the
reconciliation efforts. It is my feeling that there is a
readiness to attempt to heed such pleas, even if that is by
no means assured in each individual case.

When speaking about the issue of the war in Sierra
Leone, I would also like to emphasize the importance of the
regional approach. The relation between Sierra Leone and
Liberia is, of course, particularly relevant. Important steps
towards the building of renewed confidence have been
taken by the Secretary-General, and these are now being
vigorously pursued by both Mr. Okelo and Mr. Downes-
Thomas, as the Representatives of the Secretary-General
in the two countries. I would also like to mention the
efforts of the United States and of the Reverend Jesse
Jackson to try to reinvigorate the Mano River Union; we
feel that these are bearing encouraging results as well.
Both President Kabbah in Sierra Leone and President
Taylor in Liberia expressed to us their commitment to
pursue the track of bilateral cooperation.

Let me conclude these general observations by
commending the very efficient and important work carried
out by UNOMSIL. I believe that that mission is an
excellent example of how a relatively small United
Nations presence, with the right mix of components, can
play a very significant role. That goes for the military
observers, but also for a very dedicated team of human
rights staff as well as for the civilian police element.

Turning now to the question of sanctions, of course
it is obvious that these are not fully implemented. We
heard many reports of arms and ammunition getting
through to the rebels from outside Sierra Leone. Although
some of the resupplies seem to come from looting and
attacks within the country itself, arms and ammunition are
reportedly also coming in from the outside, and that is
obviously in contravention of the mandatory Security
Council resolution.

The land borders of Sierra Leone with both Guinea
and Liberia are very porous and difficult to monitor. But
there is a strong perception in Sierra Leone that outside
support of this kind is indeed coming in from Liberia. No
tangible evidence was presented to us, and the quantities
of the reported deliveries are difficult to assess. Some of
our interlocutors referred to this as a trickle of arms.
Others - and I want to mention in particular the
ECOMOG commanders, but also some foreign observers
in Freetown - claim that more substantial deliveries have
been reported, including by truck and by helicopter.

The President of Liberia, Mr. Charles Taylor, with
whom I had the opportunity to raise these issues, said that
he could not dispute that some, though less significant,
trafficking of arms did indeed come through Liberia, but
he also stated clearly that his Government was not
involved in this. He also denied reports that we had
heard, that rebel leaders had been allowed to travel freely
into his country. When we were there, President Taylor
reiterated the proposal he had previously made to the

 

President of Sierra Leone on setting up a system of joint
border controls with that country.

From our talks with President Kabbah in Freetown, we
understood that this is a proposal that is seen as a good
starting point also in Sierra Leone. I too believe that it
could be very useful if the United Nations together with the
international community were to consider supporting such
joint operations. Such support could include technical
equipment, but also actual border monitors or observers;
this would serve as an important confidence-building
measure, provided that the necessary security assurances
could be obtained, and also as a way of safeguarding the
Security Council sanctions.

At the same time, I would like to reiterate a point
which I made several times during the visit: that in the end
it rests upon each and every State to do its utmost to ensure
respect for United Nations sanctions. That cannot be taken
over by anyone else.

There are surely those individuals who make a good
living out of the arms trade in West Africa, where, as is
well known, diamonds are a handsome reward in return. To
my mind, there is, of course, no excuse for such behaviour.
Nor is there any excuse for sustaining the war in Sierra
Leone by supporting the rebels with arms.

The sanctions committee for Sierra Leone discussed
these matters in detail yesterday, and when it delivers its
formal report later this month, I believe it might include
some observations that will be useful to build on in the
future work of the Committee and of the Council itself in
relation to this matter. This concerns the arms embargo, but
also enforcement of the travel restrictions. As members will
have gathered from what I have said, it is my hope that the
sanctions Committee will continue to involve itself actively
in doing its part to promote peace in Sierra Leone.

