Ms. Wronecka (Poland): To begin with, I would
like to thank Special Representative Ghassan Salame' for
his very informative briefing on recent developments in

Libya. I also thank Ambassador Juergen Schulz for his
report on the ongoing work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
He has our full support.
Poland welcomes the unity shown by the
international community at the Palermo conference and
reiterates its full support for the United Nations action
plan for Libya. We therefore call on all Libyans to spare
no effort to ensure the holding of the Libyan national
conference in early 2019, so as to end the political
transition and unite the country. We believe that the
conference will provide a platform and an opportunity
to form a nationwide consensus to break the deadlock
caused by those suppressing the rights and interests
of Libya's citizens and subsequently to prepare for the
presidential and parliamentary elections.

It goes without saying that the full and effective
participation of women in Libya's political and
economic life is crucial for advancing peace and
security. In that regard, we welcome the fact that
the Women's Empowerment and Support Unit of the
Presidency Council has begun its work.

We call once again on all political and military
actors in Libya to refrain from the use of force. At
the same time, we hope that the Government of
National Accord will show a stronger determination to
implement the joint security plan for greater Tripoli.
Recent events have proved that the ceasefire reached
last September did not last long enough, since the root
causes of the ongoing violence in the Libyan capital
were not eliminated.

There is an urgent need to take a comprehensive
approach to addressing security issues as one of the
key topics of the national conference. We are sure that
the vast majority of Libyans, who are suffering from
the instability in their country, share that view. We
therefore call on all political leaders to find commonly
agreed ways to ensure the security of their citizens.

There is no doubt that political and security reforms
need to be linked with economic reforms. In that regard,
we welcome the measures taken by the Presidency
Council to introduce economic reforms for the benefit
of the Libyan people and to limit the opportunities that
the shadow economy offers to militias.

We remain concerned about the loss of civilian
lives in Libya, including during the violent clashes
in Tripoli. We therefore call on all parties to fully
respect international humanitarian law by taking every
precaution to protect civilians; refraining from targeting
civilians and civilian infrastructure; and ensuring that
the wounded and the sick are properly cared for.

We are also deeply concerned about the widespread
human rights violations and abuses committed in
the context of detention and the prolonged arbitrary
detention of thousands of men, women and children
without due process. We call on the Government to
put in place measures to ensure that all those detained
are protected from torture and other ill-treatment and
granted their right to due process.

We also urge the Government of National Accord to
intensify its efforts to ensure that those responsible for
war crimes and other serious violations of international
human rights law are brought to justice. We encourage
the Libyan authorities to fully cooperate with the
International Criminal Court, in accordance with
resolution 1970 (2011), to help bring about justice and
accountability under international law for the crimes
committed in Libya.

In conclusion, let me express my gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ghassan Salame, and to the staff of the United
Nations system in Libya for their dedication to and
support for a peaceful end to the transition in Libya.

