Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation wishes
to welcome to the Security Council once again His
Excellency Mr. Jose Luis Guterres, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Timor-Leste,. We welcome his insightful
Views on the progress attained by his country. We also
wish to thank the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen, for his
comprehensive briefing on the latest developments in
Timor-Leste.

South Africa is pleased to extend its congratulations
to Timor-Leste on the 10-year anniversary of the
restoration of its independence and the thirteenth
anniversary of the popular consultation. It is not only
a milestone for the Government and people of Timor-
Leste, but also a victory for all the peace-loving people
of the world, who continue to champion the right to
self-determination. Today, 12 November, is especially
significant, as it is a day on which the people of Timor-
Leste commemorate the Santa Cruz massacre, one of
the bloodiest days in the history of that nation. Over the
past 21 years since that tragic day in 1991, the country
has undergone a dramatic shift from the struggle for
independence through the teething challenges of a newly
independent nation to what we find today, namely, a
vibrant nation that has made significant strides towards
peace and development. Throughout that period,
the United Nations - through its various missions,
including the current United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) - has closely partnered with
the people of Timor-Leste on their journey.

As we meet to consider the situation in the country
and to dwell on the future United Nations role as
peacekeepers prepare to depart, we must consider the
significant progress made over recent years. Particularly
notable is the successful holding of presidential
and parliamentary elections earlier this year, the
confirmation of a new Government, a stable security
situation and the resumption ofall policing responsibility
by the Policia Nacional de Timor-Lcste (PNTL). The
final certification ofthe full reconstitution ofthe PNTL,
which marked the end of operational support by United
Nations police (UNPOL) to the PNTL, is particularly
significant. It is an indication that the PNTL has the
capacity to fulfil its responsibilities. Gaps remain,
as noted in the PNTL-UNPOL joint working group
report. However, the senior leadership of the PNTL and
the political will of the Timorese authorities give us
confidence that those gaps will be overcome. As Prime
Minister Gusmao stated at the certification ceremony,
"the resolve and wisdom of our people manage to draw
strength from weaknesses".

As an indication of Timor-Leste's remarkable
transition, it has gone from a country hosting a
United Nations peacekeeping mission to one that
has deployed personnel to such missions in other
countries, such as the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon and the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan. That is a testament to the
strengthened capacity of the Falintil-Forcas Armadas
de Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL) and the will of the
Timorese authorities to make a positive contribution to
international peace and security. During the Security
Council's visit there was an opportunity to witness the
tremendous progress made by the F-FDTL and PNTL.
Those institutions are well equipped to address the
security needs of the country.

The adoption by the Government of its five-year
programme and the Timor-Leste Strategic Development
Plan for the period 2011 to 2030 highlights the emphasis
on efforts to address socioeconomic challenges and
to promote equitable and inclusive development
throughout the country, especially for peasants in
rural areas, women and young people. The leadership
role of the Government of Timor-Leste in the Group
of Seven Plus fragile States and its active leadership
in promoting the implementation of the New Deal for
Engagement in Fragile States are commendable.

In resolution 2037 (2012), the Council made it
clear that it is for the Timorese authorities to decide
on the future role of the United Nations in the country.
The Government of Timor-Leste has made its views
very clear. It does not seek to remain on the agenda
of the Security Council. Instead, it seeks an innovative
relationship with the United Nations, focused on
development and institutional strengthening.

It is the View of South Africa that Timor-Leste has
made significant strides towards peace and stability
and that the situation there does not pose a threat to
international peace and security. It is therefore time
for the matter of Timor-Leste to be removed from the
agenda of the Security Council.

We recognize the challenges faced by the Timorese.
They include human resource capacity constraints,
the need to strengthen State institutions and national
judicial capacities, reparations for crimes of the past,
security sector strengthening and socioeconomic
development. Those are challenges that many of
our countries face. They are not challenges that can
be addressed overnight. We are confident that the
institutional arrangements in place in Timor-Leste are
adequate to address those challenges.

The international community should remain a
partner to the Timorese people. Bilateral and multilateral
partnerships with the country are essential to address
institutional capacity-building and development. The
United Nations country team should continue with
its sterling efforts to assist in the development of the
country.

We take note of the Government request for an
innovative partnership with the United Nations, while
we remain cognizant that such a relationship falls
outside of the mandate of the Security Council. We urge
the Timorese authorities and the Secretariat to consult
on the modalities for such a relationship.

Addressing the crimes ofthe past remains a challenge
for Timor-Leste. We recognize the willingness of the
Government to forge ahead in a spirit of reconciliation
and to move forward in a positive relationship with its
people and neighbours. During the Security Council
visit, the Government and the Prosecutor-General were
aware of that issue, which the country is addressing
through its own processes.

Developments in the recent past have shown - as
confirmed during the Security Council mission to Timor-
Leste - the desire of the Timorese people to own
their future focused on development. That focus on
national ownership can been seen in the manner in
which the Timorese people have begun to assert control
over their destiny and in their willingness to address
shortcomings. We in the international community
should support that noble endeavour.

Timor-Leste is a success story for the United
Nations. For its part, South Africa will continue to
support the people of Timor-Leste in their quest for
sustainable peace and development.

