Mr. Serrano (European Union): At the outset, I
should like to thank you, Sir, for having invited the
European Union (EU) to participate in this debate. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Montenegro, Serbia; as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align
themselves with this declaration.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report on
support to Africa Union peacekeeping and today's
debate (S/2010/514), which shows the continued
attention that the Security Council is paying to the role
of African regional institutions in peacekeeping, as
well as to the role and responsibilities of regional
organizations on the whole. At the same time, I would
like to thank the Ugandan presidency of the Security
Council for its efforts in this field as demonstrated by
the presence of the First Deputy Prime Minster of
Uganda here today.

I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Commissioner Lamamra and Mr. Ajumogobia
for their important statements.

The United Nations relations with regional,
subregional and other international organizations
should become truly strategic partnerships. Progress in
this direction could result in a qualitative leap of the
overall United Nations system's capacity to prevent,
respond and stabilize. The EU strongly believes in such
partnerships and fully supports any effective, focused
and well coordinated effort to further develop and
operationalize them.

The European Union welcomes the Secretary-
General proposals aimed at widening and strengthening
United Nations cooperation with the African Union
(AU). In practical terms, we consider that close
cooperation among the African Union, United Nations
institutions and other relevant bodies has improved in
recent years. We are encouraged that the modalities and
parameters for such cooperation have been well
established thus far, including thanks to the Prodi panel
report (see S/2008/813) and the subsequent reports by
the Secretary-General.

The European Union warmly welcomes the
launch of the AU-UN Joint Task Force on Peace and
Security as an important mechanism to enhance
strategic cooperation between the two organizations in
preventing and resolving conflicts.

We also welcome the consolidation of the United
Nations offices in Addis Ababa into a single composite
office capable of a playing a stronger role, both in its
relations with the AU as well as with the local EU
delegation. I wish to congratulate United Nations
Assistant Secretary-General Zachary Muburi-Muita for
his appointment as head of the United Nations Office
to the African Union, and we look forward to work
with him and his staff.

The European Union welcomes the commendable
efforts of the African Union in the area of peace and
security and we are pleased to see that the Secretary-
General's report recognizes the relevant role played by
the European Union in that regard. We have directly
supported the deployment of AU peace support
operations but also the progressive build-up of the
policies and pillars of the African Peace and Security
Architecture. These efforts are articulated in detail
within the Joint Africa-European Union Partnership for
Peace and Security and its three-year action plans. This
Partnership is, in turn, underpinned by a financing
architecture of more than €1 billion, which makes
possible long-term programming and ensures the
sustainability of efforts.

The European Union instrument known as the
African Peace Facility represents a major source of
predictable, sustainable and flexible funding for
African-led peace-support operations. With a total
allocation of €740 million since 2004, the Facility has
provided a major part of the funding for the
strengthening of the capacities of relevant institutions
and structures and for the strengthening of interactions
between the African Union and African subregional
organizations. It has also financed a number of
African-led peace operations, such as the former
African Union Mission in the Sudan, the African Union
Mission in Somalia and the Multinational Force of the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community
and the Mission for the consolidation of peace in the
Central African Republic, and two African Union
operations in the Comoros.

The upcoming third Africa-EU Summit, to take
place in Libya on 29-30 November 2010, will therefore
be an opportunity to take stock of our first three-year
action plan of the Peace and Security Partnership and
of the activities carried out so far. As for the future, the
summit will lay the foundations of a comprehensive
road map based on a joint assessment of the African
peace and security architecture pillars and on the
results of the Amani Africa exercise, both just
completed.
In cooperation with the African Union, we are
ready to step up our contribution to the work of the
United Nations as presented in the Secretary-General's
report, and to share the lessons learned from our
political, technical and financial support to the African
peace and security architecture and to African peace
operations.

In conclusion, let me emphasize that the
European Union is strongly committed to further
developing its own strategic partnerships with the
African Union and with the United Nations. The
Secretary-General's report highlights the extent of
United Nations and African Union cooperation, the
scope of which is strikingly similar to the ongoing
African Union-European Union cooperation. It is clear
that our organizations are driven by common agendas
and face common challenges. I therefore fully support
the encouragement of the Secretary-General to work
more in this direction.

