Ms. King (Australia): I too would like to welcome
the Force Commanders here today and convey
Australia's sincere appreciation to them and to the men
and women with whom they serve for their dedication
and commitment to the cause of international peace and
security. I would like to thank them for their informative
briefings. The three topics that they briefed us on today
are all very relevant to the Council's ability to structure
the mandates appropriately.

We are currently in a crucial period in the evolution
of peacekeeping. The mandates entrusted to them
are highly diverse and complex and increasingly
span a broad range of political and strategic goals,
encompassing not only traditional security functions
but also stabilization and peacebuilding tasks.
Therefore it is incumbent on the Council to engage very
closely with those responsible for implementing those
mandates on the ground and to ensure that our decisions
are properly calibrated to the conditions that they face
and that they have adequate tools and resources at their
disposal. We agreed to do this as recently as January
2013 in resolution 2086 (2013), and it is important that
we continue to hear the kind of feedback that we have
heard from them today.

Much of the complexity of current peacekeeping
operations arises, in our view, from the fact that many are
now mandated to protect civilians, which is a necessary
and defining element of modern peacekeeping, and the
robust elements of recent mandates have been driven in
large part by protection of civilians imperatives. The
United Nations reputation and authority in the field
now often depend on the capacity of the peacekeepers
to effectively protect civilians. To deliver on those
responsibilities effectively, the peacekeepers must have
the appropriate training, skills, equipment and mobility,
all of which are aspects that are relevant to the issues
that have been raised this morning.

In the specific context of training, Australia has
always been a strong supporter of the development
of United Nations capability standards. We strongly
support Under-Secretary-General Ladsous'
recommendation that a director for the evaluation
of field uniformed personnel be appointed, and we
recognize General Ngondi's analysis that missions
must be able to conduct in-mission assessments and
pre-deployment training with a view to addressing gaps
and, as he put it, delivering a high state of sustained
operational readiness.

The security situation for most missions is not
static. We know that. Therefore there should be
in-mission capacity to identify force capability gaps as
they emerge and to rectify them. Otherwise, it is hard
to see how we can sustain standards and ensure that
mission contingents are able to respond to evolving
challenges, let alone crisis situations. Therefore, the
establishment of an evaluation component within force
headquarters is an interesting proposal and worthy of
close consideration, in our view. I would welcome the
views of the Force Commanders on the most common
pre-deployment training gaps, identified once collective
skills are assessed, realizing that there are two parts
to that process once the troops are actually in-theatre,
and their view on whether it is possible then to address
those gaps once the troops are in-mission. It would be
interesting to have some of their views on that.

I thank General Iqbal Asi for his remarks on the
force multiplying benefits of inter-mission cooperation
and asset sharing. The cooperation between the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and the United
Nations Mission in Liberia is best practice, it would
seem. The Council rightly expects peacekeeping
operations to respond to evolving threats and crises,
but it is also rightly vigilant about efficiencies, and
inter-mission cooperation can bridge some gaps
by sharing key capabilities and providing surge
capacity in times of crisis. He has also given us some
compelling evidence of the benefits and challenges,
and we would strongly support consideration of his
recommendations, particularly given the fact that so
many issues on the Council's agenda have cross-border
and regional dimensions. In that context, I would be
interested to hear his perspectives on the scope for
further inter-mission cooperation in the context of
efforts to stand up the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.

The use of innovative technologies in support of
peacekeeping is an operational necessity, in our view.
National military planners prioritize this aspect, and
we would advocate strongly for the use of technology
to allow United Nations missions to achieve their tasks
efficiently and at the same time enhance the safety
of United Nations personnel and the people they are
mandated to protect. We appreciate General Dos Santos
Cruz's briefing on the benefits that he sees unmanned
aerial vehicles delivering to MONUSCO. We also take
his point on the importance of their being integrated
very carefully into the overall objectives of the Mission.
We would encourage the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to continue to identify the scope for the use
of advanced technologies. Operational requirements
should obviously be the overriding consideration, as
General Dos Santos Cruz has said, but as long as we
expect peacekeeping missions to perform increasingly
complicated tasks, we should also encourage the use
of technologies that enhance their capabilities to do so.

I thank you again, Sir, for the opportunity to hear
from the Force Commanders. It is essential that we,
the Council, the Member States - particularly troop-
contributing countries - and the Secretariat engage in
a continuous effort to adapt and innovate to improve
the effectiveness and efficiency of peacekeeping
operations, and this dialogue, in our view, is an
important part of that.

