The President: I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Viet Nam. I warmly welcome Her Excellency Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi to this meeting. I thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the Secretary- General and Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, for his informative and important briefing. Last November, the people and all political parties of Colombia commemorated the third anniversary of the signing of the historic Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. History tells us that reaching a peace agreement is difficult, but putting it into action is much more difficult. In that regard, Viet Nam highly commends the commitment and efforts of the Colombian Government and all relevant stakeholders in achieving sustainable peace and security in the country. Over the last three years, Colombia has witnessed very positive developments. We believe that those advances will help promote the livelihood of its people. We also stress the important role of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, along with the United Nations country team, in supporting projects and initiatives related to the implementation of the Final Agreement. Many challenges, difficulties and problems remain, as mentioned by Council members. In that regard, I would like to stress the following points. First, security and development for all Colombian people, including former combatants, must be a top priority. That will greatly contribute to long-lasting conciliation and peace. The international community should intensify its support for the Government of Colombia in several important areas, such as law enforcement capacity- building, substitution of illicit crops and the prevention of illicit economic activities, crime and violence. We call for intensified efforts and cooperation to disclose the location of mines and minefields in the country. Secondly, we emphasize the need for further measures to promote economic and _ inclusive development, social cohesion, rural development, housing, education and job creation in order to sustain the progress made to date. In all reconciliation processes, providing equal opportunity to all is the only viable means of deterring violence and reducing the risk of relapsing into conflict. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our strong support for the processes of peace, security, national reconciliation, national unity and development in Colombia. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I call on the of Colombia.
