Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the States members of the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) - the United Arab Emirates, the Kingdom of
Bahrain, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Sultanate of
Oman, the State of Qatar and the State of Kuwait - I
should like first to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
China's accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and to thank you for convening
this meeting in order to respond to the dangerous
developments in Yemen. I also thank Mr. Jamal
Benomar, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General,
for his briefing and all his efforts to achieve a political
transition and strengthened stability in Yemen.

The events that have unfolded in recent weeks are
dangerous and unprecedented because the coup against
the legitimate Government in Yemen undermines the
political and peaceful transition. It goes against the
highest interests of the people in Yemen at a time
when the country is facing economic and development
problems. Indeed, the current unacceptable escalation
is the result of the activities of the Houthis and their
sponsors, who have perpetrated a coup, occupied
legitimate Government and other institutions by force,
and kidnapped and placed elected officials - including
President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour and Prime
Minister Khaled Mahfoudh Abdullah Bahah - under
house arrest. This is unacceptable. They are using force
and flagrantly violating human rights, international
law and humanitarian law. They have terrorized the
people, committed arbitrary executions, threatened
young people, recruited followers and threatened the
livelihood, security and health of the people of Yemen.
Indeed, the activities undertaken by the Houthis and
their sponsors are a gross and egregious violation of
resolution 2140 (2014) and of international law.

In response to those events, on 21 January the
GCC convened an extraordinary ministerial summit
in Saudi Arabia. The meeting reaffirmed the fact that
the security of Yemen is intrinsic to the security of all
countries of the GCC. It pledged its full support for the
Yemeni people and condemned all terrorist activities.
The GCC also declared its rejection ofthe latest move of
the Houthis in issuing what they called a constitutional
declaration. We believe that the declaration constitutes
a violation of the GCC Implementation Mechanism,
which is the outcome of the Gulf Initiative, which in
turn was the result ofthe National Dialogue Conference
in which all parties took part. The Mechanism is also
supported by the Security Council. Therefore, we
believe that the recent move should be condemned and
that the Council should declare it illegal. We believe
that we should bring pressure to bear on the Houthis to
stop using force and withdraw from all governmental
institutions under their control. They should be asked to
normalize the security situation in Sana'a, the capital;
put an end to their armed activities; and return the
weapons they have looted from security and military
institutions.

I believe that if the Security Council does not react
quickly enough or if it procrastinates, it will send a
reassuring message to the Houthis and their supporters
and encourage them to continue in their activities,
which will threaten international peace and security
and the security and political stability in Yemen.
We are confident that the Council will not adopt a
passive position towards these activities, because this
is a coup using force against an elected Government
and Parliament. We believe that the current state of
affairs will encourage Al-Qaida to carry out even more
activities in the region and will have a negative and
nefarious impact on the region and the world at large.

That is why we stand ready to give all possible
assistance to our brothers in Yemen to facilitate the
achievement of a political solution and implement the
GCC Initiative and Implementation Mechanism and
the outcomes of the comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference. We also hope that general elections will
be organized in Yemen in the near future. In order to
achieve these goals, the GCC shall support the efforts of
the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on Yemen
to promote an amicable agreement and to facilitate and
conclude the political transition in Yemen.

Finally, we call on the Security Council to promptly
react and address this situation. The GCC shall continue
coordinating our efforts with the Security Council in
order to ensure the implementation of resolution 2140
(2014) on Yemen to protect peace and stability in Yemen
and ensure its territorial integrity and independence. In
order to save Yemen from catastrophe, we would like
to state once again that Yemen's territorial integrity
and stability are part and parcel of our own regional
security. We believe that we must make every effort to
protect Yemen's vital interests.

