Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): I would first like to commend the Bolivian
presidency for conducting the work of the Security
Council during its busy programme for the month of
June. I commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing today, all of whose
points my delegation fully endorses. I also thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights for
his briefing and the President of the Community of
Sant'Egidio for all the work it is doing in the Central
African Republic.

The Secretary-General's comprehensive and detailed
report (S/2017/473) makes for disturbing reading with
regard to the violent clashes between armed groups
that have led to the serious deterioration of security
conditions and have once again led to panic and the
displacement of populations in most of the prefectures
where those groups hold sway. We are concerned
because the reach of these armed groups extends
throughout our territory.

What can we add to everything that has been
described in the report? I believe that it is in all of our
interests, especially the Security Council's, to support
the concrete and important work that the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
is doing under the leadership of Mr. Parfait Onanga-
Anyanga. My delegation acknowledges all the support

that the Council has given our Government in its efforts
to find all possible ways and means to restore peace in
the Central African Republic.

Despite the increased presence of MINUSCA in
the field to deter rabble-rousers, the situation remains
a matter of concern. Armed groups have overtaken the
entire territory. Areas that were previously spared are
being deliberately attacked by these groups. Mission
convoys, international forces and civilians are targeted.
I offer my deepest sympathies to the brotherly and
friendly countries that provide the contingents whose
members have been savagely murdered or wounded. We
reiterate our sincere condolences to the Governments
and families of all these brave soldiers who, in saving
lives, have lost their own. We thank them for their
dedication to the cause of peace in an extremely
dangerous, complex and difficult context. Attacks
on civilians for any reason are not only unacceptable
but intolerable.

I welcome the initiative of the African Union Peace
and Security Council to ask the Security Council to
include the issue of the disarmament of the Lord's
Resistance Army in the mandate of MINUSCA. To
that end, it would be highly desirable for the Mission's
military strength, which currently stands at 10,471 men,
with an authorized strength of 10,750, to be increased,
alongside that of the police forces, to address that new
task if it is approved.
Apart from all that MINUSCA has already done
in the area of security, with a dynamic and muscular
posture, it is time to endow it with even greater resources
in order to meet the threat posed by armed groups.
The presence of armed groups complicates the search
for peace. I agree with the Secretary-General that we
must give priority to the search for a political solution.
It is in that sense that the President of the Republic
continues to promote dialogue with armed groups
through the vigorous action of MINUSCA that led to
the participation of 14 armed groups on 14 April in the
Consultative Follow-up Committee on Disarmament,
Demobilization, Reintegration and Repatriation.

In his speech at the opening ofthe 4th meeting ofthe

Committee, the Head of State proposed three key points
to the participants. He told them that the killings must
cease, that frank dialogue must be engaged on all issues
of concern, and how the dialogue should be convened.
It was in that context that His Excellency Mr. Faustin
Archange Touadera accepted the offer of the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States and the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region to endorse the African initiative for peace
and reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
The support of Angola, the Republic of Congo and
the Republic of Chad, as well as that of international
partners 4 in particular the United Nations, the
European Union and the International Organization of
la Francophonie - are of vital importance to the search
for lasting peace.

Too many crimes have been committed and continue
to be committed in the Central African Republic, and
the parents ofthe victims expectjustice to be done. They
are waiting for the Government to act. They also look
to the United Nations and the international community.
Efforts to combat impunity continue thanks to the
progress made towards the operationalization of the
Special Criminal Court. It is gradually being set up
with the appointment of most of its members. We urge
brotherly and friendly countries to help us appointing
the judges it still lacks.

There is one not insignificant point that I should
like to bring to the attention of the Council concerning
the rapid impact projects or programmes initiated by
MINUSCA, such as training centres, work-for-pay
programmes, income-generating projects, and so on. It
is essential to make the most of all these programmes,
which will employ young people who are idle and at
risk of being recruited by or returning to armed groups.
Unfortunately, some delegations in the Fifth Committee
of the General Assembly would like to see the end of
funding in the MINUSCA budget for these programmes.

I cannot conclude my remarks without expressing
my sincere gratitude to the Special Representative and
Head of MINUSCA and the Force Commander for their
determination to carry out the mission entrusted to
them - that of restoring peace in my country. Their
courage is a comfort to the people who have been
plagued by this interminable crisis. I welcome the
excellent cooperation and understanding between the
Government and MINUSCA on all issues involving
the search for an end to the crisis. I pay tribute to all
the men and women who participate in the Mission. I
cannot fail to mention the role played in the subregion
by Mr. Francois Lounceny Fall, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, in support
of the Central African Republic.
I agree with the Secretary-General that time is of
the essence if we want to avoid another relapse in the
Central African Republic, as many already foresee.
I would therefore like to thank the international
community; all the bilateral and multilateral partners of
the Central African Republic that made pledges at the
Brussels Conference, especially those that increased
their announced pledges; as well as those that were not
in Brussels and subsequently decided to support the
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. We do not
take for granted the ongoing financial support of the
Peacebuilding Fund in many projects. The Government
and the people of the Central African Republic express
their deep appreciation to them.

