Mr. Fall: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on
the situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
since the issuance of the report before the Council
(8/2018/1065). Allow me to highlight a few issues and
update members on the most recent developments.

In Sao Tome and Principe, on 22 November, the
National Assembly was inaugurated and Delfim
Santiago das Neves, from the opposition coalition,
was elected as the Assembly's new President. On
29 November, President Evaristo do Espirito Santo
Carvalho appointed Jorge Lopes Bom Jesus, the leader
of the Movement for the Liberation of S510 Tome' and
Principe/Social Democratic Party, as the new Prime
Minister. On 3 December, the President swore in the
new Government of Mr. Bom Jesus, which is composed
of 12 Ministers, including three women, and two
Secretaries of State. I must commend all stakeholders in
Sao Tome and Principe for their commitment to resolve
their differences through constitutional mechanisms to
defuse the tensions that arose following the 7 October
legislative elections. I also congratulate the people
of Sao Tome and Principe for their tireless efforts to
maintain peace and stability. This is a positive example
to follow.

In Gabon, the situation remains calm after the
legislative and local elections held in October. However,
speculation over President Ali Bongo Ondimba's health
conditions remains a source of concern, while some
opposition and civil society leaders continue to criticize
the decision by the Constitutional Court to amend
article 13 of the Constitution, on 14 November, in order
to authorize the Vice-President to chair the Council of
Ministers in the event of the temporary unavailability
of the Head of State. Meanwhile, in close coordination
with key international partners, I have continued to
hold meetings with political actors in Libreville and to
urge all Gabonese to respect the Constitution and to
preserve the unity, peace and stability of the country.

I remain concerned about the situation in the North-
West and South-West regions of Cameroon. I reaffirm
the United Nations commitment to the territorial
integrity and unity of the country. Violence has not
diminished, and allegations of human rights Violations
by all sides continue to be reported. A Kenyan priest
was shot dead on 21 November in Kembong, South-
West region, and, on 24 November, three priests from
the Archdiocese of Buea, South- West region, and one
driver were abducted by unidentified gunmen.

The number of internally displaced persons and
refugees in neighbouring Nigeria is still high. Several
schools remain closed in the South-West and North-
West regions. I am particularly concerned about the
effect of the crisis on women and children. During my
Visit to Cameroon from 17 to 22 November, I met with
key Government officials and stressed to all actors the
necessity for inclusive dialogue as a constructive and
sustainable way forward towards a peaceful resolution
to the crisis.

I welcome the efforts of the Government to provide
humanitarian access and assistance. That is a step
in the right direction. In that regard, I also appeal to
the Government to continue to safeguard access by
humanitarian partners to the populations in need and to
ensure that all human rights Violations are addressed. I
was encouraged by the Government's commitment to
putting in place plans to address the root causes of the
crisis, including through accelerated decentralization
and the activities of the National Commission for the
Promotion of Bilingualism and Multiculturalism. I
encourage national authorities to pursue such efforts,
including by implementing confidence-building
measures as soon as possible.

On 30 November, President Biya signed a decree
creating the National Committee on Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration, based in Yaounde,
with regional centres in Bamenda, Buea and Mora,
respectively in the North-West, South-West and Far
North regions. The National Committee, which is under
the authority of the Prime Minister, is responsible
for organizing the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants of Boko Haram
and the armed groups in the North-West and South-
West regions. As part ofa wider dialogue framework, I
encourage the Committee to work in close consultation
with relevant groups, including civil society and
communities, in order to ensure that the particular
needs of the three regions and their populations are met.
The United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) stands ready to support the Government
in its efforts to seek a lasting solution to the crisis in
the North-West and South-West regions, as well as
to continue assisting national authorities in the fight
against Boko Haram in the context of existing regional
frameworks together with the relevant regional States
and organizations.

In Chad, legislative elections, which have been due
to take place since 2015 and were originally scheduled
for November 2018, were postponed. I encourage the
Chadian authorities to hold those elections as soon
as possible and call on the international community
to provide the necessary financial support to the
Government of Chad, as required. At the same time,
I welcome the effective functioning of the national
framework for political dialogue, which is playing a key
role in preparation of the legislative elections. On 6 and
7 December, while in Chad for the ministerial meeting
of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa (UNSAC), I met
with members of the Government to discuss, among
other things, peace and security issues in Central Africa
and increasing conflicts between farmers and herders
in the context of transhumance. I was also encouraged
by the commitment of national authorities to ensure
the safety and security of the population in the Tibesti

desert, near the border with Libya, affected by recent
attacks carried out by armed elements. I appeal to the
Chadian authorities to seek peaceful ways to address
that situation in a sustainable manner.
(spoke in French)

The recent increase in violence in the Central
African Republic poses a threat to security in the
subregion. A large part of the population remains
internally displaced and in need of humanitarian
assistance. In accordance with my mandate for the
region, I continue to urge the countries of the subregion
to ensure that their efforts coalesce in supporting the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic and to maintain their
concerted and constructive commitment during the
critical phase of the implementation of a possible
agreement. Moreover, I continue to support the work
under way to operationalize and revitalize the joint
commissions comprised of the Central African Republic
and its neighbours as mechanisms for improving
cooperation among those States in the effective
management of cross-border issues. I will continue to
enlist the necessary support for the African Initiative
in cooperation with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic,
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga.

The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) continues to
threaten the security of the population in the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I therefore encourage the African Union to
adopt a comprehensive and cautious approach in its
ongoing efforts to replace the Regional Cooperation
Initiative for the Elimination of the LRA in order to
eliminate the possibility of any security vacuum that
the group could exploit to relaunch and intensify its
destabilization activities.

Violent extremism and terrorism remain a
significant threat to the security and development
of the subregion. Although much progress has been
made in the fight against Boko Haram, that terrorist
group continues to pursue its indiscriminate attacks on
defence and security forces and civilians. In response,
the countries ofthe subregion continue to intensify their
efforts to combat the group through better cooperation.
It is important for the States of Central and West Africa
to develop strategies that address the root causes of
the insurgency. To that end, I welcomed the holding on
29 November of an extraordinary summit of the Lake

Chad Basin Commission in N'Djamena to discuss the
ways and means of responding to the recent increase in
Boko Haram's activities in the region.

The joint summit of the Heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the Economic
Community of Central African States on peace,
security, stability and the fight against terrorism and
violent extremism, held in Lome on 30 July, marked
an important step for both subregions in their fight
against shared security threats. UNOCA has already
begun to take action, in conjunction with the ECCAS
secretariat and in cooperation with the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), to
support the effective implementation of the Lome
Declaration on Peace, Security, Stability and the
Fight against Terrorism and Violent Extremism,
which sets out the decisions arrived at during the joint
summit. Accordingly, a meeting of experts from the
ECCAS secretariat and the ECOWAS Commission
has been planned to agree on a joint action plan for
the implementation of the Lome Declaration. In the
meantime, I continue to work closely with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa and the Sahel, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, in
coordinated support of efforts to address the threats
posed by terrorism and violent extremism.

Insecurity related to transhumance is increasing in
Central Africa. According to reports, on 22 November
eight people were killed in a clash between farmers
and herders in Abeche, in eastern Chad. In that regard,
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa is facilitating
discussions on that issue, which is transnational
in nature and has economic, security, political and
environmental implications. UNOCA will continue
to work with ECCAS to address that issue, while
maintaining close cooperation with UNOWAS, given
the issue's interregional ramifications. During the first
half of 2019, Special Representative Chambas and I will
conduct a field visit to some of the areas affected by the
conflicts between farmers and herders. UNOCA, which
serves as the secretariat for UNSAC, supported the
holding of the forty-seventh meeting of the Committee
in N'Djamena from 3 to 7 December 2017. To date,
UNSAC is the only forum enabling Central African
States to meet regularly at the ministerial level to
discuss common security issues.

The Secretary-General of ECCAS and I took that
opportunity to call on all ECCAS member States to
ratify the Central African Convention for the Control
of Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition
and All Parts and Components That Can Be Used for
Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly - known as
the Kinshasa Convention. Together with the Director
of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa, we launched a joint project on
the margins of UNSAC, entitled "Support for African
States towards achieving the vision of "Silencing the
Guns in Africa by 2020': capacity-building of Central
African States".

In accordance with the mandate granted to it by the
Council, UNOCA remains committed to supporting
Member States and subregional organizations from
Central Africa, in particular ECCAS. While supporting
efforts to maintain peace, I urge ECCAS member
States to remain committed to the institutional reform
of that subregional organization and to accelerate that
process. I am confident that the successful completion
of its reform will be an important step for the
organization in improving its functionality, including
funding mechanisms, in order to ensure the effective
implementation of key projects in the areas of peace
and security and governance.

As recommended by the Security Council in its
presidential statement S/PRST/2018/17 of 10 August,
the mandate and activities of UNOCA will be subject
to strategic review in 2019, prior to the submission of
the Secretary-General's next report on the situation in
Central Africa and the activities of the Regional Office.
In that regard, I welcome the Council's continued
support for the specific role played by UNOCA as the
United Nations regional office responsible for political
affairs and peace and security in a subregion that has
considerable resources yet faces enormous challenges,
requiring a concerted and coordinated approach by
the international community. As Head of UNOCA,
I remain committed to providing the best possible
support to Member States and to producing positive
results in preventing conflict and maintaining peace in
Central Africa.

