Mr. Bent: I would like to thank you, Sir, for giving
me the opportunity to speak to the Council today in
representation of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) and United Nations police and in
regards to the protection of civilians in South Sudan.

In the past 22 months, UNMISS has been engaged
with adjusting from a post-conflict/recovery mandate,
focused on capacity-building, to a series of crisis/
conflict-adjusted mandates focused on the protection of
civilians. The scope of this tasking is vast and includes
civilians sheltering for safety in various venues,
including those which are within United Nations
compounds.

UNMISS has seen its protection of civilian sites
expand from housing several thousand internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in the first days of the
conflict to hundreds of thousands of IDPs spread
across the four major UNMISS protection of civilians
sites. The United Nations police has been tasked with
maintaining public safety and security within those
sites.There are constant, daily threats to our staff, and
situations can easily escalate to where staff members
are surrounded by tens and even hundreds of aggressive
and threatening IDPs. Serious physical injury to United
Nations personnel has happened on several occasions.

In reponse, UNMISS continues to look for
innovative ways and a better way of doing things.
As exemplified by the recent report of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), in which a change was called for to improve
the efficiency of peacekeeping operations. Considering
the dynamics of South Sudan, it is imperative that new
ways be identified to engage and improve the mission.
The Panel report calls for tailoring mandates to meet
the dynamics of the mission. In the section on four
essential shifts, it calls for being more field focused
and to awaken the United Nations on the distinct
and important needs of the field missions. It calls for
new approaches, a convergence of expectations and
capabilities, and for clarity of purpose and potential.
From our experiences and Observances of the dynamics
in South Sudan, the Panel's recommendations could not
fit our mission more appropriately.

Currently, UNMISS and the United Nations police
are engaged in supporting the pilot project for safe
return through curriculum support and human rights
training to select South Sudan National Police Service
(SSNPS) officers. This training is supported by the
respective components of our human rights, women's
and child protection sections. The United Nations police
is also supporting the SSNP identification card project
and the 777 emergency call centre - all of which are
approved in consideration of the Human Rights and
Due Diligence Policy and are supported in an attempt
to foster an improved public perception of the SSNPS
and build confidence within the IDP populations that
safe return to their homes will be possible.

UNMISS is also actively engaged in supporting
and implementing cross-cutting programmes with other
mission components in the areas of gender violence
and women's and child protection. These innovations
are combining the focus of these concerns into an
overarching community policing strategy that is being
supplemented by IDP community watch groups within
the protection of civilians sites. This overarching
strategy is also being aligned to support and enhance
the external portion of the community policing
strategy, which involves the SSNPS and community
watch groups as IDPs return to their homes, and also
to support the efforts of the SSNPS under the pilot
project for safe return. These efforts also align with and
support perfectly the concept of the newly proposed
joint integrated police. It is envisioned that this concept
will be the future policing strategy and ethics base for
the future police service in South Sudan.

Finally, we would like to reference resolution 2185
(2014) and the Guidelines on Police Capacity-Building
and Development, considering that police are a bridge
between civilians and Governments. Police interact
with civilian populations on a daily basis while guiding,
assisting and protecting them. This is the embodiment
of resolution 2185 (2014), identifying the centrality of
police in peacekeeping. However, the Guidelines on
Police Capacity-Building and Development recommend
that the host Government have ownership of the process
of reform and that plans be phased, with one phase
being completed before the next begins

Let me conclude by restating that the UNMISS
protection of civilians mission faces many challenges
and dangers. However, we are confident that given
sufficient support, guidance and flexibility, as outlined
in the report of the Hi gh-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations, resolution 2185 (2014) and the Guidelines
on Police Capacity-Building and Development,
our mission has the capability to adjust and prevail
through innovative and sustainable approaches and
programmes. I would ask that the Council invest in the
Panel's recommendations, which would help to provide
missions with the flexibility, resources, guidance and
support needed for the successful implementation and
maintenance of the protection of civilians mandate.

