Mr. De Mistura: I have come to New York to convey
to the Security Council in person - although I could
have done it by video, as we have many times - the
Secretary-General's grave concern about the escalation
of violence in Syria, and to urge the Council to
focus on de-escalating that violence and on finding a
political path forward for the full implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015).

We have seen a string of dangerous and worrying
escalations, including both inside and outside the
de-escalation zones established by the Astana
guarantors. There has been a gradual return to back-
and-forth competition over territory in ldlib and
Hama. We have seen heavy and sustained air strikes
across the North-West and in besieged eastern Ghouta,
including today. Civilians have been killed on a horrific
scale - reports suggest that more than 1,000 have died
in the first week of February alone - and strikes have
continued to hit hospitals, schools and markets. There
have been several allegations of chlorine attacks, in
Ghouta and Idlib and now recently also in Afrin. We
cannot independently verify those allegations, but
such acts, if confirmed, are outrageous and should not
go unpunished.

In just two months, 320,000 people have been
displaced due to fighting in Idlib - an area that
already hosts more than 1.2 million internally displaced
persons. Hay'at Tahrir al- Sham - Al-Nusra i is active
in Idlib. Meanwhile, there are reports of heavy mortar
shelling in residential Damascus, wounding and killing
civilians, damaging infrastructure, such as Embassies,
and falling close to the hotel in which United Nations
personnel reside.

The conflict is also spilling over Syria's borders in
more than one direction, and there have been increased
military intervention from multiple sources. Over the
past several weeks, a new cross-border conflict in
Afrin has emerged, with no clear end in sight. There
are reports of exchanges of fire between Turkish and
Syrian Government forces in Idlib, and between the
United States-led coalition and pro-Syrian Government
forces in the Euphrates valley, with major loss oflife. A
Russian aircraft was shot down over northern Syria and
its pilot was killed. Last weekend, there were Israeli
reports of an Iranian drone entering Israeli airspace,
which have been denied by Iran; Israeli jets striking
targets inside Syria; an Israeli jet shot down by Syrian
Government anti-aircraft fire; and of what Israel calls
large-scale strikes against the Syria air defence system
and Iranian targets. In short, we see developments that
raise questions about the sustainability of the Astana
de-escalation arrangements, in which we placed a great
deal of hope, and threaten wider regional stability.

I have been Special Envoy for Syria for four years
now, and this situation is the most violent, worrying
and dangerous I have observed during my tenure.
I strongly reiterate the Secretary-General's appeal
to all concerned in Syria, the region and beyond to
de-escalate immediately and unconditionally, and urge
all stakeholders, including the Astana guarantors, to
use their influence to help reduce the level of violence.
I also urge that continued attention be given to
maintaining the Amman de-escalation arrangements in
place in the south.

Not only are Syrian civilians being killed and
displaced in large numbers - even greater than before.
They are also being deprived of the humanitarian
assistance they need. There has not been a single United
Nations humanitarian convoy to any besieged area since
28 November, two and a half months ago. Last week,
together with Senior Adviser Jan Egeland, I warned
the Humanitarian Task Force of the International Syria
Support Group in Geneva of a collective failure to enable
effective humanitarian action. At the time, I urged the
co-Chairs - the Russian Federation and the United
States - as well as other States to take urgent action to
ensure immediate and unfettered humanitarian access
to besieged and hard-to-reach areas in particular.
A series of urgent consultations are under way
in Geneva. Thus far, no concrete results have been
reached, except the one convoy I mentioned earlier.
We urgently need genuine de-escalation in order to
protect civilians, evacuate the sick and wounded - in
particular sick children - and allow humanitarian aid
to reach the 390,000 people in besieged and hard-to-
reach areas. A few minutes ago, we learned that 7,200
people in besieged Nashabiyeh received a partial
delivery today. That is encouraging but let us think
about it - they account for a mere 2 per cent of the
390,000 people in besieged areas. We need much more
sustained humanitarian assistance.

We must also never forget - as underscored
by the people in Syria - the need for concrete steps
on the release of detainees and abductees, and for
the disclosure of information about those who have
been missing since March 2011. The United Nations
will leave no stone unturned to press the issue, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). We also
remind the Astana guarantors of their own commitment
agreed last December to establish a working group. We
urge them to move ahead on this important issue when
they meet next. What we are seeing in Syria today not
only imperils de-escalation arrangements and regional
stability; it also undermines the efforts for a political
solution. Yet we will not be deterred from pursuing
the Geneva process, which is the only sustainable path
towards the solution mandated by the Council.

Members will recall that in December 2017, when I
briefed the Council (see S/PV.8142), I laid out a number
of parameters and observations regarding baskets 2
and 3 of the agenda - the constitutional and electoral
baskets. Then, on 25 and 26 January, I convened a special
round-9 meeting of the intra-Syrian talks in Vienna,
focused specifically on the constitutional basket.
After intensive consultations with the Syrian parties
and key States, I made a final statement regarding the
constitutional committee to be formed, and stressed
that the final agreement on the composition, mandate
and terms of reference of the constitutional committee
must be reached in Geneva.

For its part, the Russian Federation, which had
invited the Secretary-General, also on behalf of Turkey
and Iran, to the National Dialogue Congress in Sochi,
affirmed that the outcome in Sochi would be brought
to Geneva as a contribution to the United Nations-led
intra-Syrian talks, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015). There were intensive consultations among the
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov, the Secretary-
General and myself regarding such an understanding.
In Vienna and beyond, I also maintained close
consultations with a number of other States at that time.

Accordingly, the Secretary-General asked me
to attend Sochi. The Congress took place over one
day on 30 January. I attended the opening address by
Foreign Minister Lavrov, and senior representatives of
Turkey, Iran and other States were present. Afterwards,
all internationals left the gathering to enable the
discussion to proceed among Syrians. Only Russia's
special presidential envoy for Syria, Mr. Lavrientev,
remained in the room as host to facilitate the debate,
which he accomplished effectively, alongside senior
Syrian figures and a presidium of Syrians. I was later
officially informed by the hosts that the final statement
had been adopted, and was made aware of its content.
It has been published on the website of the Russian
Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Arabic, Russian and
English, as Foreign Minister Lavrov publicly confirmed
yesterday, following his meeting in Moscow with the
Belgian Foreign Minister.

As the Secretary-General has noted, the final
statement embraced a vision of a future in Syria for
all Syrians - as reflected in the 12 living intra-Syrian
essential principles that came out of the United Nations-
led talks in Geneva in November last year. The final
statement agreed in Sochi affirmed that a constitutional
committee should be formed and stated that it should,
at the very least, comprise the Government; opposition
representatives in the intra-Syrian talks, facilitated by
the United Nations in Geneva; Syrian experts, civil
society, independents, tribal leaders and women. The
final statement noted that care should be taken to
ensure an adequate representation of Syria's ethnic
and religious components. It made clear that the
final agreement on the mandate, terms of reference,
powers, rules of procedure and selection criteria for the
composition of the constitutional committee should be
reached in Geneva, and appealed for the assistance of
the United Nations Office in Geneva in that regard.

Given that important final statement, I joined the
closing of the Congress to welcome it and to affirm
the United Nations intention to proceed speedily and
accordingly so as to assist in finalizing all aspects
of a constitutional committee, thereby enabling its
establishment in Geneva. Furthermore, I publicly noted
to the Congress, as I note to the Security Council today,
that the mandate given by the Council to the United
Nations in Geneva is to establish a schedule and process
for drafting a new Constitution within the framework
of resolution 2254 (2015). We have been assured by
the Russian Federation that it will endeavour to ensure
that the Government of Syria fully supports the official
outcome ofthe Congress in Sochi, at which many Syrian
Government officials were present. I also take note
that the Syrian negotiations commission * that is the
opposition embracing all those components specifically
mentioned by name in resolution 2254 (2015) - has
issued a public statement that is generally positive with
regard to moving forward on a constitutional committee
under the auspices of the United Nations in Geneva.

Since the Vienna and Sochi meetings, both of
which were important, I have consulted intensively
on the establishment of a constitutional committee.
I have had initial discussions so far in Geneva with
representatives of the Government of Syria, the Syrian
negotiations commissions and a number of other
Governments. My team remains in touch with a wide
array of Syrian women and men, and I continue to
look carefully at the candidates for the constitutional
committee, which was conceived in Sochi, and other
relevant input. I also continue to pursue the convening
of further formal intra-Syrian talks to make progress
with regard to all four baskets of the political process
in Geneva pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015). I am
particularly aware of the need to focus, now more than
ever, on the establishment of a secure, calm and neutral
environment if a constitutional process is to happen
and if United Nations-supervised presidential and
parliamentary elections are to take place under a new
constitution, as envisaged in resolution 2254 (2015).
From here, I will be travelling to Munich, God willing,
where I will consult with the Secretary-General and
join a number of ministers and other senior officials
who will be present at the Munich Security Conference.

Herewith is the bottom line of my statement. I
intend to strike while the iron is hot and move forward
the Geneva process, in consultation with all concerned.
To do that, I will need all members of the Security
Council i that is, the Council as a whole f and
all those who have influence on the Syrian parties,
including the Astana guarantors, among others, to push
hard on three main points. First, they must work towards
de-escaltion, civilian protection and humanitarian
access. Secondly, they must work to support the United
Nations in Geneva so that the Sochi final declaration
can take effect within the framework of resolution 2254

(2015). Thirdly, they must work to support the United
Nations in facilitating the political process for the full
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015), in particular
with regard to advancing real issues in the basket to
promote a safe, calm and neutral environment.
The Syrian people and the United Nations need the
Security Council's support now more than ever.

