Mr. Azwai (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I am confident that your personal
qualities and your well- known efficiency and experience
will enable you to steer the proceedings of the Council to
the desired success. At the same time, I should like to pay
tribute to your predecessor, the Permanent Representative
of Botswana, for his successful conduct of the affairs of the
Council last month.

Today the Security Council is meeting to discuss the
tragedy that the Palestinian people has been experiencing in
the occupied territories as a result of the campaign of
blockade, starvation and collective punishment waged
against them by the Israelis. These tragic events are
unfolding for the whole world to see and hear, in violation
of all international norms and covenants.

The Israelis have interpreted the Summit of Sharm El
Sheikh as support for their oppressive and suppressive
actions against the Palestinian people, who dare to reject
occupation and resist the occupiers, using whatever
resources they have available, from stones to suicidal
operations.

The Israeli Government perpetrates the most heinous
crimes against the Palestinians, convinced that this will help
it get re-elected and will do away with resistance to its
repellant occupation.

Of course, reneging on promises is nothing new for
the Israelis, and their lack of respect for international
legal decisions is also customary. Scores of resolutions
have been adopted calling on them to withdraw from the
occupied territories, to observe international treaties in
dealing with the inhabitants of these territories and to
allow the refugees to return to their homes, among many
other things. But the Israelis have never complied.

We have every right to ask why the Israelis insist on
the non-implementation of Security Council resolutions,
and why the Security Council is unable to impose respect
for its resolutions? Why is it that no single resolution
against Israel has been adopted under Chapter VII of the
Charter despite the fact that most Israeli crimes fall under
that Chapter? Why does the whole world raise the roof
over resistance to Israel's occupation, while never raising
a finger when Israelis take the most terrible measures
against the Arabs in Palestine or in Lebanon? The Israelis
often invoke security to justify the blockade and the
collective punishment, and we would really like to know
what kind of security they are talking about now. Are
they talking about the security of their occupying forces
or the security of their illegal settlements? Yet what
danger is posed by a woman in labour that makes them
prevent her from reaching the hospital, thus forcing her to
give birth before the eyes of laughing occupation soldiers,
and later to see her twins die of cold, out in the open,
near a roadblock?

We have all heard the Prime Minister of Israel
declare that he would not sacrifice security for peace.
Does this not prove that the Israelis do not believe in
peace, but work for the imposition of capitulation? Who
are opposed to genuine - just, comprehensive peace -
the Arabs or the Israelis? And why have the Israelis not
asked themselves why they have not enjoyed peace since
the establishment of their entity in 1948? Do they not
know that the policy of suppression, oppression and
occupation of land by force will never lead to peace? And
however weak the Arabs are, however great their
differences and however strong the American support the
Israelis receive, they will not be able to impose a fait
accompli. This policy has been tried before and has never
succeeded: the will of the people will never be defeated
because it is derived from the will of God. Force may kill
and destroy, but it will never prevent the wronged from
avenging themselves against the oppressors, even if it
means blowing themselves up with their oppressors,

The Israelis and their allies will be gravely mistaken
if they think that normalization of relations with Arab
 

countries, embracing their Heads of State and reciprocal
visits will succeed in forcing the Arab nation to surrender.
These are illusions. The peoples will never surrender or be
brought to their knees. History has seen hordes of Tatars,
Crusaders and the armies of Western colonialist empires
invade the Arab nation by force, and for approximately the
same objectives, but all of them were routed, and the Arab
nation survived.

These are not mere words. These are facts recorded in
ancient and modern history, and they bear repeating. Blood
that is shed can be washed away only by blood. Violence
and persecution are the weapons of the foolish. However,
we in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya were not taken by
surprise by these events. We have pointed out before, that
genuine, just, and comprehensive peace will not be
achieved by the imposition of agreements of capitulation
and surrender.

We have repeatedly stated that only in a non-racial
democracy can Arabs and Jews live together, in a country
that lives in peace and believes in equality and in the
future - a country that can come to be only under the kind
of regime that led to peace in South Africa.

We have also repeatedly stated that the double
standards applied by the Security Council, under the
pressure of the United States and its allies, whenever
something affects the Israelis, are the wrong policy. This
policy is destructive to the credibility of the United Nations,
and of the Security Council in particular. Our conviction is
based on long and repeated experiences relating to the
Arab-Israeli conflict, the repeated acts of aggression against
Lebanon and the violation of its territorial integrity.

This conviction is also born of the repeated
aggressions against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya by the
United States of America. Today we mark the anniversary
of the 1986 United States aggression against Libyan cities,
carried out with the assistance of Margaret Thatcher, then
Prime Minister of Britain. That aggression targeted Tripoli
and Benghazi, and used hundreds of American military
aircraft to bombard civilian targets, including the home of
Colonel Muammar Al-Qadhafi, the leader of the revolution,
in an unprecedented and despicable attempt to assassinate
the leader of a country and his family before the eyes of
the whole world.

As we all know, the whole world condemned that
barbaric aggression. But the Security Council alone was
unable to adopt a resolution condemning the aggression,
because the aggressor used its veto power. The Security
Council also ignored General Assembly resolution 41/38,
which instructs the Council to remain seized of the
question of the United States aggression.

Despite all these unjust practices by the Israelis and
the United States, we will not lose hope that the Security
Council will play its vital role in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We will spare no effort
to observe the principles of the United Nations in
cooperation with all peace-loving nations, until the world
is free of the rule of force, which should be replaced by
the rule of law so that truth may triumph and falsehood
perish.

"For falsehood is (by its nature) bound to perish."
(The Holy Koran, XVII:8I)

