Mr. Sandoval Cojull'ln (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Guatemala is grateful for the holding of this
open debate and for the briefings by the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Machiera
Kamau, and of the former Chair of the Commission,
Ambassador Olof Skoog. We are also grateful for the
leadership of Ambassador Gert Rosenthal as Chair of
the Advisory Group of Expers on the Review of the
Peacekeeping Architecture.

My delegation shares the ideas contained in the
concept note (S/2016/104, annex ) in the sense that the
United Nations can play a key role in preventing armed
conflicts from beginning, resuming or continuing. We
wish to highlight that we see peacebuilding mainly
as an effort to prevent conflict. Even in post-conflict
situations we seek to prevent further recurrence of
conflict, and peacebuilding can serve to prevent
conflicts from arising at all.

We also share the view that the recent failures of
the Organization have served to highlight the need
to review in a broad and comprehensive manner the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. As we
have repeatedly stated, peacekeeping missions should
be understood as a task in which only interested
national stakeholders should feel ownership. The
United Nations and international actors may support
and facilitate the process, but they cannot direct it.
On that basis, Guatemala proudly supports various
missions with military personnel in order to contribute
to international peace and security. We support what
was highlighted in the report (see S/2105/490) of the
Advisory Group of Experts, in the sense that the United
Nations should have better operational strategies to
have a closer relationship with international financial
institutions and regional and subregional organizations.

We see the holding of this open debate as being
very timely. It creates a space to discuss and hear the
different positions on peacebuilding. This exercise
is particularly relevant in the light of the current
negotiations of the draft resolution on the review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture.

We stress the importance of delegations using
the recommendations and observations made by the
Advisory Group of Experts as a solid and supportive
basis for discussion. We are aware that during
negotiations, the Organization's States Members will
face major challenges in reaching consensus on major
issues, such as the inclusion of human rights, funding
for peacebuilding and defining various concepts, such
as sustainable peace.

Given that the concept of peacebuilding has
been on the Organization's agenda since 1992 and
that international contexts are not static, Member
States have a valuable opportunity to engage in an
analytical discussion, based on lessons learned, on the
peacebuilding architecture of the Organization. It is
therefore imperative to remind the Council that greater
efforts are needed to prevent conflicts. The numbers
leave no room for interpretation. Investing in prevention
will prevent above all the loss of human lives. but it will
also allow for a better use of the Organization's limited
financial resources and better performance. That point
provides clarity about the importance that Member
States should give to the Peacebuilding Fund and to
strengthening coordination with both the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Support Office.

Guatemala stresses the need for the Council to
ensure that any mandate for peacebuilding missions
emphasizes that the importance of such missions
being integrated within the United Nations system as a
whole, including the Human Rights Council, in order to
implement sustainable peace on the ground.

