Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me at the outset thank
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his useful briefing.

Last month, the international community
overwhelmingly welcomed the resumption of direct
negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority. Cautious optimism was in the air. There was
even talk of reaching a settlement within one year.
However, it unfortunately did not take long for the
skeptics to be proven right once again. Despite appeals
from all quarters of the international community, Israel
let the moratorium on settlement activity expire.

For our part, we still believe that this last round
of direct talks can be salvaged. Turkey welcomes the
decision by the Palestinian side to not withdraw
completely from the process and to give ongoing
efforts to find common ground some more time. That
being said, this pause in direct engagement cannot last
forever.

Once again, Turkey, like scores of other States,
calls on Israel to desist from taking unilateral steps and
employing politically expedient rhetoric that
undermine and prejudice the notion of a negotiated
two-State settlement. That means first and foremost
immediately freezing all settlement activity, including
in East Jerusalem, with a view to giving direct
negotiations a chance to proceed.

For there to be popular support for direct
negotiations and ultimately the realization of a two-
State solution, the conditions of occupation have to be
eased and a positive environment created on the ground
that allows for the State-building exercise in Palestine
to make progress. If the Palestinian Authority is indeed
Israel's partner in peace, then it must be empowered to
assume its responsibilities fully.

We welcome the World Bank's recent
pronouncement that at its current pace and
performance, the Palestinian Authority is well
positioned for the establishment of a State at any point
in the near future. For the Palestinian Authority to
become economically viable, obstacles to private
sector development and sustainable growth have to be
lifted. Palestinians need to be able to use more of their
land. They also have to enjoy their fundamental rights
and freedoms. In short, as the base for a State is rolled
out, the measure of occupation must be rolled back. In
the meantime, the international community must
continue to support the considerable progress already
made by the Palestinian Authority in State-building.

On the other hand, according to all accounts, the
humanitarian situation in Gaza continues to be grave.
By virtue of its illegal and inhuman blockade, Israel is
directly responsible for an ongoing human tragedy that
is unfolding day in and day out, in plain sight. It is a
harsh existence where, for example, teenagers
collecting rubble to make cement are shot at on a daily
basis. Such is the sad reality designed and imposed by
Israel.

The international community must react
proactively to the suffering that endures in Gaza.
Turkey once again calls for the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) and for the
full and immediate lifting of the blockade.

On a positive note, Turkey welcomes the recent
progress made in talks between Palestinian factions.
The existing differences need to be overcome, and
disunity must be made a thing of the past. We will
continue to support efforts at reconciliation. The
Palestinian people need and deserve a single leadership
that incorporates all factions and is able to lend its full
support to the peace process.

The stability of Lebanon continues to be of
paramount importance for peace and security in the
region. Tensions have visibly mounted over the past
few weeks. It is crucial that all of the actors in the
political spectrum in Lebanon remain calm, maintain
dialogue and be sensitive to all legitimate concerns.
The Special Tribunal for Lebanon is an independent
body established by the Council at the request of
Lebanon. Its work should not become politicized.

Turkey believes that the hard-won peace in
Lebanon must be preserved at all costs, and we will
continue to play our part in a bilateral and regional
context to defuse existing tensions. In this context, let
me also reiterate our full support for the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Turkey will
continue to call for and strive towards the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).

As concerns the attack by Israeli military forces
on an international humanitarian aid convoy on the
high seas, Turkey welcomes the fact that, based on the
Council's presidential statement on 1 June
(S/PRST/2010/9), the work of the panel of inquiry
established by the Secretary-General is under way. In
mid-September the panel produced its first progress
report, after receiving an interim report on the Turkish
national investigation. The panel awaits a similar
national contribution from Israel to proceed with the
inquiry.

On the other hand, the fact-finding mission
dispatched by the United Nations Human Rights
Council submitted its report, which that Council
adopted by on 29 September (See A/HRC/RES/15/1 ). I
will not go into the details of that important report
here. In short, the mission concluded, based on a very
detailed analysis of the facts, that a series of violations
of international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law, were committed by
the Israeli forces during the interception of the flotilla
and the detention of passengers in Israel prior to their
deportation. Turkey continues to support the work of
the panel of inquiry and looks forward to the
establishment by the panel, as soon as possible, of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding that tragic use
of force against civilians in international waters.

There are once again serious question marks
about the future of the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process. At this time of uncertainty, all parties must
exercise restraint and refrain from taking steps that are
counterproductive to the efforts to establish common
ground and a basis for compromise. In that context, the
major new settlement activity in East Jerusalem,
announced just last Friday, is yet another step in the
wrong direction. Israel must put an end to the actions
designed to change the demographics and the social
and religious fabric of Jerusalem. It must refrain from
any provocative action in the city and preserve the
status of Jerusalem, as required by the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

More broadly, peace in the Middle East cannot be
attained without putting in place a comprehensive
framework that takes into account all the different
tracks. We call on all actors in the region to act
responsibly, assume their fair share of the burden in the
search for stability, and give peace a chance.

