Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate on the
working methods of the Security Council. I also thank
Mr. Ian Martin, Executive Director of the Security
Council Report, for his excellent briefing this morning.
We are grateful to him and his team for the work they
are doing in relation to our subject.

I am speaking on behalf of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group. As many of
those here know, we are a group of 25 Member States
from every region. Our objective is to encourage better
working methods in United Nations bodies, particularly
the Security Council.

The working methods of the Security Council have
been a subject of discussion almost since the creation
of the United Nations and the Council itself. Over the
years, there has been some progress. Most recently,
the adoption last August of the note by the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/507, annex), after a
process of revision successfully led by Japan, has given
us a coherent overview of the practices and working
methods discussed so far. But we must acknowledge that
overall progress has been slow and the implementation
of what has been agreed on has been uneven. In order
to safeguard the effectiveness and reputation of the
Council and the United Nations at large, and to gain the
support of the wider United Nations membership for
Security Council decisions, we believe it is important
to implement these practices in a consistent manner
and not to backslide from previous decisions and
commitments. Today I want to highlight four areas
where ACT would like to see specific improvements.

The first has to do with enabling the 10 elected
members of the Council to be fully involved in all
of its business. We encourage all measures aimed at
involving the non-permanent members early on in the
Council's business and ensuring continuity. In that
respect, we welcome the fact that in the past two years,
starting in October, incoming members have been
invited to observe closed Security Council meetings
and consultations. We also welcome and encourage
the elected members' active engagement in wrap-up
sessions and interactive briefings on the monthly work
of the Council. However, more can be done to ensure
they have access to as many resources and documents
as possible at an early stage. Furthermore, coordinating
the incoming elected members with both the outgoing
members and those staying on the Council for another
year is essential to ensuring unity and coherence in the
Security Council's work.

Secondly, the Council's drafting and
decision-making practices need some attention.
Assuming that the penholdership system persists, the
elected members should be enabled to engage actively
on all issues, including those that are particularly
important to them and where they have particular
expertise. More penholderships could be entrusted to
elected members. Another possibility for ensuring that
could be by increasing the use of co-penholderships,
and we encourage Council members to discuss jointly
deciding on the distribution of penholderships and
co-penholderships. With regard to decision-making, the
revised note 507 underlines the importance of holding
at least one round of consultations with all Council
members on drafts before their adoption. That is crucial
to ensuring that all members have an opportunity to
engage and fulfil the responsibility that the wider
membership has entrusted to them.

Thirdly, ACT strongly believes that the rule of
law should apply within the United Nations as well as
outside it, particularly in situations in which United
Nations actions directly affect individual rights. The
United Nations in general, and the Security Council
in particular, should lead the way in that regard.
Resolution 1904 (2009), of 17 December 2009, which
established the Office of the Ombudsperson to the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, was a
significant step forward in improving the fairness and
transparency of the sanctions regimes on Al-Qaida
and the Islamic State in Syria and the Levant and
enhancing the rule of law in the implementation of
Council decisions. We strongly urge the Security
Council to complete the appointment procedure for the
post of Ombudsperson, which has been vacant since
August of last year, without further delay. We also call
on it to extend the Ombudsperson's mandate, which
has been further improved in the meantime, to other
sanctions regimes.

Fourthly, the relationship of the Council with the
membership and other bodies is an area where we have
been happy to note some positive developments over
the years. It now has regular interactions, for instance,
with the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission in its role as an
advisory body to the Council. We also note a trend
whereby Council members choose to speak in open
meetings more often, thereby contributing to increased
transparency. While there are situations or stages
of deliberations on certain items that require closed-
door meetings or consultations, we encourage Council
members to hold open meetings whenever possible and
to seek interaction with Member States, other bodies
and civil-society representatives who can provide
useful advice to the Council. Close interaction is also
essential if we are to avoid situations where the Security
Council finds itself adrift from the larger membership
because the use of the veto has prevented it from taking
decisions. In that regard, ACT encourages all States
to adhere to and implement the ACT code of conduct
regarding Security Council action against genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes.

