Mr. Spirie (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in Bosnian; interpretation provided by the delegation): At
the outset, let me express my pleasure at being here
again since my last visit in November 2007, although
in significantly different circumstances.

As members may recall, Bosnia and Herzegovina
experienced major turbulence in November 2007. I am
pleased to report today that our authorities have
demonstrated the sense of dialogue and compromise so
badly needed if Bosnia and Herzegovina is to succeed,
proving that we are able to manage a crisis and not be
managed by it.

Since November 2007, many positive
developments have taken place in my country. The
Council of Ministers functioned as a caretaker
Government between October 2007 and February 2008,
but that did not prevent us from addressing the
numerous challenges and difficult tasks before us.
European integration and full membership in NATO
have been the two main guidelines of our work.
Brussels recognized our work by initialling the
Stabilization and Association Agreement, and NATO
by introducing intensive dialogue with Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which we strongly appreciate. At the
same time, it has encouraged us to continue working to
meet the requirements for full NATO membership.

The initialling of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement posed many challenges to the
Council of Ministers, the most serious of which was
police reform, an issue that remained pending after
many unsuccessful attempts to resolve it. The Council
of Ministers took the lead role in that reform. Although
the parliamentary majority showed a lack of
willingness and understanding in support of the reform
at the very last moment, I am particularly glad that the
Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina
adopted the proposed legislation, whereby we fulfilled
the final political condition for signing the Agreement.

I hope that lessons have been learned from the
earlier failures of domestic institutions to assume the
lead role in the reform process. Those institutions
should not be bypassed or completely excluded, as was
the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We now rightly expect Brussels to set the date for the
signing ceremony and for the institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to continue fulfilling the conditions that
the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council has defined.

The Council of Ministers has adopted numerous
important laws and decisions, including a law on
pharmaceuticals and medical devices, a law on the
Fiscal Council, a law on the protection and rescue of
humans and assets from natural and other disasters, a
law on agriculture and rural development, a law on
sports and others. We expect timely action by the
Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
adopt the proposed legislation.

Special emphasis has been placed on educational
reform, ultimately supported by the adoption of a law
on vocational education and training, a decision on
adopting documents necessary for the further
implementation of the Bologna process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, a decision to establish a centre for
information and recognition of higher education
diplomas, and a decision to establish the Higher
Education Development Agency. Together with the
Entity Prime Ministers and the Mayor of Brcko
District, I signed a memorandum of understanding
establishing the Conference of Ministers of Education
in Bosnia and Herzegovina as the highest standing
advisory body in that field. The establishment of that
agency and its successful functioning will encourage
the coordination of the activities of all bodies and
institutions working in the field of education.

Cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) is an issue
that has long burdened domestic institutions and
relations within Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Council
of Ministers is fully committed to the final resolution
of that issue and the closing of that chapter. We are
doing our utmost in that respect. Domestic institutions,
together with representatives of international agencies,
exert continuous pressure on persons suspected of
aiding war-crimes suspects. The representative of the
European Union monitoring mission, who evaluates
reform processes in Bosnia and Herzegovina, has
assessed the cooperation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
with the ICTY as satisfactory. We will pursue our hard
work on public administration reform, on which visible
though insufficient progress has been achieved
recently.

With respect to the economy, we may agree that it
is not yet satisfactory, but it is unquestionably on the
right track. The real growth rate of the gross domestic
product in 2007 was 6.1 per cent. The projected growth
rate in 2008 is 6.5 per cent, and further growth is
expected in 2009 and 2010. A major contribution to
economic growth is expected from an increase in
exports, industrial production and investments, and
particularly from foreign investments, which are
demonstrating continuous growth. Direct foreign
investments in Bosnia and Herzegovina reached record
highs in 2007.

The main problem in Bosnia and Herzegovina's
economy remains the high unemployment rate, the
optimal solution of which is an increase in green-field
investments. For that reason, together with the Entity
Prime Ministers, I have decided to support the
convening of the Crans Montana Forum in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to ensure the positive promotion
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to attract foreign
investments.

All of this testifies to the progress that has been
achieved in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but, honestly
speaking, certain outstanding obligations remain. We
have not succeeded in adopting a State property law,
reaching agreement on a methodology for determining
the permanent ratio for VAT revenue distribution, or
adopting a justice sector reform strategy or a war

crimes strategy. We will continue to hard work on
those issues, and I am convinced that we will reach
mutually acceptable solutions.

Constitutional reform is one of the ongoing
challenges we face. My position on the issue is clear.
Constitutional reform cannot be based on denials,
either of the Washington or of the Dayton Agreements.
Therefore, I recommend to all that we revert to the
original form of the Washington and Dayton
Agreements. I would like openly to warn those who
seek to challenge the Dayton Agreement that such an
approach can jeopardize the results already achieved.
Updating the agreement is possible and desirable, but it
has to be the result of internal consensus and
compromise and never imposed from abroad.

The Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution should
be reformed in such a way as not to represent an
obstacle to Euro-Atlantic integration. A denial of the
Entities, which some promote, is not a precondition of
successful constitutional reform and could even
generate instability, with unforeseeable consequences.

Please allow me to underline the importance of an
issue that has somehow been marginalized, either
intentionally or not. The rule of law is the foundation
on which the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
legal protection of its citizens are based. Building the
rule of law is the only guarantee that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will be a reliable partner of the
international community. If some in our country -
even ministers or other high dignitaries of power - are
allowed to believe themselves to be above the law, I
am not sure that we will be perceived as reliable
partners to anyone. In that regard, I hope for the strong
support of the international community and this body.

Once again, let me take this opportunity to stress
that Bosnia and Herzegovina is committed to good
neighbourly relations and regional cooperation, which
we consider to be important to our common aspiration
to European integration.

Finally, I would like to thank the High
Representative for his new approach, which includes
raising awareness of the importance of reforms in
Bosnia and Herzegovina without using his Bonn
powers.
