Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation congratulates you, Madam President,
on the accession of your country, Argentina, to the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October, and thanks you for your initiative to organize
today's debate on the important issue of the working
methods of the Security Council. My delegation would
also like to thank Ms. Kimberly Prost, Ombudsperson
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2001) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, and the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
their constructive briefings for the debate.

The question of the working methods of the
Security Council is closely linked to that of the
reconfiguration of the Security Council. However,
until we are able to find a consensual point of entry
that will someday, hopefully, enable expansion and
equitable representation in the Council, the collective
duty now is to do everything possible to ensure the
greatest efficiency in the Council's actions, with a view
to maintaining international peace and security, in
accordance with the Charter.

My country suffered a severe post-election crisis,
which left more than 3,000 dead and 1.5 million
displaced persons at the height of the crisis. However,
thanks to the consensus that prevailed in the Security
Council on that issue, resolution 1975 (2011) was
adopted in 2011 and allowed us to put an end to the
violence and save countless human lives. Imagine
for a moment if the veto had been used in the case of
the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire, then today we would be
deploring another genocide in Cote d'Ivoire. With that
experience, the news of the mass atrocities that we are
witnessing now calls on us and obliges us to condemn
the Security Council's inaction in the face of those
situations, due mainly to the misuse of the veto.
Lest we forget, the right to veto conferred to
permanent members of the Security Council is an
enormous privilege, which, in our opinion, must yield
to the moral imperative of protecting populations
against mass atrocities. In that sense, C6te d'Ivoire
understands the French initiative to implement a code
of conduct to govern the use of the veto in situations of
mass atrocities. That is why again today, Cote d'Ivoire,
expresses its full support for that initiative and will
reiterate it whenever it is necessary, just as it did on
25 September, through its Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Minister of State His Excellency Charles Koffi
Diby, during the ministerial meeting on that issue,
co-chaired by France and Mexico, on the margins of the
general debate of the sixty-ninth session of the General
Assembly.

It is clear that the effectiveness of the Council's
working methods will increase significantly with the
adoption of such a code of conduct, especially since
we have seen the emergence of an encouraging trend
with the adoption of resolutions 2150 (2014), on the
prevention of genocide, and 2171 (2014), on conflict
prevention. In that regard, my delegation urges the
Council to organize more briefings by the Special
Advisers to the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect, as
well as by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. The importance ofthat was highlighted
in the joint briefing of the Council on South Sudan by
Mr. Adama Dieng and Ms. Navi Pillay (see S/PV.7168).
In that context, my delegation also supports the
horizon-scanning approach of the Department of
Political Affairs and any Arria Formula initiative aimed
at informing the Security Council on situations where
there is a potential risk of mass atrocities.

In conclusion, I would like to recall that as the
seventieth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations approaches, the expectations of people all over
the globe are increasingly desperate to see a safer, more
peaceful and more just world. The Security Council is
on the front lines when it comes to providing answers to
such legitimate expectations. That is why we encourage
the permanent members of the Council to adopt a
declaration of principles for a code of conduct on
refraining voluntarily from using the veto in situations
involving mass atrocities. That will certainly help to
give the Security Council all the credibility and strength
it needs to deal effectively with its various challenges.

