Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General De Mistura for
the update on the constitutional committee. We would
like to say that we very much appreciate and support his
tireless efforts to set up the committee before the end
of the year. We are deeply disappointed with Syria's
demonstrated lack of willingness to cooperate with the
United Nations and the Special Envoy in the political
process, which is in breach ofthe Sochi agreement. The
establishment ofa constitutional committee, which was
agreed to in Sochi, is now long overdue. It is high time
that those who initiated the committee, particularly
Russia, intensified their efforts to ensure Syria's full
cooperation with the United Nations. The Astana
guarantors must now also deliver on their commitments
in support of the United Nations-led process.

High-level meetings in the relevant formats have
shown that there is now international momentum
with regard to Syria that must be seized. As agreed
in Istanbul, a constitutional committee should be in
place before the end of the year, and invitations should
be sent out by mid-December, as the Special Envoy
mentioned. He has our full support in convening it
within that deadline. We fully support his efforts to
ensure that the committee is credible, balanced and
representative of the Syrian people, as is also provided
for in the Sochi final statement, and that it includes a
minimum of 30 per cent women. His list of participants
must now get the support it needs, particularly from the
Astana guarantors. We reiterate that the Special Envoy
has a mandate to establish a committee and decide on
its composition. The Sochi final statement made it clear
that the final selection of the committee would be made
through the United Nations-led process.

We are encouraged that the agreement to cease
hostilities in Idlib held, but there are now worrying
signs of escalation. We welcome the call made at
the Istanbul summit for the ceasefire to be upheld,
and we reiterate our expectations of the guarantors
in this regard. However, the best way to prevent a
humanitarian disaster in Idlib is ultimately by enabling
genuine progress towards a political solution and
ensuring respect for international law. We also reiterate
that Sweden, like the rest of the European Union, will
not assist in Syria's reconstruction until a political
transition in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva process is firmly under way. The return of
refugees must be safe, voluntary and dignified, and the
conditions for that are clearly not in place at the moment.

The Special Envoys need the Council's active
backing. At this critical moment, all the members of
the Council should take a clear stand and deliver on
their commitment to supporting the United Nations-
led political process and the Special Envoy. We
must step up our joint efforts to make sure that the
constitutional committee will indeed convene before
the end of the year. Only through a United Nations-
led process can we achieve a sustainable political
solution, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva process, acceptable to all Syrians and the
international community.

