The President: I thank Ms. Malcorra for her
briefing and for the work that she and her Department
have been doing on this very important topic.

I have the pleasure to give the floor to General
Agwai, Force Commander for the United Nations-
African Union Mission in Darfur.

General Agwai: Good morning. I am deeply
honoured to have been invited here to address this
prestigious forum.

We have just heard from two Under-Secretaries-
General about the importance of identifying a new
horizon for peacekeeping. The African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
encapsulates the full range of challenges facing modern
United Nations peacekeeping missions: the role of
critical enablers, deployment challenges, robust
peacekeeping, the protection of civilians, logistic
support and all the other issues addressed, which are at
the very heart of UNAMID.

I come here as a simple soldier and would like to
take this opportunity to speak to the Council candidly
at the end of my posting to Darfur. It has been an
extraordinary two years, and it has been a privilege to
end my 40-year military career with such a challenging
mission.

I was first posted to Darfur in July 2007 as the
Force Commander of the African Union Mission in
Sudan (AMIS), which was basically an observer
mission with only eight infantry battalions and a
strength of just about 7,000 sparsely deployed
personnel. From those early days we have had to
confront the consequences of the lack of critical
strategic enablers in peacekeeping, whether in the
African Union or the United Nations.

One example is the lack of military helicopters.
In the attack on the AMIS camp at Haskanita in
September 2007, 10 peacekeepers lost their lives on the
spot and 2 more died in hospital. We could not fly
many of them out until the following day because of
the lack of helicopter resources. Sadly, UNAMID is
now approaching its second anniversary without these
vital enablers that can make such a difference to the
safety and security of our personnel.

Another one of those enablers is robust
communication lines. The well-executed ambush of a
UNAMID patrol in July 2008 resulted in the deaths of
seven more peacekeepers. One of the first rounds fired
destroyed the patrol's only VHF radio, and the first
information that the base camp had about the attack
was when the survivors limped in some six hours later.
Again, helicopters could have played a critical role in
bringing the injured to safety.

The lack of specialized capabilities is critical in
difficult and dangerous operating environments. Even
the most experienced United Nations hands who were
brought to help us after the transfer of authority on
31 December 2007 agreed that Darfur presents logistic
challenges that go well beyond those that United
Nations peacekeeping operations regularly face. The
roads were no more than muddy tracks; the airfields
were too short to allow large aircraft such as Antonov
l24s to land; the railway was single-track, and the
climate was brutal. The rate of deployment has been
affected. The first new troops did not arrive until May
2008.

Nevertheless, we have made progress. By the end
of this month, we should have 74 per cent of the total
19,555 troops on the ground. This is one of the factors
behind the positive shift in attitude towards UNAMID
among the local population and the significant number
of civilians moving towards the UNAMID camps.

Yet, as the New Horizon non-paper makes clear,
effective deployment is not just a question of total
numbers of the ground. It is about the right types of
capabilities arriving in the right sequence. As
UNAMID's integrated deployment plan illustrated,
sequencing of deployment - logisticians, engineers
and medics first, as the United Nations Light and Heavy
Support Packages, and new battalions thereafter -
makes sense. But UNAMID also demonstrates that this
is often very difficult in practice. Even now, there
remain significant shortfalls to effective operating
capacity of the mission.

The longer it takes to establish initial operating
capacity, the more difficult it is to focus on practical
mandate implementation. We are now beginning to
look at this at UNAMID. Here, the New Horizon
document makes an essential point as to the importance
of peacekeepers with adequate pre-deployment
training. In particular, we need to continue developing
patrol skills if we are to extend UNAMID's area of
influence.

At present, we are like 32 ink spots on a very
large piece of blotting paper. Each spot must grow and
be connected to the others. That means considerably
longer patrols, ranging from base for several days at a
stretch. Many of the troops deployed do not currently
have the skills, discipline and equipment required for
this type of patrolling. This, in turn, puts further strain
on UNAMID to establish in-mission training units.

I attended the Conference on Robust
Peacekeeping organized by the Office of Military
Affairs in May 2009. Darfur typifies the kind of
environments that often demand a robust response
capacity. It is a complex internal dispute with many
diverse players. It affects the most vulnerable -
women and children. As the Brahimi report asserts,
peacekeepers "must be prepared to confront the
lingering forces of war and violence, with the ability
and determination to defeat them" (5/2000/809, p. viii).

From my experience as Deputy Force
Commander in Sierra Leone from 2000 to 2002,
wherever the United Nations deploys, civilians have an
expectation that it will provide protection. We are
achieving that, but we need the tools with which to do
it, including those critical enablers that I mentioned
earlier. We also need well-trained troops and effective
command and control. If we are to be robust, there
must also be an acceptance of the risk of casualties,
and we will need to redouble our efforts to protect
mission and civilian personnel in the face of these
risks.

I should say, however, that a robust posture is not
only a matter of training, equipment or force strength,
important as they are. It is first a matter of the attitude
and resolve of the mission. When the Sudanese army
and the forces of the Justice and Equality Movement
squared off over control of Muhajeriya in late January
and early February 2009, UNAMID's small contingent
there risked being caught in the crossfire and was by
no means in a position to directly impact the military
situation. But by refusing to leave the town and its
inhabitants, it sent a potent message to both parties and
thereby contributed to averting direct hostilities.

A mission such as UNAMID demonstrates the
importance of partnership and interaction between all
the parties involved. The tripartite mechanism between
the African Union, the United Nations and the
Government of the Sudan, which focuses on
deployment, logistical and administrative issues, is an
effective one. I am particularly grateful to Under-
Secretary-General Susana Malcorra for the
commitment she has made to keeping those meetings
focused, and to Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy
for pushing the process forward.

But it does not stop there. In Darfur, we have to
liaise daily with the parties on the ground - the State
leadership, the Walis, the amdas, the Government of
the Sudan police and military liaison, the sheikhs, the
sheikh of sheikhs - and the list goes on. Failure to

include any one of those can result in delays in
deployment, stalled projects or obstructed patrols. It
remains a real challenge for operational effectiveness.

This has been a remarkable two years for
UNAMID. We have made significant progress on the
ground and the end of the deployment is at last in sight.
This is a major achievement, and I have faith that when
we are fully deployed, we will make a difference to the
men and women of Darfur, who have suffered so much
for so long. The burden of expectation upon us is high,
but we owe it to them to deliver.

On a personal note, may I thank all Council
members for their unflinching support throughout my
tenure. It has been an absolute privilege to be the Force
Commander of such a challenging mission.

The President: I thank General Agwai for his
briefing and his outstanding service to the United
Nations over the past several years. We are very
grateful to him for everything that he has done
personally. We also thank the entire team at the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

I take this opportunity again to thank all the
commanders of the peacekeeping missions who are
here for their annual conference and have taken time
out from that to attend our meeting this morning. I
know they have to move on in 10 minutes' time or so,
but we are very glad to have them here. On behalf of
the Council, I should just like to thank them all, and all
the men and women of their missions, for the
outstanding work they do for peace and security around
the world.

I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council. In accordance with the understanding
reached among Council members, I wish to remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than five
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the texts in
writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.


