Mr. Dang Dinh Quy (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Madam President, for giving me the opportunity
to participate in this open debate. I would like
express my appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov, Mr. Billingslea and Ms. Buku for their
insightful briefings.

Over the past few months, the world has continued
to witness and suffer from heinous attacks of terrorism.
Innocent civilians continue to be killed in many corners
of the world. The landscape of terrorism has become
more complicated than ever before. The financing of
terrorism, including its fundraising tactics, is becoming
increasingly diversified and sophisticated. In that
context, I commend the holding of today's open debate
and will focus on several issues outlined in the concept
note (S/2019/239, annex).

First of all, it is crucial to implement the legal
framework for counter-terrorism financing laid out
in the various relevant Security Council resolutions.
Resolution 2462 (2019), just adopted this morning, is
an important tool for filling gaps and a timely response
to the challenges we face. In that regard, Viet Nam
has gradually harmonized its normative framework in
order to align it with those resolutions, including by
criminalizing all acts of terrorism and its financing,
with serious penalties in our revised penal code and
relevant specific laws for countering terrorism and
money-laundering. We have also strengthened our
international cooperation in that area. Facing the new
challenges related to terrorist financing, we are of the
view that the Security Council could consider further
strengthening the implementation of existing sanctions
regimes, including those under today's resolution, with
a View to effectively addressing new and emerging
risks and trends related to the financing of terrorism.

Secondly, we should consolidate collaborative
action at all levels and through all channels. Viet Nam is
actively participating in international efforts to prevent
and combat the financing of terrorism. We became a
member ofthe Asia/Pacific Group on Money Laundering
in 2007. In 2014, we implemented a national plan of
action for the period from 2015 to 2020, on money-
laundering prevention and control and on terrorism
financing, in order to fulfil the recommendations ofthe
Financial Action Task Force. At the regional level, we
have joined the efforts of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) to implement the ASEAN
Convention on Counter Terrorism and the ASEAN
Plan of Action to Prevent and Counter the Rise of
Radicalization and Violent Extremism for the 2018-
2025 period. Bilaterally, we have concluded several
mutual legal assistance agreements in criminal matters.
We have also established a network for cooperation
and information-sharing and exchange with the law-
enforcement agencies of more than 20 countries. Given
the current complexity of the financing of terrorism,
my delegation stresses how vital it is to intensify
cooperation among States in sharing information on
suspected transactions, capacity-building and the
transfer of technology to address the threats posed by
new financing methods.

Thirdly, Governments should maintain effective
collaboration with the private sector and the relevant
stakeholders. The State Bank of Viet Nam, our
central bank, works closely on regulatory inspection
with all institutions to monitor, inspect and ensure
their transactions' safety, security and preparedness
with regard to counter-terrorism. Information
regarding suspected transactions is regularly
exchanged between law-enforcement agencies and our
international counterparts.

In conclusion, I would like to once again reaffirm
my Government's commitment and determination
to work closely with States and other international
partners in the fight against terrorism, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
international obligations.

