Mr. Maiga (Mali) (spoke in French): Like
previous speakers, I, too, would like to thank Mr.
Annabi for his very comprehensive update of the
situation in Kosovo.

We can see that significant progress has been
made with regard to managing conflict, in the sharing
of responsibilities between the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
local population and, finally, in the carrying out of
essential projects and programmes. Nevertheless, my
delegation must point out that, unfortunately, some
aspects of Kosovo society have not changed. We
continue to witness continuing acts of violence, threats,
attacks and murders that are primarily committed by
extremists on all sides, motivated by racial hatred and
political intolerance. Therefore, the real challenge of
creating a society where the entire population can live
without fear and in complete security still remains. In
that regard, my delegation would like to make the
following remarks.

First, we welcome the signing of the Airlie
Declaration. While it is true this is a small step, it is
nevertheless a very important one for the reconciliation
of hearts and spirits that the international community
so much desires.

With regard to the elections, we call upon
UNMIK to take the appropriate police measures to
ensure that the elections that have been announced for
next October take place smoothly, transparently and
with the required rigour. We also welcome the
significant results achieved in registering people to
vote, and we call upon UNMIK to continue that task
while taking into account all the ethnic groups of
Kosovo.

Thirdly, the efforts of the international
community will not achieve the desired success until
solutions are found to the question of prisoners and, no
less importantly, to that of people who have
disappeared.

With regard to security, we think that we must not
only continue to provide effective security guarantees
for ethnic minorities, but that those guarantees should
be reinforced so that they can participate actively in
political and economic activities for the rebuilding of
Kosovo.

Member States and the donor countries should be
urged to continue to provide UNMIK with the
necessary means to accomplish its complicated
mission. I would therefore like to end by once again
renewing my delegation's support for Mr. Kouchner
and for the Mission that has been deployed in Kosovo.

