Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like our
colleagues, I thank Ambassador Nestor Osorio for his
leadership of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006), for the work accomplished
under his direction, and for the informative report he
just presented on the activities carried out in the past
three months. Some of the issues raised in that report
are indeed particularly worrying, and we encourage the
Committee to pursue its investigations on all those
matters. Increasing tensions in an already unstable
region reinforce our concerns.

Let me reiterate once again the importance that
we attach to the publication of the Panel of Experts
final report, which was submitted in May 2011. That
report should already have been made available to all
United Nations Member States as a measure not only
of transparency, but also of accountability for the tasks
undertaken by the Committee last year. Moreover, we
need to raise awareness among Member States of the
importance of fully and adequately implementing
resolution 1929 (2010), and information sharing is
crucial in that regard.

The report of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), dated
24 February (S/2012/114, annex), established again the
continued absence of progress in Iran's cooperation
with the Agency and confirmed that its enrichment
activities and heavy water-related projects were not
suspended. A number of outstanding cases that demand
urgent clarification were not answered, and access to
nuclear sites, in particular the Parchin site, continue to
be denied.

The possible existence in Iran of past or current
undisclosed nuclear activities involving a military
dimension, including the development of ballistic
missile capabilities, significantly increases our general
concern and suspicion over the true nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme. At this point in time, it is
essential for Iran to urgently restore international
confidence concerning the exclusively peaceful nature

of its nuclear programme, in accordance with its
obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and its Safeguards Agreement, as
well as the relevant provisions of Security Council
resolutions.

As we have stated before, the IAEA is the only
international body of ascertaining the true nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme. It is imperative that Iran
respond positively and through concrete actions to the
requests of the Agency and engage seriously in the
resumption of negotiations for a comprehensive and
long-term settlement of the nuclear issue.

Portugal continues to stand by its long-standing
commitment to support and work for a diplomatic
solution and is encouraged by the prospect in the near
future of substantive talks to be held in the framework
of the E3+3. We sincerely hope that Iran will now enter
into meaningful discussions without preconditions and
cooperate with the IAEA to clarify all outstanding
issues, in particular those that give rise to the
international community's deep concerns about
possible military dimensions to its nuclear programme.

