Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Alexander Hug for
their briefings on the situation in Ukraine.

We reiterate our support for the ongoing steps
taken by the Secretary-General and the United Nations
to bring an end to the situation in Ukraine, and we
support the vital work of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in mediating the
conflict and implementing the Minsk agreements. We
express our deep concern over the recent escalation
of violence in Ukraine. As we have stated on many
occasions, we believe that full compliance with the
ceasefire, monitored and verified by the Special
Monitoring Mission of the OSCE under the provisions
of the Minsk agreements, and dialogue between the
parties is the only way to achieve lasting peace.

We underscore the importance of strengthening the
rule oflaw and the obligation to respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
General Assembly resolution 68/262 and international
law. We have also reaffirmed on many occasions the
importance of upholding those principles, which we
consider indispensable. We regret the deterioration
of the security situation and its serious consequences
for the civilian population, which continues to suffer
human rights violations and abuses. We urge the parties
to respect human rights, including full respect for the
rights of minorities, and we call for the perpetrators of
such violations to be brought to justice. We recall that
accountability is also a way of implementing the Minsk
agreements.

The complexity of the crisis in eastern Ukraine is
not limited to the security sphere. More than 5 million
people require humanitarian assistance, and the number
of internally displaced persons and those seeking refuge
continues to increase, making it is urgent to address the
problem. It is also crucial to ensure rapid and unhindered
humanitarian access to the affected population, and all
parties must respect international humanitarian law.
The international community should help alleviate the
crisis. We appeal to donors to contribute to the 2015
Ukraine humanitarian response plan, which so far has
been funded at only 29 per cent.

We are at a critical juncture when it is imperative
that the Council reiterates a message to the parties on
the importance of creating conditions for the effective
implementation of the Minsk agreements. The facts
reveal that apprehensions about the precariousness of
effective enforcement have some merit in the context
of structural tensions. Only political dialogue within
the framework of the Minsk agreements could help to
overcome those critical cycles of violence.

