Mr. Feltman: I brief today against the backdrop
of many unsettling developments in the region.
Nonetheless, we should not lose sight of the Israeli-
Palestinian issue. With peace negotiations suspended
since the end of April and despite the restraint initially
displayed by both sides, the situation on the ground
has turned highly volatile with several disturbing
developments. Intensive search operations in the West
Bank for the three Israeli students abducted near Hebron
are ongoing with a corresponding increase in violence
in the West Bank. The hunger strike by Palestinian
administrative and other detainees since 24 April is
now in its sixty-first day. New settlement units have
been announced. And the fragile calm in Gaza was
interrupted by multiple rockets fired at Israel, and the
Israeli military response. All these issues, on which the
United Nations has pronounced itself unequivocally,
can be addressed only if the parties act responsibly
and with restraint. Only then can any renewed attempt
by the parties to find their way back to meaningful
negotiations and to address the much lacking political
horizon, in order to avert further escalation, take hold.
International engagement and support for that effort
should remain unwavering.

The reporting period also witnessed significant
political developments on both sides. On 2 June, President
Abbas announced the formation of a Government
of national consensus headed by Prime Minister
Hamdallah on the basis of the Palestine Liberation
Organization commitments of recognition of Israel,
non-violence and adherence to previous agreements.
The Palestinian President added that elections would be
organized within six months. On 10 June, Israel elected
long-time member and two-time Speaker Reuven Rivlin
of the Knesset as the next President to succeed Shimon
Peres.

The situation in the West Bank - already
tense with demonstrations in support of Palestinian
detainees - has worsened. In the evening of 12 June,
three Israeli students - a 19-year-old and two 16-year-
olds - were reported missing. Their abduction has
been roundly condemned, including by the Secretary-
General, who has expressed his outrage publicly and
in a phone call with Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu.
Israel blamed the abduction on Hamas, an allegation
Hamas has reportedly since denied. We nevertheless
find Hamas statements glorifying the perpetrators
of that act to be outrageous. If Hamas involvement
is corroborated, that would indeed constitute a grave
development.

Search operations by Israeli security forces have
extended to the rest of the West Bank, including in major
population centres. Israeli authorities also implemented
tightened movement restrictions, including prohibiting
men from Hebron between the ages of 20 and 50 years
from crossing the Allenby Bridge into Jordan, the
only international crossing for West Bankers. We are
concerned by reports that over 350 Palestinians have
now been arrested, many injured and four Palestinians
killed, including one minor on 20 June. The rising
death toll as a result of Israeli security operations in
the West Bank is alarming. We condemn all killings
of civilians and call for an investigation into any such
deaths. Reportedly, the Israeli Cabinet also voted to
impose harsher conditions on detainees affiliated with
Hamas who are in Israeli custody.

As the search for the missing youths continues, we
call for restraint in carrying out the security operations,
in strict compliance with international law and while
avoiding punishing individuals for offences they
have not personally committed. Detentions included
those of reported Hamas affiliates and members of
the Palestinian Legislative Council, notably Speaker
Aziz Dweik, as well as over 50 Palestinians previously
released as part of the so-called "Shalit deal".

Palestinian security forces continued their work to
maintain law and order. Earlier, on 5 June, Palestinian
security forces reportedly uncovered and seized in
Hebron explosives, knives, flags and military uniforms
allegedly belonging to Hamas.

Overall, since our last briefing (see S/PV.7178),
Israeli security forces carried out a total of 607 search
and arrest operations and detained an estimated
928 Palestinians. Five Palestinians were shot dead,
including during search operations for the missing,
and 291 injured, including during demonstrations
against the barrier and in support of Palestinians in
administrative detention. Twelve Israeli security forces
personnel were also injured. We are alarmed that there
are significant increases in all of those categories since
our last briefing.

Settler attacks, on the rise during this period,
resulted in 18 Palestinians injured, including three
children, and damage to Palestinian property.
Palestinian attacks, mostly consisting of stone- and
Molotov cocktail-throwing, resulted in injuries to seven
Israelis. The Israeli authorities have not disclosed yet
the findings of their investigation into the deaths of two
Palestinian youths on 15 May.

Settlement activity, illegal under international law,
continued apace with the announcement on 4 June of
the issuance of tenders for over 1,400 new settlement
units in the West Bank and occupied East Jerusalem,
and reports that the Israeli authorities had advanced
plans for some 1,000 settlement housing units following
Prime Minister Netanyahu's reported decision to
unfreeze planning processes for 1,800 settlement units.
On 18 June, 172 settlement units were announced in
the settlement of Har Homa, between Jerusalem and
Bethlehem.

The demolition of 65 Palestinian structures resulted
in the displacement of some 112 Palestinians, including
56 children. Israeli authorities destroyed or seized
a total of 28 donor-funded humanitarian assistance
items, including on 5 June of a water and sanitation
consignment en route to a vulnerable Bedouin
community in Al-Ganoub, in the southern West Bank.

The Secretary-General and the High Commissioner
for Human Rights remain gravely concerned about the
deteriorating health of those Palestinian prisoners on
prolonged hunger strikes. Both have repeatedly called
attention to the situation of prisoners on administrative
detention and reiterated their long-standing position
that administrative detainees should be charged
or released without delay. The United Nations is
concerned about the Government-sponsored legislative
amendment before the Israeli Knesset that, if adopted,
would permit force-feeding and medical treatment of
prisoners on hunger strike against their will under
certain conditions, in contravention of international
standards. The Government-sponsored bill passed its
first reading in the Knesset on 9 June, despite strong
objections raised by national and international medical
and human rights organizations.

Tensions also continued around the holy sites in
the Old City. Since our last briefing, access restrictions
were imposed on several occasions on Palestinians, and
clashes between worshippers and Israeli security forces
resulted in tens of Palestinians injured and detained,
including on 13 June. We call on all parties to show the
utmost restraint regarding the holy compound and to
fully respect the sanctity of holy sites of all faiths.

In Gaza, the prevailing calm started unraveling,
especially following the abduction of the Israeli
students. Since our last briefing, a total of 39 rockets
and four mortar shells were fired towards Israel. Two
rockets exploded at launching sites and 17 dropped
short in Gaza, injuring two Palestinian girls on 16 June.
Three rockets were intercepted by the Iron Dome
system, but four mortar shells and 19 rockets landed
in open areas of Israel, including two near the city of
Ashkelon, without resulting in injuries. Israel conducted
a total of 5 incursions and 38 airstrikes into Gaza,
resulting in the death of a Palestinian militant and a
seven year-old child. Another Palestinian civilian died
on 8 June from injuries after being shot at by the Israeli
Navy on 26 May. A total of 10 Palestinian militants and
eight Palestinian civilians were injured by Israeli fire.
We continue to condemn indiscriminate rocket firing
against civilians as well as any loss of civilian life. We
further call on all Palestinian factions to adhere to the
calm as per the understandings reached in the lead-up
to the unity agreement. Of chief importance is the need
to support the Palestinian Authority's efforts to take
up security functions in Gaza and to unify the security
forces under one legitimate authority.

The persisting dire socioeconomic situation as
the result of a tightened access regime and continued
violence has seriously complicated prospects for the
new Government of national consensus in assuming its
functions and delivering tangible improvements to the
lives of Gazans, which the United Nations had pledged
to support. The tension over the payment of salaries
is but one manifestation of the immediate challenges
as the Palestinian Authority attempts to reunify the
institutions. Existing acute de-development indicators
remain of concern, including rates of food insecurity
at 57 percent, and unemployment at 41 percent,
disproportionately affecting youth.

Much of Gaza's challenges still require structural
solutions, which remain unaddressed. Following the
abduction incident on 12 June and the ensuing rocket
firing, the Kerem Shalom crossing was closed from
15 to 17 June but for the transfer of fuel supplies; it has
been re-opened fully since 18 June. Since our last report
to the Council, there have been no approvals for the
resumption of additional United Nations construction
projects, and pre-approved work stalled as a result of
the crossings being closed. Open crossings, both for
goods and people, access to construction material,
re-establishing trade links between the West Bank
and Gaza, and exports are as urgently needed as ever
to kickstart the economy and create job opportunities.
Rafah was only open for seven days during the reporting
period.

Under the current strenuous circumstances,
although it will not be easy, the United Nations will
continue to deliver assistance to the people in Gaza in
close cooperation with the newly appointed ministers.

Turning to Lebanon, the constitutional deadline to
elect a new President expired on 25 May. Presidential
powers transferred to the Council of Ministers under
the leadership of Prime Minister Salam, in accordance
with the Constitution. Seven parliamentary sessions
have been called so far, but the necessary quorum
was not achieved. We again underline the urgency for
Lebanon's leaders to ensure the election of a President
without further delay and stress the importance for the
Government meanwhile to discharge its responsibilities
effectively.

The security situation has remained relatively
calm with the implementation since April of security
plans for Tripoli and the Bekaa. However, a suicide
car bomb at a security checkpoint in Dahr Al-Baidar
on 20 June killed a member of the internal security
forces. The bombing coincided with an extensive police
raid in Beirut's district of Hamra in which several
suspects were arrested after security agencies received
information about possible new terror attacks, which
resulted in raising the state of alert in Beirut and
elsewhere. In the past month, there have also been at
least five air strikes by Syrian aircraft in Lebanese
territory and three cross-border shelling incidents from
Syria.

More than 1.1 million Syrian refugees are now
registered in Lebanon. On 31 May, the Interior Minister
announced that Syrian refugees who returned to Syria
would lose their refugee status in Lebanon. Restrictions
on the entry of Palestine refugees from Syria have
been reintroduced. The situation in Palestinian camps
remains of concern, with an explosion in Ain Al-Hilweh
on 19 May, allegedly targeting a Fatah official. Faction
leaders have sought to coordinate with Lebanese
authorities to address the concerns, especially in Ain
Al-Hilweh.

In Rome on 17 June, the Government of Italy
hosted a ministerial conference within the framework
of the International Support Group for Lebanon on
support to the Lebanese armed forces. Participants
from 43 delegations welcomed the announcement of
new assistance to the Lebanese Army and encouraged
further assistance in priority areas. The situation in the
area of operations of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon and along the Blue Line remained generally
calm and stable, despite almost daily Israeli violations
of Lebanese air space.

Turning to Syria, on 20 June the Secretary-General
reiterated his deep concerns about the continued levels
of violence and human suffering and destruction in
Syria, and I would like to reiterate the six points he
offered on Friday as a way to help address the situation
in a principled and integrated fashion.

Ending the violence is the most immediate priority.
It is essential that the flow of arms and fighters pouring
into the country be stemmed. In order to achieve that,
an arms embargo must be imposed. Local ceasefire
arrangements, however imperfect, are taking place
and are enabling us to deliver much-needed aid and
to curtail the levels of violence. We should turn those
war agreements into peace agreements. Such an
arrangement was reached most recently in Yarmouk
refugee camp in Damascus over the weekend.

Secondly, we must do our utmost to protect the
human rights, safety and dignity of the Syrian people,
3.5 million of whom are in hard-to-reach locations. The
sieges must end and immediate, unfettered humanitarian
access across internal front lines and borders must be
allowed.

Thirdly, we desperately need new efforts to
start a serious political process for a new Syria. The
Secretary-General will soon name a new envoy, who
must be afforded full cooperation and support by all
international and regional actors.

Fourthly, any credible peace process will have to
address the question of ensuring accountability for the
serious crimes that have been committed by all sides.

Fifthly, while a major landmark was achieved
today with the removal of the last remaining identified
chemicals, finishing the destruction of chemical
weapons in Syria remains an imperative. The joint
effort of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and the United Nations has been
essential in reinforcing the global norm prohibiting
chemical weapons.

Sixthly, and finally, the prolongation of the conflict
in Syria has created fertile ground for radical armed
groups, including those affiliated with Al-Qaida.
Recent events in Iraq have demonstrated vividly that
the Syrian conflict can have devastating impact on
neighbouring countries and far beyond.

Recent serious incidents along the area of separation
supervised by the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) are a further grave reminder
of the risk of regional escalation caused by the Syrian
conflict. Yesterday, approximately 300 metres north of
UNDOF position 52, firing from the Bravo side to the
Alpha side killed an Israeli teenager and injured three
Israeli contractors, including the teenager's father,
who were carrying out work along the Israeli technical
fence. The Israel Defence Forces retaliated with several
rounds of tank fire and again with air strikes in the early
hours today. UNDOF personnel in the area went into
shelter and were not affected, and UNDOF is currently
investigating the incident. All involved should exercise
the utmost restraint, respect their mutual obligations
and halt firing of any kind across the ceasefire line.

We are facing a moment of real crisis that is testing
the region in new ways. Negative forces on multiple
fronts in the Middle East continue to draw strength
by sowing strife and frustrating viable options for a
political solution. We should take this as a wake-up call
that challenges all of us to work together to restore the
prospects for a durable regional peace. In the Israeli-
Palestinian context, both sides have a responsibility to
exercise maximum restraint in order to contain what
has rapidly developed into a critical security situation
on the ground, restore calm and create opportunities
to return to a negotiating process. This is a time for
renewed impetus and political will aimed at ending the
conflict and the occupation that have already scarred
the lives of far too many Israelis and Palestinians for far
too long. We must work together now to build a better
future for the people of the region.

On behalf of the Secretary-General, I also want
to express our collective appreciation to the Special
Representatives and special coordinators of the United
Nations, their teams and the United Nations country
teams, who are working so heroically and diligently
in this region, helping to address the challenges I have
outlined in today's briefing.

