Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Like
other colleagues, I am sure I am very grateful to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and to
Minister Draskovic for their contributions. I would like
to associate myself with the remarks shortly to be made
by Ambassador Ryan on behalf of the European Union.

We have just witnessed the most serious outbreak
of inter-ethnic violence in Kosovo since 1999. There is
no question that it has severely damaged Kosovo's
reputation and has shown that there is a long way yet to
go to build the necessary tolerance in Kosovo. All
parties need to understand clearly that we cannot turn
the clock back to the worst aspects of inter-ethnic
conflict.

It should make the international community more
determined that the standards review policy endorsed
by the Council in December should be fully
implemented. So we very much welcome the
publication of the plan to do just that - the plan issued
on 31 March - because the implementation of the
standards remains the best basis on which to build an
inclusive, multi-ethnic, democratic Kosovo where all
its citizens can live in peace and in security. That has
to be the continuing goal.

We therefore welcome the efforts made by
Member States in the arrangement now being put in
place on the ground in Pristina through an intensified
dialogue to give impetus to that process. But our
accepted policy is "standards before status". Both those
issues are sensitive, and they are linked. The standards
are basic. But on the other hand, the Kosovars will all
need greater clarity or, at least, reassurance as to their
eventual destination.

It seems to me that there are two bottom lines in
this. The first is that achieving standards will facilitate
the final status negotiations; on the other hand, not
achieving the standards will jeopardize the future we
all want to see for Kosovo and its peoples.

I should like to pick out, if I may, three
challenges which face the Kosovo Albanians and the
Serbs today. The first and immediate one is to build
tolerance and to reassure the Kosovo Serbs on the
ground. The Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government need to demonstrate a genuine
commitment to strengthening the rights and the
protections of Kosovo's minorities. The open letter of 2
April from Kosovo leaders, calling for all citizens to
build that tolerant democracy, is a positive step
forward and it needs to be built on, and so Belgrade
and Kosovo Serbs also have an important part to play
in the process and need to make a constructive
contribution and to get engaged. The United Kingdom
looks for a constructive Pristina-Belgrade dialogue. I
would say that unilateral statements on status by any
side are not just unacceptable, but have always proved
to be destabilizing.

Secondly, Kosovo needs a more responsive and
effective Government. It was clear before 17 March
that local leaders needed to take more responsibility at
the central and the local level. We very much support
Special Representative Holkeri and his plans for the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to take on
further responsibilities in areas such as the economy,
with the important caveat that they can take on only
those responsibilities which are not formally reserved
in the Constitutional Framework for elsewhere and
cannot be transferred.

Thirdly, the intention to devolve more
responsibility to local Government is very welcome,
but I think we should be clear that the aim of
delegating responsibility is to achieve greater
efficiency and to have more responsive Government. It
does, however, entail a responsibility by all those who
gain greater authority from that devolution. The United
Kingdom very much agrees with the way Special
Representative Holkeri put it. The aim is greater
efficiency; it is not partition or cantonization. So we
look forward to recommendations on that. Not only are
the proposals from Belgrade on decentralization a
useful contribution to the debate, but I understand that
they have been put forward in a spirit of actually being
prepared to work constructively, and that is very
welcome.

As far as the international community is
concerned, let me simply enumerate two points. The
first is that we all have to learn the lessons of 17-20
March. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization has
taken fairly prompt action through its lessons-learned
paper and there is an intention to restructure the
Kosovo Force and to remove national caveats. That is
very welcome, as is the review of the performance of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) which has been set in train by the
Special Representative. Drawing on this, UNMIK
needs urgently and very carefully to assess whether it
has the right structures and whether the resources we
are deploying are appropriate in dealing with Kosovo
in 2004 and not in the very different situation of 1999.
The aim is to reduce the dependency in Kosovo on the
international community, but let us be clear: That will
need an integrated response by the international
community and a greater coherence in the international
effort, with the different organizations pulling together
more coherently, more flexibly, more responsibly and,
if I may say so, more responsively to the common
objectives. The efforts of the Special Representative to
address those aspects are crucial, we think, to the way
forward.

My last simple point is that we need to inject
impetus into Kosovo's economy because, at the heart
of this, there are some very severe economic problems.
The case for privatization and moving forward quickly
on that - I hope, with the cooperation of Belgrade to
permit lots of necessary steps to be taken - is in the
right direction.

