The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

The United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2349 (2017). I am grateful that
that consensus was achieved, and I would like to thank
Senegal in particular and all members of the Security
Council for their work on those issues and support for
this important text. The adoption marks the beginning
of the next chapter of our work on the Lake Chad basin.

Seeing a crisis first-hand is a good start, but it is
not enough on its own. It is not enough just to bring
attention to its situation. We will fail the people of the
region if we do not respond to what we saw and do not
take tangible action to bring real relief and respite to
the suffering, the hunger and the instability. Through
today's resolution, we have made clear what action
needs to be taken.

First and foremost, we need the countries in the
region, the international community and the United
Nations urgently to scale up their response to the
humanitarian crisis. If we act now, famine can be
avoided. But that means quickly dispersing money
pledged at Oslo - every single dollar ofthe $458 million
pledged by donors, and of the $1 billion pledged by the
Government of Nigeria. It means supporting the regional
Governments to lead a comprehensive and effective
response to the crisis while building on the leadership
that they have already shown. It means that all in the
region - including the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Economic
Community of Central African States - address the
root causes of the crisis and economic inequalities,
counter violent extremism and empower women. Boko
Haram exploits the poverty of the north-east. It exploits
the men who view women as no more than objects,
wives and cooks without the prospect of a future. That
is unacceptable.
We also must avoid a protracted crisis by better
bridging the divide between humanitarian and
development programming. The United Kingdom
is leading by example. We were one of the earliest
contributors to the response. We are supporting the
regional Governments. And we are expanding our
development programming, even as humanitarian aid
continues to be delivered.

Ifwe are to bring a conclusion to the crisis, we must
also commend and support the countries in the region
with regard to their efforts to combating Boko Haram,
including through the Multinational Joint Task Force.
They must sustain their momentum to defeat Boko
Haram and Da'esh. But, as they do so, all parties and
countries must comply with human rights, especially
during counter-terrorism operations. You cannot
defeat terror or build peace if you commit or condone
the abuse of civilians. We all must hold ourselves to a
higher standard than that. We therefore hope to see the
deployment of United Nations human rights officers to
help in that regard.

I new resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative
of Cameroon.

