Judge Robinson: It is an honour for me to appear
before the Security Council today in my capacity as
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, and particularly to do so under the
presidency of Mexico. I congratulate Mexico on its
assumption of the presidency of the Council, and I
thank the President for the attention that he has given
to matters pertaining to the Tribunal.

As the Tribunal's completion strategy report (see S/2010/270) bears witness, the Tribunal has continued
to work as efficiently and as expeditiously as possible
in accordance with the highest of international due
process. The Tribunal has now commenced all of the
trials pending on its docket and conducted proceedings
in 10 trials simultaneously in its three court rooms. It
has managed to do that by, inter alia, doubling up
judges and staff so that they are working on more than
one case simultaneously.

Nevertheless, there has been significant slippage
in the trial schedule. There are valid and unavoidable
reasons for that slippage, and the report clearly
identifies all the factors in relation to each trial that
have led to revised estimates of completion. It will not
surprise the Council to learn that the doubling-up of
judges and staff are contributory factors. The
scheduling of hearings, deliberations and consultations
has been complicated by the need to take into account
the obligations of judges and staff to other cases.

It must be underscored that the trial schedule
produced by the Tribunal is not akin to a bus schedule.
At most, it is a forecast subject to constant change
depending on the course that a trial takes. The
anticipated completion dates in the trial schedule are
estimated on the basis of factors within the Tribunal's
control. But unforeseeable factors beyond the control
of the Tribunal emerge, resulting in unavoidable
delays. For example, it would have been impossible to
anticipate the death of the lead counsel in Stanisic' and
Simatovic'; the volte-face of Seselj in deciding at this
stage to raise a defence; the extensive litigation in
Gotovina et al., resulting from the investigations
carried out by the Croatian Government; or an
application by the prosecution to amend the indictment
to add significant new charges on the eve of the trial,
as happened in the Tolimir case.

But most significantly, the Prlie et al. case, the
Stanisie and Simatovic' case, the Stanisie and Zupljanin
case, the Karadeic' case and the Seselj case could not
have foreseen the discovery of new evidence by the
national authorities of Serbia, namely 18 military
notebooks of Ratko Mladic', allegedly written during
the period 1991 to 1995. The discovery of that new
evidence has the potential to substantially impact the
projected completion dates of seven of the nine
ongoing trials. Thus, I must emphasize that the
schedule I present today is a forecast subject to change.

Yet another very significant reason for slippage in
the Tribunal's trial schedule is the alarming rate of staff
attrition, coupled with the fact that throughout the
reporting period, the Tribunal has been running
10 trials simultaneously, with staff levels appropriate
for six trials. That has created a tremendous burden on
both staff and judges, and it has become even more
onerous with the constant departure of the Tribunal's
highly experienced staff for more secure employment
elsewhere. Staff attrition and the desperate need for
urgent action in stemming that flow are factors that I
have repeatedly stressed to the utmost degree in my
previous presentations to the Security Council and the
General Assembly. Quite frankly, I am at a loss as to
what more might be done or said on my part to turn the
Council's attention to this issue.

I reiterate that staff are leaving the Tribunal in
droves - three every five days - for greater job
security with other institutions, often within the United
Nations itself. I must therefore warn the Council that as
the report demonstrates, this factor is having an
adverse impact on the expeditious completion of all but
one of our trials. And it will worsen. Our trials will be
further delayed by staff attrition.

There are measures that can be taken, and the
first is the granting of permanent contracts to our staff,
which would provide them with an incentive to remain
with the Tribunal until the completion of their work.
They would have the security of knowing that, if the
United Nations cannot place them in another position
by the time their posts expire, they will nonetheless be
compensated and that compensation will buy them the
time they need to find another position. I know from
talking to staff that the granting of permanent contracts
would be a tremendous incentive for them to stay at the
Tribunal until the completion of their work.

But while many of our staff have accrued the
right to be considered for permanent contracts under
the rules and regulations of the United Nations, I have
had to fight exceedingly hard to ensure that that right is
respected. It had first been posited that our staff be
excluded on the grounds that they are staff of a United
Nations institution with a finite mandate and not staff
of the United Nations as such. Following extensive
lobbying on my part against this discrimination
towards our staff, their right to be considered for
permanent contractual status is now being respected.
But I fear that our staff will, at the end of the day, still
suffer discrimination and be denied permanent
contracts on discriminatory grounds. I urge the Council
to assist the Tribunal in ensuring that this does not
10-41106
happen. It would not only be of great detriment to our
staff, but it would have profound effects on the
Tribunal's ability to complete its mandate as
expeditiously as possible, because staff would continue
to leave.

A second measure that can be adopted relates to
General Assembly resolution 63/256 of December
2008, which authorized the Tribunal to offer contracts
to staff in line with planned post reductions and the
prevailing trial schedules. This was a measure adopted
by the General Assembly to allow the Tribunal to offer
a measure of job security to staff. The background to
this resolution was that the Tribunal had proposed a
staff retention bonus. This was rejected, and instead
resolution 63/256 incorporated a non-financial
measure. Yet, it has not been implemented because the
budgetary authorities at United Nations Headquarters
do not consider that the Tribunal can offer contracts to
staff that are not tied to approved budgetary
submissions.

As I explain in the report, when this resolution
was brought to my attention by the Tribunal's Staff
Union, I went to the International Civil Service
Commission - which was involved in the process
leading up to the adoption of the resolution - and to
members of the Fifth Committee and asked them to
explain to me what the resolution meant. I was advised
by every person I consulted that it allowed the Tribunal
to offer contracts in line with the trial schedules. On its
face, this is clearly what the resolution authorizes, but
the Tribunal cannot implement it without a clear
authorization from the Controller's Office because
fiscal responsibility to the Registrar is only delegated
authority.

Now I ask: How can the General Assembly, the
principal organ of a body like the United Nations
whose membership is worldwide, adopt a resolution
unambiguous in language and purpose and on the basis
of which constituent bodies such as the Tribunal make
plans, only to be told by the budgetary authorities in
New York that the resolution does not mean what it
clearly says? The Tribunal has been severely
prejudiced by this misstep in the United Nations. It
cannot offer contracts in line with prevailing trial
schedules, and therefore critical staff cannot be
retained. In effect, the odd result is that the United
Nations will not be implementing the resolution of the
General Assembly in accordance with its plain
interpretation. This must have a consequence for the
management and efficiency of the Organization as a
whole.

What we are now being told from high authority
is that all that the resolution means is that the Tribunal
can offer contracts, but that it must do so within the
envelope of funds appropriated under the budget. But
the Tribunal was always able to do that, and a
resolution of the General Assembly is not necessary to
tell the Tribunal that it can do something that it has
always been able to do. This state of confusion would
be delightfully risible did it not have such painful and
dire consequences for the running of the Tribunal at
this critically important stage of its life.

What is needed now is a pragmatic solution to
extricate ourselves from the institutional muddle into
which we have been immersed by the differences
between the General Assembly and the administration.
I ask the Security Council to assist the Tribunal as
much as it can in resolving the interpretation and
implementation of that General Assembly resolution,
for what is certain is that, in the absence of the
implementation of a measure of the kind set out in the
resolution to assist in the retention of staff, the dates
for the completion of the Tribunal's work will stretch
further and further into the future. We want the
Security Council to help us by using the influence and
weight it undoubtedly has within the United Nations.
The Council should adopt a statement acknowledging
the problem faced by the Tribunal in retaining
experienced staff at this time and requesting all the
relevant United Nations bodies, including the
administration, to adopt appropriate staff-retention
measures.

A third measure that can be adopted to assist the
Tribunal in retaining its staff, and thus completing its
work, is the end-of-service grant recommended by the
International Civil Service Commission, which is still
pending in the Fifth Committee. Finally, the resolution
of the new continuing contractual regime and the
inclusion of Tribunal staff in that regime would have a
tremendously beneficial impact upon the Tribunal's
retention of its essential staff.

These are all matters that I, as President of the
Tribunal, have been fighting for, but to be successful
the Tribunal needs strong political support. I urge the
Council to take measures now and to ensure that action
is taken on these issues. I can only repeat my warning
that a failure to take action immediately on the rate of
staff attrition at the Tribunal will have profound effects
on the ability of the Tribunal to complete its mandate
as expeditiously as possible. The situation will worsen.

In the face of the slippage in the trial schedule,
the Tribunal has taken immediate measures to try as
much as possible to mitigate that slippage. I
reconstituted the Working Group on Speeding Up
Trials to undertake a third review of the Tribunal's
practices in order to assess whether further
improvements could be implemented in our work. The
Working Group submitted its report on 21 May and
recommended a number of reforms to the Tribunal's
procedures. The Judges discussed these reforms on
7June at an extraordinary plenary session convened
expressly for that purpose. The Judges are now actively
integrating these reforms into their ongoing trials. I
note that the problem of staff attrition is so serious that,
in its report, the Working Group expressed its greatest
concern over the effect that staff turnover has on the
speed of trials and on the Chambers' ability to process
the evidence and motions in their cases. The Working
Group recommended that the management of the
Tribunal do all that it can to keep experienced staff.

Another matter I again bring to the Council's
attention is that of compensation to victims. In order to
contribute to a lasting peace in the former Yugoslavia,
justice must not only be retributive; it must also be
restorative. The International Criminal Court and the
11] States that have ratified the Rome Statute accept
the importance of compensation to victims of war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide, and the
United Nations must, I submit, do the same. I therefore
call upon the Council to take action and to establish, as
the International Criminal Court has, without further
delay a trust fund for victims of crimes falling within
the Tribunal's jurisdiction to complement the
Tribunal's criminal trials by providing victims with the
necessary resources to rebuild their lives.

The final issue that I wish to bring to the
attention of Council members is the mandate of the
Judges, a matter currently pending before the Council.
Just as staff need job security, so do our Judges, and I
urge the Council to bear in mind the benefits to the
Tribunal's completion strategy of granting mandates to
the judges in line with the projections I have provided
to the Council through my letter to the Secretary-
General up to 2013 in respect of those judges whose
trial and appeals will be ongoing at that time, and up to
2014 for the remaining appeal judges. It is simply not
rational to assign judges to cases that will last longer
than their mandates.

In closing, I wish to reiterate that we at the
Tribunal are dedicated to completing the work
entrusted to us so that peace, justice and reconciliation
may prevail in the region of the former Yugoslavia. We
at the Tribunal have accepted this responsibility from
the Security Council because we believe in this
mission. However, we need more support from our
parent organ, the Security Council. We are hanging by
a thread and we need Council members to throw us a
lifeline. And I have to say this very bluntly: Not
helping us with staff retention measures is
counterproductive because trials will take longer,
appeals will take longer and the life of the Tribunal
will be much longer.

I therefore again urge the Council to actively
work with the other relevant organs of the United
Nations for meaningful retention measures as a matter
of urgency and specifically in the ways I have
mentioned here today.

