Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
Central and Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union - the Czech Republic, Hungary,
Lithuania, Poland and Slovakia - and the associated
country Cyprus, as well as the European Free Trade
Association countries members of the European Economic
Area - Iceland and Liechtenstein - align themselves with
this statement.

The European Union is deeply concerned at the Israeli
Government's endorsement of plans to extend the municipal
authority of Jerusalem in a way which will alter the
demographic balance in the Jerusalem area and tends to
pre-empt the final status of occupied land. That concern is
heightened by statements, attributed by the media to senior
Israeli spokesmen, that the new arrangements are,

"a basic change in Jerusalem's status which will be
remembered as a turning point".

The European Union reaffirms the applicability of the
Fourth Geneva Convention to the occupied Palestinian
territory, including Jerusalem, and to the other Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967. The European
Union has consistently called upon Israel to recognize that
the Convention applies de facto and de jure to those
territories and to comply fully with its provisions. We have
never accepted Israel's claim that the Convention does not
apply to those territories. The Israeli Government, by
initiating, encouraging and endorsing settlement activity in
the occupied territories, is in violation of that Convention.

The extension of the jurisdiction of the Jerusalem
municipal authority to settlements to the east and north of
Jerusalem tends to pre-empt final status negotiations and
contravenes the spirit of the Madrid and Oslo accords.

The European Union reaffirms its policy on the status
of Jerusalem. East Jerusalem is subject to the principles set

 

out in Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November 1967, notably, the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force, and is therefore not
under Israeli sovereignty. We believe that the final status
of Jerusalem should be determined in final status talks.
Neither side should take actions which seek to pre-empt
this.

The European Union stresses that the current
opportunity for progress on the Palestinian track must not
be lost. The Union strongly supports the efforts of the
United States to gain the agreement of the parties to a
package of ideas which, if accepted, would open the way
to implementation of existing agreements and the relaunch
of final status talks. In that context, the European Union
calls on Israel to recognize the right of the Palestinians to
exercise self-determination, without excluding the option
of a State. At the same time, it calls upon the Palestinian
people to reaffirm their commitment to the legitimate
right of Israel to live within safe, recognized borders.

It is all the more important at this juncture in the
peace process to avoid unhelpful unilateral actions likely
to arouse suspicion and put further obstacles in the way
of peace.

