Mr. M'Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like thank Mr. Farid Zarif for his presentation of the
quarterly report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/631)
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). I also welcome the presence of
the Prime Ministers of Serbia and Kosovo at today's
meeting and congratulate them on their statements.

I will limit my statement to a few comments on
the progress of the process of normalizing relations
between Kosovo and Serbia, in the light of the historic
agreement they signed on 19 April and in view of the
security situation in Kosovo.

Despite repeated obstacles resulting notably from
differences in occasional interpretation that might have
impeded the process of normalization, Kosovo and
Serbia continue tirelessly with their efforts to implement
the aforementioned agreement. Togo welcomes the
major role that the European Union (EU) continues to
play in helping the parties overcome their difficulties.
High-level meetings between Serbian and Kosovo
authorities, organized under EU sponsorship, and the
ongoing meetings of bilateral technical working groups
have indisputably facilitated significant progress in
implementation of the agreement.

My country notes with satisfaction that the
dynamic of dialogue made it possible in November to
hold municipal elections for the first time in Kosovo.
Indeed, by committing to lifting the obstacles of a
procedural or political nature, grappling with logistical
problems that marked the organization of the election,
and agreeing, inter alia, to the participation of displaced
persons and the representation of Kosovo Serbs in the
Central Election Commission, the parties opened the
way to a transparent and credible election. Their robust
involvement aimed at ensuring significant participation
in the elections on the part of of Kosovo Serbs and
ensuring that the elections were held successfully
reflects their strong commitment to work definitively
towards normalizing relations between Kosovo and
Serbia.

Ultimately, the elections were held, on the whole in
a satisfactory manner and with significant participation
by Serbs living in the municipalities of the south,
which my country commends. However, we condemn
the attempt by some Serbian nationalists opposed to the
normalization of relations between Serbia and Kosovo
to compromise the elections through acts of violence
and threats. My country believes that this protest
approach is counterproductive. It is in the interests
of all Serbs of northern Kosovo to take control of the
destiny of their communities by getting involved in
the implementation and operation of the association
of Serbian municipalities, which, in accordance with
the 19 April agreement, are provided with a certain
degree of autonomy, including in the areas of economic
development, health and education.

As noted in the report under review, the
implementation of the 19 April agreement is ongoing
in many other areas. On the positive side, important
arrangements were arrived at by the parties on
8 September on the issues of telecommunication and
energy. Similarly, we welcome the efforts undertaken
by the Serbs to transfer the parallel structures in
northern Kosovo to Kosovo authorities, including the
police and judiciary.

It would appear that those developments were made
possible thanks to the leadership, political courage and
commitment of the leaders of Serbia and Kosovo to
gradually settle the disputes between the two parties in
the interests of their people. Togo would like to applaud
their efforts with a view to reaching that goal. The
difficult compromises they had to reach should be able
to open the way to European integration for Serbia and
Kosovo. We urge them to pursue the dialogue on the
outstanding issues in the same spirit, so as to ensure the
full implementation of the 19 April agreement.

Stability and security continue to prevail in Kosovo
overall. However, as mentioned earlier, political
tension and acts of violence continue in the north and
are the work of a part of the population that refuses
to join in the process of normalizing relations between
Kosovo and Serbia. We condemn the assassination
in that context of a customs officer who was part of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) on 19 September. No effort should be spared
in bringing the perpetrators of that crime to justice. We
are concerned about such incidents, which are related
to the uncontrolled use of firearms and explosives
and which target both civilians and Kosovo and
international security personnel. The use of violence
and intimidation to try to impose political views is
unacceptable. We urge Kosovo's senior officials, in
particular those in charge of the police, to continue
their efforts to investigate each incident and bring the
perpetrators to justice.

I would like to conclude by reiterating my
congratulations to the European Union, especially its
High Representative, for its pivotal in bringing about
significant progress in the implementation of the
19 April agreement, including the holding of the recent
municipal elections.

We would also like to thank UNMIK, the Kosovo
Force, EULEX, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and all partner organizations
that support the authorities of Kosovo and Serbia in
normalizing their relations.

