Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Germany is also
concerned about the continuing military attacks. We
condemn in particular the attacks on Saudi Arabia and
the recent ones in general. It is very clear that for this
conflict, as for many others, there is no military solution.
We therefore support all the efforts of Martin Griffiths
to reach a political solution. We think that looking at all
the tactical steps that are necessary to implement the
Stockholm Agreement is the right approach to but most
important is to keep the strategic objective in mind,
that is, to make progress on the political process. It is a
question of political will. A solution can be found. The
elements are there. The puzzle must just be put together.

I would like to echo what Martin Griffiths and
the United Kingdom and Polish representatives said
regarding the death sentence imposed on 30 civilians.
I would urge the responsible Houthis to revoke those
unacceptable sentences. I would also like to echo what
Mr. Griffiths said with regard to General Lollesgaard.
His perseverance is truly remarkable and I congratulate
him on the success that he has had.

I thank Mr, Lowcock and Mr. Beasley for their
briefings and for their efforts. I particularly thank
their teams on the ground for what they are doing
under difficult circumstances. It is unacceptable that
humanitarian aid workers encounter the problems on
the ground that they are seeing at the moment. I think
Mark Lowcock said that it was ironic that some ofthose
who asked for humanitarian aid are now making it very
difficult for that aid to be delivered. Let me appeal to
all sides to adhere to international humanitarian law.
That is very clear and we can only recall and reiterate
it day after day.

I hope that Mr. Beasley will soon receive the right
text message, saying that it is now actually agreed and
that WFP can continue with full-fledged humanitarian
aid. I think that he took the right decision to cut the
aid because there were too many people benefiting
from the assistance that did not deserve to. At the same
time, it was absolutely right that those who are the most
vulnerable continue to receive support.

I also echo Mr. Beasley's plea for those who have
pledged humanitarian aid to implement it. Germany has
fulfilled its task. We have increased our pledge. But
we really appeal to those who have pledged, including
those from the region who have pledged large sums,
to implement. We have heard the figures and we just
cannot allow the humanitarian aid to stop.

In conclusion, let me express Germany's support
for the work oer. Griffiths, Mr. Lowcock, Mr. Beasley
and General Lollesgaard. I ask that they do all they can
to end the worst humanitarian crisis of our time.

