Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): In our
globalized world, in which threats recognize no
borders, violent extremism continues to spread and to
implicate regions near and far. A tidal wave of refugees
and migrants in Europe and tens of thousands of
terrorist foreign fighters moving between the region's
hot spots and their own societies are indicative of the
rapid deglobalizing nature of this crisis. It is alarming
that, according to a recent estimate, the trend of foreign
terrorist fighters travelling mostly to Iraq and Syria is
still upward. It indicates that international efforts to
curb the flow have been far from sufficient.

No member of the international community can
feel safe from the fallout of the crisis in our region. As
the threat is global, thwarting it too requires a serious,
well-thought-out and coordinated global effort. Success
requires a new mindset, away from the old paradigm of
exclusion governed by a zero-sum mentality that has
only produced negative-sum outcomes.

Mindful of the need to address the threat globally,
my President in his address to the General Assembly
(see A/70/PV.13) reiterated his call for a united front
against violent extremism and proposed to draft a
comprehensive plan of action on how to proceed. That
is imperative, especially in View of the persistence of
the threat, the appalling humanitarian consequences
and the fact that the present international coalition is
failing to achieve its goals.

The plan of action should translate the broad
international consensus on the need to uproot violent
extremism into targeted and effective actions, which
have so far proved elusive. Based on the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, and while providing
for a readjustment in mindsets and a new paradigm,
the plan of action should aim to support a cultural and
ideological front against extreme ideologies, address
such contributing factors as dictatorship, poverty,
corruption and discrimination, counter Islamophobia
and engage all regional States and international actors
to deny extremists access to funds, recruits and free
movement across borders. It should also address the
continued occupation of Palestine and the Israeli
atrocities against the Palestinian people over so many
decades, which have fuelled extremism and other crises
in the region and beyond.

Let me conclude by stressing that we in Iran are fully
aware that extremism, terrorism, Takfiri mentality and
sectarianism are common challenges that threaten all of
us in the region and beyond and require our collective
response. We regret that one or two of our neighbours
have failed to recognize the threat and our common
destiny and exhibit irresponsibility, manifested in their
regional posture and, most recently, in the treatment of
the victims of the recent disaster in Mecca. The world
has not yet forgotten their complicity in the creation
of Al-Qaida and the Taliban and in Saddam Hussein's
crimes against my people and his own. Those were the
major contributing factors in the dangerous emergence
of Takfiri extremism.

But Iranians are prudent enough to recognize
that we should not live in the past and must engage in
serious dialogue and regional cooperation, because we
truly believe that the security of our neighbours is our
own security. We certainly hope that the one or two
left-outs in our neighbourhood will embrace this reality
and respond positively to the call for responsible action,
dialogue and regional cooperation.

