Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Aid for their chilling accounts of the Yemeni crisis. We also thank Ms. Raja Abdullah Ahmed Almasabi for her moving testimony, as well as Ms. Wafa'a Alsaidy. Ms. Almasabi and Ms. Alsaidy took us, as the Council, to their houses and the streets of Yemen, where ordinary people live. We thank them for sharing their daily lives and challenges with us. South Africa reiterates its support to the Special Envoy in his arduous pursuit for a peaceful solution to the situation in Yemen despite the escalating violence that persists amid the unyielding coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. My delegation would like to reiterate that, as Mark Lowcock said, the disturbing humanitarian situation in Yemen, aggravated by the COVID-19 pandemic, is inextricably linked to the political impasse. As such, my intervention will focus on those two elements, namely, the humanitarian and the political situation. With regard to the humanitarian situation, South Africa remains deeply concerned about its devastating impact on the people of Yemen, in particular women, children, the elderly, internally displaced persons and those with disabilities, as we just heard. As Ms. Almasabi mentioned, it is a harrowing reality that persons with disabilities are disproportionately affected in situations of risk and face multiple barriers to accessing protection and humanitarian assistance. South Africa therefore calls on all authorities in the various governorates to agree to a unified set of measures to counter the spread of COVID-19 in Yemen and alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people. It is imperative to allow full access into the country, to accelerate customs clearance of personal protective equipment and medical supplies, and to facilitate air travel of humanitarian staff into the country for staff rotations, as well as to communities in need in both the north and the south of Yemen. This will enable health- care workers and the humanitarian community to slow the rate and spread of infection. It is vital for all parties to abide by their obligations and responsibilities under international humanitarian and international human rights law, and to take all measures necessary to end and prevent violations against civilians. Investigations into alleged violations must be pursued to uphold the standards of integrity, transparency and accountability. On the political impasse, fighting continues in the region of Yemen's northern border with Saudi Arabia, on the edge of Mar'ib city, Al-Hudaydah and Taiz. The proposed ceasefire remains unimplemented and there has been no substantial progress on any of the political agreements. South Africa calls on all parties to cease hostilities, in line with the Secretary-General's global ceasefire call and resolution 2532 (2020). Furthermore, we call on the parties to agree on confidence-building measures, such as the payment of civil servants, the reopening of Sana'a airport and the lifting of commercial import restrictions to help the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as to provide impetus to the overall political negotiations to end the war in Yemen, as we have been asked to do. We reiterate our position that a military response is not a viable solution, and call on all parties to approach the resumption of the political negotiations in a spirit of compromise, placing the interests of Yemenis at the centre of a negotiated political settlement - that means all Yemenis, including, as has been requested this morning, those 4 million people with disabilities. We appeal to all parties to avoid approaches of seeking to gain absolute positions. South Africa remains concerned regarding the lack of implementation of the Riyadh agreement. We reiterate our call for the implementation of that vital agreement between the Yemeni Government and the Southern Transitional Council. We also call for the full implementation of the December 2018 Stockholm Agreement. South Africa urges all parties to conclude the issue of the FSO Safer oil tanker by allowing critical repairs to take place and thereby avoid a man-made disaster in the Red Sea. The need to allow technical experts to undertake an assessment and initial repairs cannot be stressed enough. It is our wish that this impending threat be dealt with on a purely technical basis, without politicization. In conclusion, South Africa reiterates that the only solution to the conflict in Yemen is an inclusiveYemeni-led, Yemeni-owned political settlement that will deliver on the hopes of the Yemeni people for a strong economic and political future. In this context, we call for the full and meaningful participation of women in all aspects of an inclusive political process.
