Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I should like to welcome the presence in the
Security Council of the new Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom, Sir Emyr Jones Parry. We
expect to have the best relations with him, as we had
with his predecessor, and I am certain that his presence
will make a concrete and effective contribution to the
Council's work.

This is the second quarterly report submitted to
the Council by the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), as required by resolution 1455 (2003). As
agreed by the members of the Committee, today's
meeting will also include my first detailed oral
assessment of Member States' implementation of the
relevant Council measures imposed by resolutions
1267 (1999), 1333 (2000) and 1390 (2002). As we
know, those measures are aimed at individuals and
entities belonging to or associated with Al Qaeda and
the Taliban, and they were adopted with a view to
hindering the pursuit of activities by those groups and
thus at preventing greater human tragedies caused by
terrorist acts.

The implementation of those measures - the
freezing of assets, the travel ban and the arms
embargo - is an urgent task, particularly since we are
dealing with a determined and dangerous enemy that
seeks to undermine our coexistence. Therefore, we
must examine in detail the effectiveness of the
measures that have been adopted to confront this threat
to international peace and security, and must determine
how they can be strengthened and improved.

Since the adoption of resolution 1455 (2003), the
international community has achieved a degree of
success in the fight against Al Qaeda, thanks mainly to
the arrest of key operatives. However, the recent
bombings in Saudi Arabia, in Chechnya in the Russian
Federation, in Morocco, in Yemen and in Afghanistan
make clear the dangers and challenges that lie ahead.
At least 263 persons have lost their lives in such
incidents since December 2002 - a figure that does
not include the physical or psychological
consequences.

My predecessor submitted the first oral report on
15 April 2003, and I am particularly pleased that
today's consolidated informational meeting is taking
place in the context of an open Council meeting, since
the Committee's work can take full advantage of its
possibilities only if all States undertake concrete
measures against persons and entities on the
Committee's list and continue to identify those who
support terrorist activities. That is why I wish to
emphasize that our objective is to establish an ongoing
and constructive dialogue between Member States and
the Committee so that States can believe that the
Committee is ready to help them in their work. The
Committee itself is assisted in its efforts by the
Monitoring Group established in resolution 1363
(2001), and I wish to welcome its members here today.

In order to establish a context for this informative
meeting, I shall summarize and provide an update on
the principal measures undertaken by the Committee
thus far this year.

First of all, with the valuable assistance of the
Monitoring Group and the Secretariat, the Committee
has improved the format and the content of the
consolidated list of persons and entities belonging to or
associated with the Taliban and Al Qaeda. The list
serves as the fundamental mechanism to assist States in
implementing sanctions imposed by the Council. The
Committee formally communicates the list to all
Member States every three months, in conformity with
resolution 1455 (2003), but an updated version is
always accessible worldwide via the Internet, with
explanatory information in the six official United
Nations languages.

Moreover, the Committee has reviewed and
expanded its guidelines to help States submit
supplementary information related to the list and to
enable the Committee to act on that information in a
much more timely manner. The Committee is
extremely grateful to the States that have submitted
supplementary information. But I would again strongly
urge States to work actively to seek out and submit to
the Committee any information not included in the list
that they are able to provide.

Given the emphasis that resolution 1455 (2003)
places on assessing Member States' implementation of
relevant Security Council measures, the Committee and
the Monitoring Group worked hard during the first
months of the year to prepare and disseminate among
all Member States transparent guidelines to assist them
in preparing their implementation reports. States are
strongly urged to reflect those guidelines in their
reports, as that helps the Committee to determine
where there have been successes in implementation and
also where problems remain. Furthermore, reports that
have followed the Committee's guidance document are
more likely to help the Committee determine where
technical assistance is needed most, and they can also
help the Committee to formulate its own
recommendations to the Council on how to strengthen
sanctions measures.

The Committee can improve its future guidelines
directed at States only if sufficient responses to its
present guidelines are received. By resolution 1455
(2003), the Council has entrusted our Committee with
the task of assessing Member States implementation of
the assets freeze, the arms embargo and the travel ban
against listed individuals and entities. If the
information requested in paragraph 6 of the resolution
is clearly insufficient, the Committee will have no
choice but to note that reality in preparing its year-end
written assessment to the Security Council of actions
taken by States to implement those relevant measures.

In addition to urging States once again to submit
their reports, I also wish to emphasize that the
Committee and its Monitoring Group are ready to assist
States in the preparation of their reports and thereby
contribute to the dialogue. The focused and practical
reporting guidelines also describe how relevant
information previously submitted to the Counter-
Terrorism Committee will be taken into account by the
1267 Committee. Precise references to previously
submitted reports can be made. Moreover, information
already submitted need not be duplicated in updated
reports. Also important to note is that the confidential
or sensitive parts of implementation reports can be
designated as confidential and will not be made public.

Recognition of the possible presence of Al Qaeda
or of those associated with the network within its
territory appears to be a stigma for some States.
Therefore, detailed information concerning the
activities of the Al Qaeda network and of its operatives
and supporters, many of whom were trained in
Afghanistan or at other Al Qaeda-associated or run
facilities, is not being submitted to the Committee.
During its meetings in capitals with State officials, the
Monitoring Group has often stressed that even if a
particular State perceives no threat to its own security,
the presence, however dormant, of Al Qaeda-related
individuals may pose a threat to other countries not
necessarily of the region, but elsewhere in the world.

Although the majority of States have submitted
reports following the guidelines issued by the
Committee and have provided useful information, the
overall response has so far been disappointing. To date,
64 reports have been received - representing barely
30 per cent of the United Nations membership.
According to information available to the Monitoring
Group, individuals or entities associated with Al Qaeda
are believed to be active in some way in a significant
number of States that have not yet submitted a report.

A review of the reports indicates that, for the
most part, countries have taken steps to implement the
specific requirements of the resolution by updating or
enacting legislation and have also taken practical steps
to adopt necessary measures. A number of States
submitted very comprehensive reports, including
information on planned and existing legislative
enactments and administrative measures. Some reports
documented specific regulations to deal with the
freezing of financial and economic assets, the travel
ban and the arms embargo. A number of countries
provided information on frozen assets, including type
and amount.

On the other hand, some reports offered only a
brief account of the legislative measures taken, while
others concentrated mostly on practical steps taken in
the areas of ongoing investigations and enforcement
actions.

Few States have indicated the need for technical
or financial assistance to strengthen their capacity to
implement the measures. However, a number of reports
indicated that a particular State was already providing
or was willing to lend assistance to strengthen the
overall implementation of the measures.

Paragraph 3 of resolution 1455 (2003) stressed
the need for improved coordination and increased
exchange of information between our Committee and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), also known as the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). Pursuant to that paragraph, I am

pleased to point out to the Council that contacts
between the two Committees have recently become
more regular. At a recent meeting convened by
Ambassador Arias and myself, experts from the
Monitoring Group and CTC had a fruitful discussion
on how they can best cooperate and exchange
information. Despite having different objectives, their
tasks are clearly complementary, especially with regard
to the analysis of Member State reports and to advising
States on how to obtain technical assistance.
Ambassador Arias and I are aware that some confusion
remains regarding the differences between the
mandates and the roles of both Committees. Thus, for
the sake of clarity, the two Committees have recently
issued a joint press release that clearly sets out their
mission and goals.

I will now briefly draw attention to the recent
activities and current work of the Monitoring Group so
that Council members might get a sense of what is
actually happening in States. I would also like to note
that the Chairman of the Group, Mr. Chandler, is
present to respond to questions members may wish to
ask him.

The Group continued its programme of visits to
Member States, including Afghanistan, Bulgaria, the
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia and the United
States. The Group also participated in the International
Atomic Energy Agency Conference, held in Vienna, on
the security of cross-border movements of legal and
illegal radiological sources and in the fourteenth
plenary meeting of the special Financial Action Task
Force on Money Laundering, held in Berlin.

The first written report of the Group was
submitted to the Committee on 16 June. The report
notes the successes to date in the fight against Al
Qaeda and the positive impact of the intelligence and
information gleaned following the arrest of key Al
Qaeda individuals. However, in its review of the
continued existence of the Al Qaeda network, the
Group has highlighted certain important shortcomings
and has warned against complacency by States in the
collective effort and political will required to enforce
the measures adopted by the Council. Al Qaeda has
built-in resilience and flexibility, which contributes to
its survival as a global network. That, in turn,
encourages support for the network among elements of
the population of many countries, which produces
sympathy for the ideology, new recruits to the
movement and funding.

Funds may also easily reach the Al Qaeda
network through the sale of heroin and opiates
originating from Afghanistan. The United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime reported high levels of
opium poppy production last year and forecasted
another bumper crop this year. A large proportion of
these harvests emanate from provinces in which
support for the Taliban and its ideology has been
strong. Thus, the possibility that a substantial
proportion of the profits from these illicit harvests will
go to warlords sympathetic to the Taliban and Al
Qaeda cannot be ignored.

As States improve the steps to implement the
measures, the international community must exercise
greater control over the accounting methods and
transparency of charities. Despite the good intentions
of such charities when they were established and the
good work of many of their genuine operations, there is
sufficient evidence for the Council to be concerned
about some of the disbursements of funds of these
organizations. States must be encouraged to ensure that
effective measures are put in place to stop such
humanitarian activities from being abused in any way
by Al Qaeda operatives. This is one area in which the
Monitoring Group is concentrating its efforts. For this
reason, I call upon all States to cooperate fully with the
Group and give it the maximum possible assistance
when requested.

Such assistance should not be confined to
questions related to charities and the funding of the Al
Qaeda network; it is required across the whole
spectrum of matters related to the implementation of
the measures. This is especially true when the
Monitoring Group embarks upon specific case studies
in key areas related to implementation of the Council's
measures, which States have requested of our
Committee.

Another continuing concern involves the many Al
Qaeda operatives who have received training in more
specialized forms of terrorist activities such as making
improvised explosive devices or crude forms of
weapons of mass destruction, or carrying out
assassinations. The concern is that many of these
individuals have left Al Qaeda camps in Afghanistan or
camps run by its associates, such Jemaah Islamiyah,
and have returned to their countries of origin or to
other countries where they have gone underground,
obviously ready to mount attacks at later dates. The
Group firmly believes that any such individuals who
are known to the authorities should be listed in order to
reduce the opportunities for them to move around
freely. They are a constant source of danger for all
States if allowed to go unchecked. States are therefore
urged to face this reality and bring these individuals to
the notice of all agencies responsible for public order
and security, through the Committee's list.

The Group has noted that, notwithstanding the
measures being taken around the world to implement
the arms embargo, Al Qaeda, the Taliban and their
associated terrorist groups are still able to acquire
adequate quantities of weapons and explosives where
and when they need them. Regrettably, this fact has
been all too clearly demonstrated in the past three
months by the attacks I mentioned earlier, but also by
the many successes in seizures by State authorities of
weapons, ammunition and explosive-making materials.

I hope that today's briefing will make it clear that
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1267 (1999) goes well
beyond the mere processing of reports. While the
analysis and follow-up of implementation reports is a
critical avenue of communication between the
Committee and States, it is not the only one. In
addition to the operational work that the Monitoring
Group undertakes on the ground during its visits to
States, there are a number of other ways in which the
interactions between the Committee and Member
States can also be enhanced.

First, I intend to continue to hold periodic
briefings open to all Member States. Such briefings
allow the Committee to provide details on any
significant new developments related to its work or
procedures, and they also afford all States with an
opportunity to ask questions directly of the Monitoring
Group or myself and receive straightforward answers
on the spot.

In addition, paragraph 11 of resolution 1455
(2003) requests that the Committee consider the
possibility that its members or I visit countries with a
view to encouraging States to implement all Council
resolutions. I believe that such a mission, which I
intend personally to undertake as of October, will
provide an excellent opportunity to encourage
Governments to take a more proactive and creative
approach to implementing the established measures and
to hear from them.

The 1267 Committee has thus been engaged in a
very full programme of work in the first half of 2003.
The members feel that they have done their utmost to
lay the groundwork for the successful implementation
of resolution 1455 (2003). It is the Committee's sincere
hope that, in the second half of this year, the wider
membership of the United Nations will do its part to
implement that very demanding resolution.

In resolution 1455 (2003), the Council also set for
all of us the very challenging goals of improving the
implementation of important counter-terrorist measures
and improving the measures themselves. If we devote
all of the attention and resources to these tasks that
they deserve, and in a spirit of effective dialogue and
true cooperation, then there is real hope that lives may
be saved, which in the last analysis is the fundamental
purpose of the role of the Council and the Committee.

Today's briefing serves as a mid-year review, and
clearly much remains to be done in the months ahead.
The written report that I will submit at the end of the
year will contain a detailed analysis of both the reports
received and the findings of the Monitoring Group.
Pursuant to resolution 1455 (2003), the Council will
return to this matter to ensure that its efforts to combat
the Al Qaeda network continue to be effective and, we
hope, enhanced.

