Mr. Diop: Allow me to express our warmest
congratulations to the delegation of Malaysia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June. By the same token, I would like
to commend the delegation of Lithuania for the manner
in which it conducted the work of the Council during
the previous month.

(spoke in French)

I would like once again to express the deep
gratitude of His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita, President of the Republic of Mali, and that of
the Government and people of Mali to our common
Organization, the United Nations, and to Member
States for their multifaceted and steady support of the
peace process in Mali since January 2012. In a similar
vein, I would like to reaffirm the confidence of the
Government of Mali in the international mediation
led by Algeria, which included the United Nations,
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the European Union, the
Organization for Islamic Cooperation and neighbouring
nations such as Burkina Faso, Mauritania, the Niger,
Nigeria and Chad.

I would like to particularly thank France for its role
and decisive contribution in Mali and all its sacrifices.
I also commend the United States of America for the
decisive role it has played in helping to restore peace and
stability in our country. I also take this opportunity to
commend the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for
his personal commitment to peace and reconciliation in
Mali, but also to stability in the Sahel region in general.

I extend the heartfelt thanks of the Malian people
to all friendly nations and international partner
organizations that have shown their solidarity with
Mali by sending their children, and often their experts,
to defend the values underlying our humanity. I pay
solemn tribute to the memory of all victims - civilians
and soldiers, Malians and foreigners - who fell on the
field of honour in Mali in defence of human dignity,
freedom and democracy.

I reassert the active solidarity of the Government
and people of Mali with the Governments and people
of the Niger, Chad and Kenya, following the recent
terrorist attacks, which caused a high number of
casualties, particularly among the civilian population.

The Government of Mali has taken note of the
Secretary-General's report on the evolution of the
situation in Mali (S/2015/426) and would like to thank
our friend Mr. Mongi Hamdi, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), for his briefing. At the
outset, I would like to note that the report should be
updated, because it fails to mention the recent positive
developments, including in relation to the peace
process, that have taken place since 15 May.

I am particularly gratified to be meeting with the
Security Council this morning, at this juncture when
the peace and reconciliation process in Mali has made
significant progress in the right direction, as evidenced
by the finalization of the Bamako Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Indeed, following
the signature on 15 May of the Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, which came from the
Algiers process, by the Government of Mali, the
Platform coalition and members of the Coordination
coalition, we welcome the signature of the Agreement
on 20 June in Bamako by the other members of the
Coordination that had not previously signed. Mali now
has a consensual peace agreement that will serve as the
general framework for the sustainable resolution of all
dimensions of the most serious crisis in our country's
history. This Agreement will set the seal once and for
all on reconciliation among Malians.

The Bamako Agreement constitutes a balanced
compromise that takes into account the legitimate
concerns of all the parties while respecting the unity
and territorial integrity of Mali and the secular and
republican character of the State. It also establishes the
conditions for long-term stability, because the reconciled
Malian nation will effectively and relentlessly combat
terrorism, drug trafficking and other criminal networks,
particularly in the area of irregular migration.

The signature of the Agreement by all the Malian
parties, however, is not enough in itself. The greatest
difficulty at the moment remains the effective and
full implementation of the provisions of this valuable
and, I must emphasize, historic instrument. For its
part, the Government of Mali, under the authority of
the President of the Republic, Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita, once again reaffirms its steadfast determination
to honour all its commitments under the Agreement.
We expect the same of the other Malian parties, whose
good faith and commitment in the matter we do not
doubt. We also call upon the international community
to honour its commitments and to continue its support
for thorough and full implementation of the Agreement.

As Council members will remember, on 25 June
2014, the Security Council adopted resolution 2164
(2014), extending the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, or MINUSMA. As the Council once again prepares
to extend that mandate, I would like to emphasize that
the Mission's future mandate should take into account
the positive developments in the Malian peace process.
In that regard, the Government would like the future
mandate of MINUSMA to be based essentially on
the implementation of the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, as highlighted a moment ago by
the Secretary-General's Special Representative.

In our view, therefore, MINUSMA should
support the following: political dialogue and national
reconciliation; the Government's efforts in the area
of security, stabilization and the protection of civilian
populations; the re-establishment of the State's
authority throughout the country; the reconstruction of
the Malian security sector; the promotion and upholding
of human rights; and humanitarian aid. Specifically,
and in view of the lessons learned in recent times,
the Government of Mali requests the members of the
Security Council to take into account certain priorities
in the future mandate of MINUSMA.

First, with regard to support for the political process
designed to resolve the crisis and ensure reconciliation
in Mali, the Government invites the Security Council
to give MINUSMA a mandate to help the Malian
authorities and all the Malian parties to effectively and
fully implement the Agreement. Particularly important
are the continuation of the good-offices missions of
MINUSMA, intended to anticipate, prevent, mitigate
and resolve conflicts; support for the Comite de
suivi, led by Algeria, and for the central role that the
Government of Mali will play in the implementation of
the Agreement; enhancement of cooperation between
MINUSMA and the Malian authorities - a point
on which I would place particular emphasis; and the
re-establishment of confidence between MINUSMA
and the people of Mali, who are in no way hostile to the
force's intervention in the country; quite the contrary.
In addition, the human, material and financial resources
of MINUSMA should be strengthened to meet the
challenges of security, early recovery and development
in the implementation of the mandate of this important
tool.

The Malian Government's second priority is
security, stabilization and the protection of civilians.
It calls on the Security Council to once again authorize
MINUSMA to help the Malian authorities to stabilize
the main urban areas, in particular in the country's
northern regions, remove threats and take steps to
prevent the return of armed elements to those areas.
The Council should also renew its authorization for
MINUSMA to support the Malian authorities so as to
coordinate the international efforts to canton the armed
groups; develop and implement the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme
for former combatants; and dismantle such groups.
The Council should also renew its authorization for
MINUSMA to protect civilians imminently threatened
with physical violence, in particular women and
children threatened by conflict, especially those who
are victims of sexual violence.

To that end, MINUSMA must be invited to expand
its presence in the north of the country, particularly
in areas where civilians are in danger; support the
implementation of the ceasefire and confidence-building
measures on the ground; and enhance its operational
coordination with the Malian defence and security
forces. The DDR programme, which is important to
the implementation of the Agreement, must be taken
in hand, and all combatants from armed groups who do
notjoin the defence and security forces must be able to
benefit from socioeconomic rehabilitation programmes.

We feel that the Council should demand in particular
that the battalions needed for the establishment of
the MINUSMA rapid deployment force be made
operational, something that has not yet happened even
though the force was envisaged in resolution 2164
(2014).

Secondly, the mechanisms for observing the
ceasefire and implementing the Agreement should also
become operational. Next, we will not cease demanding
that resources needed to provide MINUSMA with
surge capability be made available. Then the use of
every available means of preventing and avoiding the
threat and return of terrorist groups, drug traffickers
and other forces hostile to the implementation of
the Agreement - including, 1 would reiterate, the
establishment of a regional rapid deployment force, as
recently advocated by ECOWAS, the African Union
and the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation - must be
authorized. The Security Council should also demand
that the armed groups that signed the Agreement
be clearly distinguished from terrorist groups, drug
traffickers and other hostile forces.

The third priority for the Government of Mali is
support for the re-establishment of the State's authority
throughout the country, for the reconstruction of
the Malian security sector, for the promotion and
upholding of human rights and for humanitarian
aid. The Government would like the new mandate of
MINUSMA to take the following into account.

First and as a matter of absolute priority is support
for the re-establishment of the State's authority, the
reconstruction of the security sector and the provision
of basic social services. Such support will be an initial
test of the commitment and credibility of all parties to
the Agreement. The Special Representative referred
just now to the fact that the people are demanding the
restoration of basic social services. That is absolutely
true, but above all they are specifically demanding
the restoration of the Malian State, which will enable
us to create the conditions necessary for restoring the
administration, restoring basic social services and
creating a minimum level of security. Here I should
also stress the importance of assisting the Malian
authorities with training and other forms of support for
demining and the destruction of improvised explosive
devices.

Another issue is ensuring the security of
humanitarian convoys, including by opening
humanitarian corridors and implementing an emergency
humanitarian package. I would like to emphasize that
last issue, setting up the emergency humanitarian
package. This is not a new problem. During the
negotiation process the Government party put on the
table the need for all sides to agree on a minimum
humanitarian action package that would make it
possible to ease the people's suffering. Unfortunately,
that idea did not receive the hoped-for support, but now
that the Agreement has been signed, it is one of the
top priority tasks we should tackle with the help of the
United Nations, and particularly the agencies within
whose purview it falls, along with the assistance of our
financial partners.

Next is combating terrorism and trafficking of
every kind within the framework of cooperation
between, on the one hand, Operation Barkhane and
the Malian armed forces, and, on the other, between
MINUSMA and the Malian armed forces and security
forces. And of course all three should be able to work
together, with the Malian forces in the centre.

Then comes support for the national authorities in
combating organized crime, especially drug trafficking.
In our view, that particular point should be one of the
innovations in the new resolution. It is true that one
can create a framework for countering terrorism with
the help of the Barkhane force. Organized crime,
particularly drug trafficking, is the source fuelling the
conflict, and as long as we do not deal properly with
the issue - which the Agreement does not address
sufficiently - we will never reach a definitive solution
to the crisis, because drugs are feeding every party to
this conflict. Thus I believe it is absolutely essential,
with the help of the United Nations and every partner
involved, that we launch a strong initiative to fight drug
trafficking.

Next is support in organizing and securitizing
elections, particularly those relating to the country's
territorial and political reorganization through the
regionalization process, as well as in our work on
structural projects designed to benefit the people and
areas affected by the crisis.

Following the decisions taken by ECOWAS and the
African Union at their respective summits, which took
place on 17 and 18 May in Accra and 14 and 15 June
in Johannesburg, the Government of Mali would like
to urge the Security Council in its turn to ensure that
it is the Malian armed forces alone that have the right
and the legitimacy to occupy any area of their national
territory as part of their sovereign mission to secure the
country's borders, its people and their property. Any
other occupation by irregular forces is therefore illegal
and should end, and the Agreement should support that.

Furthermore, in his current report, the Secretary-
General recommends the deployment of 40 military
observers. The Government takes note of the
recommendation but asks that posts be created for
liaison officers to work with the Malian armed
forces and security forces so that the deficiencies in
collaboration and cooperation between our forces and
those of the United Nations can be remedied.

Here I hope I may comment on the proposal to deploy
40 military observers, since we believe it important that
the Secretariat clarify the concept and indicate more
specifically how those additional elements will work
with those already in place, including both the Mixed
Technical Commission on Security and the mobile
observation units - how they will work together and
what will be the role of the Government in relation
to the observations they will perform. We are totally
willing to continue our dialogue with our friends in the
United Nations and the Secretariat on the issue, and we
think it should enable us to move forward.

The Government of Mali is also very concerned
about the development of terrorist activities and drug
trafficking in the region. I note that the report addresses
those major concerns only fleetingly, and I was
surprised to see that in fact terrorism is not mentioned
anywhere in the report. That is a serious question. What
has changed in our vocabulary? We know how high a
price the Mission itself has paid, with about 50 troops
killed, basically owing to terrorism. We have all been
asking why terrorism is not mentioned as such in the
Secretary-General's report.

In order to defend against that threat, the
Government of Mali calls on the Security Council
to thoroughly consider the possibility of authorizing
the deployment of a regional rapid reaction force put
together by the countries of the region. I realize that at
the moment there is no great enthusiasm for the idea,
but I would like to explain. I think we should take a
longer view. The African Union has been tasked with
looking further into that option and approaching the
United Nations and Operation Barkhane regarding
their support.

The basic aim of such an initiative is not to replace
operations already under way - we particularly
welcome Barkhane's lifesaving action in the fight
against terrorism - but we also know that it is important
to create capacity within a country such as Mali, like
our neighbours Algeria, Burkina Faso, Mauritania, the

Niger and Chad, a capacity enabling us to fight these
threats over the long term. As we know, terrorism
has no sell-by date. This is a fight that will continue,
and our countries need help in developing their own
capacities. On the way, we will have to depend on the
capacities that are already there, but it is absolutely
critical for us that we not be denied the opportunity to
consider how to set up a regional intervention force. If
we find something better, so much the better, but the
important thing is that we start to create a regional and
national capacity for countering terrorism, because it
is our soldiers, not just those from foreign countries,
who must put their lives on the line for that cause. We
are ready to make those sacrifices for what we asking
for, but we ask that our units be adequately trained and
equipped to be able to enter that fight.

I would like to end as I began, by once again
emphasizing that the peace process in Mali has
made major, real and significant progress towards
the achievement of national reconciliation and the
harmonious development of the country as a whole,
so that there is a place in it for every one of its sons
and daughters. They are all Malians, and they all have
the right to live in dignity in their own country and to
participate in the political and social life of Mali.

The implementation phase that is beginning will
therefore be the most important step of all. While it
will unquestionably be a difficult and complicated one,
we at least have the good fortune of possessing a road
map, because we have the Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement, which sets out what the next steps must
be. Speaking for the Government of Mali, 1 would once
again like to reiterate its determination to honour all of
its commitments and to work inclusively with all the
Malian participants to ensure a Malian-owned process,
one including members of civil society, who are also
asking for the right to be at that table to contribute to the
restoration of peace and reconciliation in our country.

In the next few days, the Government will establish
a national mechanism responsible for implementing the
Agreement. The international monitoring committee
provided for in the Agreement, which was established
in Bamako on 20 June on the margins of the signing
ceremony, is ready to begin. In that regard, we expect,
we hope and we demand that MINUSMA will play an
important role.

We think that the national mechanism should assume
the lead in the implementation of the Agreement. It can
serve as liaison to the international Comite' de suivi
provided for in the Agreement and as the instrument of
national ownership of the process of implementation by
Malian men and women. The Government will make
available all the human and material resources required
to act in that regard.

Before concluding, I would like to call on the
international community to continue its support
and to honour its commitments for the effective
and comprehensive implementation of the Bamako
Agreement and a guarantee of lasting stability in Mali
and in the region. I have no doubt that the Security
Council will play its full part in that regard.

