Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): In accordance
with paragraph 24 (e) of Security Council resolution
1970 (2011), of 26 February 2011, I have the honour to
report to the Council on the work of the Committee
established by the same resolution. The report covers
the period from 29 March to 27 June 2011.

During this period, the Committee convened one
informal consultation, on 6 June, to meet with the
newly appointed Panel of Experts and hear a briefing
by INTERPOL on the value of INTERPOL's notice
system to the Security Council's sanctions committees.
The Panel is currently on mission to several countries
in Europe, to be followed by travel to countries in
Africa, in order to gather information from States,
relevant United Nations bodies, regional organizations
and other interested parties regarding the
implementation of the measures decided in resolutions
1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011). The Committee expects
to receive a copy of the Panel's interim report no later
than 10 August.

Aside from the informal consultations, the
Committee dealt with a number of written
communications from Member States, most of which
relate to the assets freeze measure. I will not go into
detail here regarding each and every communication.
In sum, the Committee granted 10 requests for
exceptions to the asset freeze, under the basic expenses
provision set out in paragraph 19 (a) of resolution 1970
(2011). It acknowledged receipt of one notification
under the lien or judgement provision set out in
paragraph 19 (c) of the resolution, and it acknowledged
receipt of 25 notifications under the prior contracts
provision set out in paragraph 21 of the resolution. The
Committee has also answered, or is in the process of
answering, a total of 15 requests for guidance
concerning the scope and implementation of the assets
freeze.
11-38899

At this point, I would like to assure those
Member States that have yet to receive a response to
their request for guidance that the members of the
Committee are working diligently to address those
requests.

In connection with the arms embargo, the
Committee approved one request for an exception to
that measure, in accordance with paragraph 9 of
resolution 1970 (2011), vis-a-vis demining equipment.
Moreover, the Committee responded to a request for
clarification on the scope of the arms embargo as well
as a request for additional information relating to its
enforcement on the high seas. In the context of such
enforcement, the Committee has thus far received 11
reports of inspection of cargo on board vessels heading
towards Libya.

In paragraph 19 of resolution 1973 (2011), the
Council directed the Committee to designate additional
Libyan authorities, individuals or entities as subject to
the assets freeze. Most of the specific proposals are
still under the Committee's consideration. However, as
of 24 June 2011, the Committee had listed two
individuals as subject to the travel ban and assets
freeze and one entity as subject to the assets freeze.

Finally, in paragraph 25 of resolution 1970
(2011), the Council called upon all Member States to
report to the Committee within 120 days of the
adoption of the resolution, that is, by 26 June 2011, on
the steps they had taken with a View to implementing
effectively the arms embargo, the travel ban and the
assets freeze. To date, the Committee has received only
30 implementation reports. The Committee dispatched
two notes verbales to all Member States reminding
them of the deadline for submission, and I would like
to take this opportunity to remind them once again.

