Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would like
to welcome the outcome of the London Conference on
Somalia. The security pact and the new partnership
agreement between the international community and
Somalia should be seen as a genuine road map for donor
countries in supporting Somalia's progress in a number
of areas that the Federal Government has defined as
priorities. We hope that their implementation will
accelerate Somalia's progress towards lasting peace
and prosperity by 2020. At a time when more than
6 million Somalis are in need of assistance owing to
malnutrition and food insecurity, and with more than
1 million at risk of starvation, it is critical to scale up
the humanitarian response to the ongoing drought.

At the same time, we are deeply concerned about
the fact that Al-Shabaab continues to exploit the
drought to promote its own objectives and restrict
humanitarian access to those in need in areas under its
control. Ukraine strongly condemns its recent attacks
in Somalia, including the attack on 9 May on the Somali
national army base in Goofgaduud district in Baidoa
in which at least 13 people were killed. In that regard,
improving security by reforming and strengthening the
Somali security architecture, embracing both the army
and the police, is vital to preventing Somalia's relapse
into open conflict and enabling its broader political and
economic development.

Mindful of the gravity of the threat posed by
Al-Shabaab, we would like to affirm our continued
support to the joint efforts and cooperation between
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
the Somali national army in their campaign to fight
terrorism. With respect to AMISOM's achievements
in ensuring security, we support the conditions-based
transition from AMISOM. to Somali security forces,
which should include the implementation of security-
sector reforms, as set out in the security pact. We look
forward to the recommendations of the United Nations-
African Union review ofAMISOM. ahead ofits mandate
renewal in July this year.

The political process is another sector that requires
the special attention and consolidated efforts by all
actors in Somalia and the international community.
Further progress in that area is essential to building
up a more inclusive federal and democratic State. We
fully agree with the Secretary-General's call on both
the Federal Government and the Parliament to advance
the constitutional review, which is critical to ensuring
effective and clear power-sharing among political
players, improving the interaction among federal
member states and, equally important, achieving a
one person, one vote system for the next elections.
The strengthening of local governance should also be
considered as a matter of high priority. Reconciliation
and the establishment of an inclusive administration
in Galmudug is a crucial part of that reform, as well
as an important step on the path towards a successful
conclusion of the country's electoral process. We
therefore urge all parties to continue the dialogue
aimed at achieving reconciliation, holding inclusive
elections and establishing a broad-based administration
in Galmudug state.

We commend the work done by AMISOM. and
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) in supporting peace and reconciliation,
advancing the State-building process and promoting
human rights in Somalia.

To conclude, let me touch upon the recommendations
from the review of the United Nations presence in
Somalia after the 2016 electoral process. We share the
position of the Secretary-General that, in the next phase
of the United Nations, the Organization should support
the Somali-led political and State-building process. In
our View, UNSOM. should be maintained and allowed
to continue its work with a focus on strengthening,
and building the capacity of, all Somali regional and
local authorities.

