Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset I wish to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2010/522)
and his Special Representative, Ms. Ameerah Haq, for
her comprehensive briefing to the Council. We support
her efforts and the key coordinating role of the United
Nations in Timor-Leste. We express our condolences at
the passing away of Mr. Takahisa Kawakami. We
welcome Ambassador Borges, Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste, and thank her for her
intervention.

Like others, we are very pleased to note that the
security situation has remained relatively calm and
stable. I want to commend that the Timorese people,
Government and political parties for showing restraint
and for their continued efforts at dialogue. The
Timorese have wisely used this considerable
stabilization by addressing long-term key issues, such
as the adoption of the National Strategic Development
Plan, the Justice Sector's Strategic Plan for Timor-
Leste, and the creation of an Anti-Corruption
Commission.

In the same vein, it is praiseworthy that in 10 of
the 13 districts primary policing responsibilities have
been handed over by the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) to the Timorese
national police. We are also pleased to note that the
resumption of primary police responsibilities by the
national police (PNTL) has not led to an increase in

criminal activity. We welcome the further progress
achieved in the registration, screening and certification
programme for the PNTL. It seems, however, that there
are quite a few logistical and training requirements that
have to be met in order to complete the handover
process. We carefully note the drawdown foreseen for
the end of June next year, which will reduce the
UNMIT police by almost 20 per cent - from 1,023 to
around 800 officers.

As conditions improve and stability continues, it
is quite logical to start thinking about the transition
period and the eventual exit of UNMIT. However, we
believe that things should not be rushed and that
UNMIT's mandate and force composition should not
be further altered, as the 2012 elections will be a
crucial test for the stability of the country. In that
regard, we believe that it is of the utmost importance
that the Timorese Government - but also the police-
contributing countries and donors - focus their efforts
on building the capacity of the Timorese police force in
particular and of State institutions in general.

Likewise, we continue to concur with the
Secretary-General's call for defining a meaningful role
for the Timorese army in a peacetime setting. In
February last year we suggested in the Council that the
army could be oriented and trained to contribute to
peacekeeping operations. Thus we are pleased to note
that the Government has embraced that idea and that
the UNMIT military liaison officers conducted a
mentoring programme for Timorese officers. We
believe that UNMIT and Timorese authorities should
continue to work along those lines.

Although the growth projected for Timor-Leste is
impressive, the Government and the parties should be
aware that further efforts are needed to overcome the
political, economic and social challenges that
contributed to the 2006 crisis. In particular, the high
rate of unemployment among the youth is not only
worrisome for the economic development of the
country but continues to pose a possible risk to the
country's security.

Given the progress achieved so far, we are
confident that Timor-Leste will eventually overcome
all the challenges. However, that requires continued
national dialogue and unity. We also believes that
Timor-Leste requires ongoing support from the
international community in its quest for peace, stability
and prosperity. We thus encourage an assessment of the
situation in the transitional period until the 2012
elections in order to define the best format for the
United Nations presence after the completion of
UNMIT's mandate. In that regard, the Security Council
visit to Timor-Leste next month will surely be useful,
and we look forward to participating.

On the other hand, it goes without saying that we
should listen carefully to the views of the Timorese, as
this quest for stability is a nationally owned process.
Turkey contributes police officers to UNMIT and will
continue to support the United Nations and Timor-
Leste.

I would like to conclude by wishing continued
success to the Timorese people and Government.

