Mr. Braun (Germany): I too would like to express
Germany's gratitude to Malaysia and the members
of the Joint Investigation Team for introducing the
draft resolution before us today (S/2015/562), as well
as to the Kingdom of the Netherlands for leading the
investigation into the Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7
tragedy.

We deeply regret that the Council's unequivocal
commitment to accountability and justice was vetoed
today. A year ago, with the adoption of resolution 2166
(2014), the Council called for a thorough investigation of
the downing of Flight MH-17 and demanded that those
responsible be held accountable. With that resolution,
the Council took on the responsibility of bringing the
perpetrators of this heinous crime to justice. Today,
it failed in that responsibility. As one of the grieving
nations, Germany will do everything in its power to
ensure that justice takes its course and accountability
is achieved. Establishing an international tribunal on
the basis of a Security Council resolution would have
represented a significant step to that end, which was
why Germany sponsored today's draft resolution, which
unfortunately failed to find the Council's approval.

As we speak, the unbearable situation that led to the
tragic downing ofFlight MH-17 and the loss of so many
innocent lives continues. Every day, people in eastern
Ukraine are killed or wounded or lose their homes as
a direct consequence of the conflict. That has to stop.
We call for an immediate and lasting de-escalation of
the conflict in order to prevent more tragedies from
happening, and we urge all sides to fully implement the
Minsk agreements. All of us, but particularly Ukraine
and its neighbour Russia, have a profound interest in
stabilizing the situation in eastern Ukraine. Germany,
together with France, Ukraine and Russia - in the
Normandy format and with other partners - has been
working hard to end the conflict and find a solution.
As we have all seen in the long negotiations on nuclear
issues with Iran, in which we also cooperated closely
with the Russian Federation and the other permanent
members of the Security Council, solutions are
possible when all sides approach the issues at hand in a
constructive manner.

Today the Council has utterly failed the victims,
families and friends ofthe passengers and crew members
killed, among them four German citizens. That does
not mean that the perpetrators can triumph and hope for
impunity. We, the grieving nations, supported by many
others, will not rest until they are held accountable. We
sincerely hope, and to that end we call on all members
of the Council and all parties concerned, that we can
ensure that the Council will find another way to live
up to its responsibilities and bring the perpetrators to
justice. We owe it to the victims and to all who were
close to them.

