Mr. Ouedraogo (spoke in French): Allow me first
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Council. I also wish to thank the
Security Council for this opportunity to address it on
behalf of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) to affirm our commitment to finding
a rapid solution to the crisis in Mali.

Before I go any further, allow me to pay a strong
tribute to the Chairman of the Heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS, Mr. Alassane Ouattara; to
the Chairperson of the African Union, Mr. Thomas
Boni Yayi; and their colleagues, the ECOWAS Mediator
for the Malian crisis, Mr. Blaise Compaore, and the
Associate Mediator, Mr. Goodluck Ebele Jonathan, for
the solidarity they have steadfastly displayed towards
the people of Mali and for their determination to
resolve the institutional and security crises sweeping
the country.

I also take this opportunity to commend the
unstinting efforts of the Secretary-General to resolve
the Malian crisis and to commend him for his
comprehensive report (S/2012/894) on the current state
of events. The report comes at a critical phase and calls
for concrete, positive steps to put an end to the suffering
too long endured by the Malian people at the hands of
terrorist groups that indulge in massive human rights
violations before our eyes.

The Security Council, in adopting resolution
2056 (2012) in July, demonstrated the international
community's political commitment to supporting
the efforts of ECOWAS and the African Union to
resolve the crisis in Mali. Another very important
milestone was the Council's unanimous adoption on
12 October of resolution 2071 (2012), bespeaking the
Security Council's readiness to follow up the request of
ECOWAS and the African Union for the deployment of
an international force to help re-establish control over
the occupied areas of the northern Mali and to combat
terrorism.

In the context of the widespread mobilization
on Mali's behalf, the strategic concept, outlining a
comprehensive and coordinated approach to settle
the crisis in the country, was adopted on 19 October
in Bamako and then endorsed by the African Union
Peace and Security Council. Similarly, the coordinated
operations concept for the deployment of the African-
led international force was adopted by the ECOWAS
Heads of State and Government on 11 November and
then ratified by the African Union after a series of
broad consultations with regional and international
military planners, including from the United Nations.

I emphasize that those significant documents, which
were called for by the Council in resolution 2071 (2012)
and have been delivered to the Secretary-General, were
arrived at through a collaborative, inclusive process
with the full support of the Malian authorities and all
parties concerned: the African Union, ECOWAS, the
United Nations, the European Union, the countries of
the region, including Mali's nearest neighbours, as well
as our multilateral and bilateral strategic partners. That
testifies to the consensus enjoyed by those documents
in the search for solutions to the Malian crisis.

The extreme urgency of the situation in northern
Mali requires more than ever that the firm stance taken
by the Council in resolution 2071 (2012) be maintained.
It requires us to advance to a further, more assertive
stage in implementing the initiatives taken on all levels,
in keeping with the agreed strategies to end the crisis.
With every day that passes, any retreat from our resolve
entails the clear risk that the situation will deteriorate
and the suffering of the affected population - who are

the victims, as the Council is aware, of grave human
rights violations - will be exacerbated.

In the view of ECOWAS, the political
dialogue - which should always enjoy pride of place
in crisis resolution i must in Mali's case be combined
with the military option if we are to help the country
to regain its territorial integrity, dismantle the terrorist
networks and restore State authority throughout its
national territory. Non-intervention in northern Mali or
any backing down from the urgent need to send a force
could further aggravate the security and humanitarian
situations, which are already greatly troubling.
Notably, it could encourage the further entrenchment
of terrorist and criminal groups, with the threat of dire
consequences for regional and international security.

That is why, on the recommendation of the sixty-
ninth ordinary session of the ECOWAS Council of
Ministers in Abidjan from 30 November to 2 December,
and in accordance with the previous decisions taken
at the ECOWAS Conference of Heads of State and
Government, I ask the Council, upon consideration of
the Secretary-General's report, to recognize the urgent
need for a resolution authorizing the deployment of
the African-led international support mission in Mali,
under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.
I have also delivered to the Secretary-General, for
the consideration of all members of the Council, the
communique issued by the ECOWAS Council of
Ministers on the Secretary-General's report, outlining
our position, which enjoys the support of the African
Union.

At this point, I would like to share with the Council
the vision shared by ECOWAS and the African Union
of the approach to be taken and the measures to be
adopted in the days and weeks to come, to deliver a
coherent response to the settlement of the Malian crisis.

First, the strategic concept for the international
community's intervention in Mali follows the dual
approach of engaging, on the one hand, in dialogue
and negotiation with those armed groups that respect
human rights and have already clearly cut their ties
with terrorist groups, and on the other hand deploying
military force against terrorist groups.

Secondly, we believe that the deployment of
the international force is crucial to restoring Mali's
sovereignty and territorial integrity. To that end, it
is essential that the Council resolution authorizing
deployment be adopted before the end of the year.

Thirdly, in support of our initiatives, ECOWAS
and the African Union call for greater coordination
of political and security efforts to strengthen national
cohesion; organize credible, transparent, open elections
meeting international standards; and conceive and
implement a reform of the Malian armed forces.

Fourthly, we count on the involvement of the United
Nations and its expert support for the international
force expertise in matters of politics, human rights,
peacekeeping and logistics.

The request that we reiterate here today has the
full support of the African Union and the Malian
Government. We expect the Council's response to be
fully focused on ensuring that the efforts which have
enjoyed unanimous regional and international support
since the outbreak ofthe crisis will not be watered down
and stripped of all their impact on the ground. The
deployment will of course be funded by the countries
of ECOWAS and the African Union and their strategic
partners, including the United Nations. For that reason,
once the resolution is adopted, a round table on the
financing of the operation will be convened to identify
the pledges already made.

A robust resolution of the Council is necessary. It
is eagerly awaited by the people of Africa, especially
those suffering in northern Mali. It will rescue and
strengthen the political dialogue launched with the
assistance and mediation of ECOWAS, and pave the
way to a rapid resolution to the crisis in Mali.

In conclusion, please allow me to again thank all
Council members and our bilateral and multilateral
partners for their continuing support for Mali and for
their assistance in the peacebuilding process and in
restoring security in West Africa.

