Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
role of civil society is clearly gaining importance for
United Nations peace-building and peacekeeping, and
there is greater awareness of the needs of peace-
building and peacekeeping. In that connection, we
cannot fail to recognize the important role played by
civil society organizations in the economic, social and
humanitarian fields as a channel of communication and
daily interaction between Governments, the
international community and the people, particularly in
post-conflict situations.

We believe that, when considering the role of
civil society organizations in peace-building, we must
take into account several important elements relative to
their broad participation in responses to conflict and
post-conflict situations.

In the United Nations system, particularly in the
Security Council, we can observe a significant trend of
relying on civil society organizations as a ground-level
source of information in the economic, political,
security and humanitarian fields. That places a moral
and a legal responsibility on those organizations to be
fully objective and impartial. It is our view that civil
society organizations face a real test of credibility and
objectivity if they are to be considered full and active
partners in the efforts of the United Nations and the
international community to help people overcome the
negative impact of conflict.

Secondly, the capacity of civil society
organizations effectively to help alleviate the suffering
of vulnerable or affected groups in a conflict situation
is linked to their ability to gain access to those groups
to provide humanitarian assistance or other social
services. Their commitment to cooperate and work in
coordination with the local authorities or the traditional
leaders of such societies is important in order for them
to enjoy the necessary legitimacy to achieve their
goals. Such coordination and cooperation enhances the
ability of international civil society organizations to
absorb the relevant cultural values of the societies in
which they are working, which makes it easier for their
efforts to be accepted in the settlement of such
disputes.

Thirdly, it is imperative, given the need for
cooperation and coordination with local governments,
to help to address the root causes of conflicts, to spread
a culture of tolerance and to help implement national
policies for national reconciliation and the
reintegration and rehabilitation of refugees and
displaced persons, so that the efforts of such
organizations can complement and support national and
international peace-building efforts. From that
perspective, multilateral relations between the United
Nations, national Governments, regional and
subregional organizations, international financial
institutions and civil society organizations become
increasingly important in order to achieve the synergy
necessary to enhance peace-building, peacekeeping,
reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts.

Fourthly, we should, in that context, reiterate the
fact that the achievement of a durable peace requires a
comprehensive strategy that takes account of the
political, security, economic, social and human
dimensions in dealing with post-conflict situations. I
am therefore convinced of the importance of the role of
civil society in peace-building efforts. It might be
appropriate to determine the nature and the limits of
such a role in the framework of a comprehensive
strategy at the start of efforts to deal with a conflict on
the part of the United Nations, the international
financial institutions and regional and subregional
organizations, in order to achieve clarity of purpose on
all sides and realize the necessary synergies.

In that context, we propose that meetings be held
between the Security Council and the principal United
Nations bodies, including under the Security Council's
Arria formula, so that such bodies could become
familiar with the priorities and prerequisites of the
peace process and the coordination mechanisms in the
field, be they peacekeeping missions or the United
Nations Resident Coordinators in the States concerned.

It would also be appropriate for civil society
organizations active in the field to participate in
discussions held by any committees, monitoring
mechanisms or working groups set up by the parties to
the conflict, or those related to coordination at the field
level.

We have carefully studied the report of the Panel
of Eminent Persons, headed by former President
Cardoso. We will give it due consideration and study it
with a view to helping to strengthen relations between
civil society and the United Nations. In that respect,
what is required in future is to arrive at agreed norms,
rules and mechanisms that would set limits and
determine the responsibilities of all partners, in a
manner that is commensurate with their means and
capabilities, which would rationalize the utilization of
the financial, human and material resources available
to the international community in the process of facing
the challenges inherent in working to achieve a durable
international peace.

In conclusion, I should like to express our deep
gratitude to you, Madam President, for your successful
conduct of this debate. We wish also to thank the
delegation of the Philippines for its successful
presidency of the Council during the current month.

