Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): Nelson Mandela,
whose International Day was recently celebrated, once
said that he dreamed of an Africa that was at peace
with itself. Until his dream comes true, let us look at
Africa not as a continent made up only of challenges,
but as one made up also of great wisdom, creativity and
a promising future. In this spirit, allow me to refer to
some of the progress recently witnessed on the African
continent in the area of peace and security.

The African Union in particular has developed
a significant pattern of cooperation with the United
Nations. The Economic Community of West African
States is playing a decisive and constructive role in
countries such as Guinea-Bissau. Other subregional
organizations are also playing their part in promoting
peace and enhancing institutions.

It is worth noting that three important peacekeeping
operations in Africa are now led by women - the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara. In West Africa, significant progress has been
achieved in the transitions in Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire.
The sanctions regimes imposed on them have been
discontinued. In Cote d'Ivoire, UNOCI was extended
for one last time. In Liberia, the Government fully
assumed its national security responsibilities last
month.

West Africa recently emerged from the Ebola
outbreak. Despite the tragic loss of 11,000 lives, the
coordinated action of the United Nations and the
essential early-warning role played by the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) contributed to the prevention of
even more casualties. This underlines the relevance of
the PBC's activities in sustaining peace on the continent.
The Commission has developed considerable expertise
in assisting countries while taking into account a longer-
term perspective. Its diversified membership allows for
inclusive discussions that reflect a wide range of views.

As the recurrence of conflicts in some countries
sadly demonstrates, sustaining peace is one of the
most challenging issues faced by the international
community. Brazil has long advocated for the
importance of promoting development policies in
order to foster stability in conflict and post-conflict
situations. The interdependence between security,
development and human rights is central to the idea of
peacebuilding.

While acknowledging progress, it is important
to bear in mind some of the difficulties that Africa
still faces. The report of the High-level Panel on
Illicit Financial Flows from Africa estimated that the
continent lost $1 trillion over the past five decades
due to illegal financial flows. In the same vein, a more
recent report from the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development concluded that billions of
dollars are lost by developing countries each year due
to misinvoicing in the trading of commodities. This is
not only an African issue, but one that concerns the
entire international community.

It is not possible to resolve conflicts in Africa
without taking into account the crucial question of the
illegal exploitation of natural resources. Peacebuilding
efforts need to address this issue in order to favour
sustained peace. The Great Lakes region, for instance,
shows that Violence can be fuelled, inter alia, by an
abundance of natural resources, not a lack thereof.

With regard to Burundi, we acknowledge the need
of prompt measures to avoid further Violence. However,
we believe that the Council should prioritize the
promotion of reconciliation through inclusive dialogue
and national ownership. The fragile humanitarian
situation in the region continues to be aggravated
by the influx of 270,000 refugees from Burundi into
neighbouring countries. These refugees' status and
rights should be fully recognized and respected. The
PBC configuration should be invited to express itself.

Particularly deplorable is the current crisis in South
Sudan. The United Nations should remain committed to
working with all South Sudanese, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union and
other regional partners.

The Sahel continues to face the consequences of an
ill-fated intervention in Libya, which contributed to an
increase in the illegal trafficking of weapons and to the
spread of the activities of terrorist groups in the region,
as the situation in Mali exemplifies. Similarly, violent
extremism that leads to terrorism has been plaguing
the Lake Chad Basin, where Boko Haram continues
to submit the civilian population to heightened fear
and pain. This should be taken as a powerful warning
against resorting to military force as the first measure
to solve conflicts.

It is disheartening to acknowledge that many
of these situations could have been less traumatic or
could have been circumvented had different approaches

been attempted. In this sense, the recent reviews
on peacekeeping operations, on the peacebuilding
architecture and on women and peace and security
represent a step in the right direction. They converge on
the emphasis on prevention and on political solutions
to conflicts through dialogue and diplomacy in Africa
and elsewhere.

