Mr. Mendonca e Moura (Portugal): It gives me
great pleasure to address the Security Council on
behalf of Portugal as part of this timely initiative by
the Chinese presidency, co-sponsored by Angola and
Senegal.

Portugal shares the view that security challenges in
the Gulf of Guinea region have to continue to be tackled
in a holistic and comprehensive manner. Although
the main focus of the international community has
been directed at the problem of maritime security, in
particular as it pertains to the safety and security of
navigation, the region faces broader security concerns
that go well beyond the coastline. In fact, the problems
of piracy and interrelated phenomena - such as armed
robbery at sea and oil bunkering - are a ramification
of the broader threat of transnational organized crime
in West Africa.

The increasing number of unlawful events in the
Gulf of Guinea during the current year is a reality.
The destabilizing effects of piracy and the corruptive
influence of transnational organized crime are being
felt widely in region. Hence, it is high time we all take
effective measures to prevent those criminal activities.

Resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012) both
express the deep concern about the threat that piracy
and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea pose
to international navigation, security and the economic
development of States in the region. In 2015 in the
Gulf of Guinea, 81 per cent of the reported incidents
of unlawful acts took place within the territorial and
internal waters of coastal States. Therefore, their role in
coping with that scourge is more and more demanding.

Pirates and individuals involved in armed robbery
at sea have been developing their weaponry. In the case
of the Gulf of Guinea, they have increased the violence
employed in the attacks. In addition to small firearms,
pirates are now using machine guns and rocket-
propelled grenade launchers. With those technologies,
their attacks can be completed much faster, sometimes
in less than 20 minutes. Preventing and avoiding those
kinds of attacks will be successful only when we
address the root causes that motivate those individuals
to put their own lives and those of others at stake.

But the Gulf of Guinea is too large, and we will
not prevail until and unless we act together. The
geopolitical features speak for themselves: 6,000
kilometres of coastline, 17 coastal States, 2 island
States and 5 landlocked States, all depending on the
Gulf of Guinea for their survival. It is therefore of
the utmost importance to continue to actively support
regional efforts in the Gulf of Guinea. Three elements
remain crucial in that endeavour. First and foremost,
there is a need for political will and engagement with
a View to achieving concrete results. Secondly, there
is a need for technological means to ensure security.
And, thirdly, there must be coordination of the different
actors and initiatives.

In line with the resolutions I just mentioned,
and considering the African Union 2050 Integrated
Maritime Strategy, several efforts have been
undertaken to promote synergies among regional and
international actors in the Gulf of Guinea. Those efforts
have had noteworthy results, namely, in the outcome
of the Summit of Heads of State and Government on
Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea,
held in Yaounde in June 2013, which agreed on the
establishment of an integrated interregional maritime
architecture, with four interconnected and mutually
reinforcing layers. We believe that the interregional
framework, design and agreed to in Yaounde, should be
the linchpin of any international approach and support
to the organizations and States in the region, with
respect for regional and local ownership. In that regard,
let me add a few thoughts on what we think the role of
the international community, and of the United Nations
in particular, should be in contributing to regional
efforts.

First and foremost, we must concentrate on
mobilizing support to the Yaounde process, the relevant
regional organizations and the coastal States. That
encompasses the Interregional Coordination Centre for
Maritime Security in Yaounde and the Regional Centre
for Maritime Security in Central Africa, in Pointe

Noire, Congo, and the Regional Maritime Security
Centre for West Africa , located in Abidjan, as well as
all of the planned multinational coordination centres, of
which only those located in Cotonou - Zone E - and
in Douala - Zone D - are active so far.

Secondly, we must foster cooperation among
national authorities and promote capacity-building,
while trying to make good use of all available
mechanisms. Capacity-building should entail both
the public and private sectors, which are are the main
targets of pirates and of the armed robbery incidents.

Thirdly, we must assist individual countries and
regional organizations in the creation of common legal
approaches at national and regional levels, so as to give
them the appropriate means to deal more effectively
with the ever-changing nature of threats to security and
stability in the region.

Finally, we must raise awareness of the importance
of the blue economy for coastal States and to
facilitate cooperation in the establishment of concrete
sustainable blue economy projects for the benefit of
local communities.

I would like to reiterate Portugal's engagement
in contributing to the international efforts to help
the coastal States in the Gulf of Guinea in facing the
important challenges that have brought us here today.
Our long-established technical, military and legal
cooperation with countries in the region - namely,
with Angola, Cabo Verde and Seo Tome and Principe;
the know-how that we have acquired in managing a
very wide exclusive economic zone and in defining
one of the largest continental shelves in the world;
and our experience in participating in and leading
piracy-fighting missions in the Gulf of Aden are good
references of our capabilities in that respect.

In conclusion, let me underscore that Portugal
currently holds the presidency of the Group of Seven
Friends of the Gulf of Guinea, coinciding with Japan's
Group of Seven chairmanship. During our presidency
of the Group, we will strive to promote synergies and
capacity-building along the lines I mentioned here, in
close coordination with the Yaounde process members,
the Economic Community of West African States,
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Gulf of Guinea Commission, and all the other
relevant international actors and initiatives.

