Mr. Lopes da Rosa (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): On 13 March 1997, the Security Council
received a letter from the Government of Albania
expressing its deep concern over its inability to ensure
law and order because of the climate of violence and
anarchy into which the country had been plunged, and
requesting emergency consideration of the matter given
the continuing deterioration in the situation.

The Security Council, aware of its responsibilities,
recognized the importance of stability in the region. The
Council considered this uncontrollable violence to be not
only a threat to the peace in Albania but also an attack on
regional stability as a whole. Accordingly, it adopted a
presidential statement calling on the parties to halt the
hostilities and the violence and urging them to cooperate
in efforts at political dialogue with a View to easing
tension and facilitating the return of peace to the country
as a whole.

We welcomed this speedy reaction on the part of the
Security Council. It demonstrated a desire to act quickly
and jointly in order to provide solutions in a timely
manner, thereby avoiding any further deterioration in
hotbeds of tension or in conflict situations. It is our hope
that this trend and this spirit of harmony will continue in
all similar situations.

Given the continuing violence and concerned over
the deterioration in the humanitarian situation, two weeks
following the receipt of the letter from the Government of
Albania, on 28 March 1997, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1101 (1997) authorizing the establishment of a
multinational protection force to facilitate prompt delivery
of humanitarian assistance and to help create a secure
environment for missions of international organizations in
Albania. Guinea-Bissau welcomes the speed with which
the decision was taken and voted in favour of the
resolution, for we believe that the United Nations, and the
Security Council in particular, should become increasingly
and more speedily involved at the first sign of conflict.

We would venture to hope that our Council will
make good use of the clear example set by the operation
in Albania, enabling it to take measures speedily where
necessary in other circumstances in order to preserve
international peace and security.

Guinea-Bissau would like once again to emphasize
the importance of preventive diplomacy in the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Here we would like to reiterate our
thanks to all those who made efforts to find a negotiated

 

solution to this crisis. We thank also the Member States
that provided contingents to the force. We would like to
pay a well-deserved tribute to Italy and to France, which
kept the Council regularly informed of the force's activities
through clear and accurate periodic reports.

Today, four months following the adoption of
resolution 1101 (1997), the Security Council is assessing
the force's achievements. We think that the balance sheet
is a very positive one and that the force has fulfilled its
mandate satisfactorily. This represents yet another success
story for the United Nations. Relative calm has been
restored, humanitarian assistance has reached the people it
was intended for, elections were held and a democratic
Government has been constituted. My delegation finds all
this very encouraging.

However, much remains to be done before Albania
can truly restore peace and set forth on the path towards
reconciliation and economic and social rehabilitation.
Primary responsibility lies, of course, with the Albanian
people themselves, but undeniably the international
community continues to have an essential part to play in
this process so as to help the country face the serious
problems confronting it. We stand convinced that the
Albanians will be able to take up this new challenge with
a view to ensuring rehabilitation of their country.

