Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, Mr. President, I would like to say that we
are glad to see you chairing today's meeting. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and for his first report on this issue.

Many countries emerging from conflict today are
faced with the heavy task of reconstruction, restoration
of the rule of law and justice and the stabilization of
public order. All of those issues are important in order
to give people new hope for peace. There is a
universally recognized need for international
mechanisms that will be democratic, harmonious and
consistent with the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. That is our common aspiration and
the general course that needs to be followed. In that
regard, today's meeting is definitely opportune and
timely and will help us to better focus on our
objectives.

Now I would like to concentrate on the following
observations.

First, the restoration of the rule of law and justice
is both a prerequisite for the restoration of peace in
conflict-ridden societies and also a basic safeguard for
ensuring long-term peace. Without the rule of law there
can be no genuine peace. Only political stability, the
progress of the population as a whole, sustained
economic growth and peaceful development will make
it possible to ensure genuine peace and stability.
Therefore, the rule of law and justice must not be built
on fragile foundations. Experience has shown that
promoting the rule of law and justice is not merely a
legal matter, it is also closely bound up with political,
economic and social issues.

Secondly, the origins of conflicts are not always
the same, but they are often associated with poverty
and backwardness in terms of development. The end of
a conflict does not mean the advent of peace. Conflicts
jeopardize the possibilities for capacity-building in
these regions, which often face difficulties in terms of
resources, technology and qualified personnel. The
international community and, in particular, donors need
to assist these regions and actively support them. At
the same time, in granting assistance, we must ensure
that there is full respect for local customs, cultural
traditions and the local legal system. We need to
respect the right of the local population to choose and
to decide. The participation of external parties should
be limited to guidance, rather than direction.
Strengthening local capacities - and not imposing pre-
designed solutions - should be stressed.

Thirdly, coordination must be enhanced within
the United Nations system, in order to draw on each
other's expertise, to provide the right level of judicial
assistance and to enhance the capacities of judicial
elements in peace operations. The Secretary-General
has presented a number of recommendations in
paragraph 65 of his report, in particular regarding the
roster of experts. These are measures that should be put
into effect as soon as possible.

Fourthly, restoring the rule of law is something
that should serve the purpose of securing lasting peace
and security and providing for economic and social
development. It should also serve the fundamental
long-term interests of the local population. In this
process, all parties must respect the United Nations
Charter and the universally recognized norms of
international law with regard to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the country in question, and
refrain from interfering in internal disputes and
differences.

By way of conclusion, I would like to quote the
Secretary-General in his address to the General
Assembly: "Those who seek to bestow legitimacy must
themselves embody it; and those who invoke
international law must themselves submit to it"
(A/59/PV.3).

