Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Secretary-General for
his edifying briefing and his personal commitment to
addressing the problems that have brought us together
today. I would also like to thank the Italian presidency
for taking the initiative to hold this important discussion
on our common challenges in the Mediterranean. This
subject is strategically important when it comes to
regional and international security and stability. It is
also a humanitarian priority - almost 3,000 people
have died in the Mediterranean since the beginning of
the year.

I would like to begin by underlining the urgency of
tackling security challenges in the Mediterranean. The
Mediterranean - a crossroads between Europe, Africa
and the Middle East - is facing an unprecedented
multiplication of regional crises. It is home to multiple
humanitarian, security and development challenges,
which affect particularly vulnerable populations. It
is our responsibility to take collective action against
these threats.

The fight against terrorism is the first major
challenge and a top priority for France. Increased
efforts are needed to address the common challenges
posed by terrorism: the return or relocation of foreign
terrorist fighters, the use of the Internet by terrorist
groups and the financing of terrorism, which will be
the focus of an international conference organized
in Paris by President of the Republic, Emmanuel
Macron in April 2018. The links between transnational
organized crime and terrorism must also receive our
full attention. In both Libya and the Sahel, various
trafficking activities carried out by criminal networks
are fuelling terrorist groups.

The fight against terrorism also involves continuing
to work to protect cultural heritage. Resolution 2347
(2017), adopted in March on the initiative of France
and Italy, underscored how the destruction, looting and
illicit trafficking in cultural property is contributing to
these conflicts. We are looking forward to returning to
this topic at the meeting on 30 November.

A second manifestation of the security challenges
in the Mediterranean is the migration crisis, which
is affecting Europe and leaving millions of people
completely destitute. A purely security-oriented
approach to the migration issue would be neither
desirable nor effective. The migration challenge
demands increased European and international
cooperation and should encompass the entire migratory
route - from the countries of origin to the countries
of destination - while respecting the rights of the
persons concerned.

That is why our President, in close connection with
Italy, has made migration one of France's top priorities.
In that regard, I wish to pay tribute to Italy for its
considerable efforts to host refugees. On the initiative
of President Macron, an international meeting was
held in Paris, on 28 August, which led to the adoption
of a plan of action on migratory issues in the central
Mediterranean, with a particular focus on the countries
of origin, Chad and the Niger.

We remain very concerned about the inhuman
treatment of migrants who are passing through Libya.
We reiterate our appeal to the Libyan authorities to
make every effort to ensure that migrants are treated
with dignity and respect for their human rights. The
EUNAVFOR MED Operation Sophia, which is saving
tens of thousands of lives every year and whose mandate
was recently renewed, illustrates the European Union's
commitment to fighting the smuggling of migrants in
the central Mediterranean.

To address these issues over the long term, we
must promote a cross-cutting approach, based on
cooperation among Africa, the Middle East and Europe.
Mediterranean crises will not be resolved without a
coherent, long-term political approach that combines
security, development and solidarity. Climate change
exacerbates development issues in the Mediterranean
region and its effects are potential sources of instability
and conflict. That was one of the observations made by
the Council during its mission to the Lake Chad basin,
which I personally found striking.

In the Sahel, France promotes a conmprehensive
response based on the pillars of security, development
and good governance, as well as education and the
prevention of violent extremism. In that spirit, we
actively support the Group of Five for the Sahel initiative
to establish ajoint force to lead cross-border operations
in order to combat the transnational threat posed by
terrorism and trafficking in States of the region. We
work with the other partners of the Sahel Alliance
to further mobilize the principal donors to promote
development and good governance in the countries of
the Sahel. The political track and implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
must progress in parallel. Finally, we will continue
to mobilize the international community to support
the Joint Force, in line with the ministerial meeting
of 30 October 2017 and looking ahead to the Brussels
conference. In that regard, we will soon put forward
proposals, taking into account both the needs expressed
on the ground and the sensitivities around this table.

The crises in the Middle East require political
solutions that are inclusive of all populations. That is
why France fully supports a negotiated transition in
Syria, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). France
calls on the international community to support the
efforts of the Special Envoy, Staffan de Mistura, ahead
of the Geneva negotiations at the end of the month. That
is the only political process that is likely to lead to a
lasting political solution.

In Libya, the solution lies in national reconciliation
and the restoration of State authority throughout
the territory. That is also the best long-term solution
to overcoming terrorism and to responding to the
challenges of migration. As we said yesterday before
the Council (see S/PV.8104), we fully support the
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ghassan Salame.

In Gaza, the humanitarian crisis, coupled with an
environmental crisis, also has political causes. The
intra-Palestinian reconciliation process must continue.
We commend the efforts of Egypt in that regard. That
process must enable the Palestinian Authority to fully
exercise its prerogatives in the Gaza Strip, including in
the area of security, and to facilitate the lifting of the
blockade imposed on the Gaza Strip. In our view, that
intra-Palestinian reconciliation is inseparable from the
resumption ofthe peace process on the basis ofthe two-
State solution.

Finally, the protection of the rights of all, including
people belonging to minorities, is critical to preserving
pluralism and diversity in the Middle East, which

we strongly support. Together with Jordan, France
organized the international Paris conference in
September 2015, which resulted in the submission of an
action plan in support of victims of ethnic and religious
violence in the Middle East. As we recalled this year at
the Madrid conference, France is fully committed to the
implementation of that plan. It contributed €10 million
euros to the emergency fund.

It will be essential to continue the fight impunity
for violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. Following the adoption of resolution 2379
(2017) in September, we welcome the establishment of
an investigative team to document the crimes committed
by Da'esh in Iraq. Strengthening the role of women,
in particular through their effective participation in
political processes, must also be an integral part of the
response. France will continue to ensure the protection
of children, who remain the first victims of conflicts.

The scale of the challenges seen today calls for
the Security Council and the entire international
community to play an greater role. Beyond the
mobilization of the General Assembly with the
negotiation of the agreements on migration and refugees,
the increased mobilization of the Council is essential.
France continues to be committed to strengthening
its cooperation with countries on both shores of the
Mediterranean - both European countries and those
of the Maghreb, with whom we maintain particularly
close historical and cultural ties. In that spirit, France
supports the economic development of countries on the
southern shores of the Mediterranean, in particular in
the context of the Tunisia 2020 initiative.

In conclusion, responding to the multifaceted
challenges of the Mediterranean area requires a
comprehensive and integrated approach: prevention,
peacekeeping and peace-building efforts must be
mutually reinforcing in order to be fully effective.
Solidarity with countries neighbouring conflict zones,
which are at the front line of population displacements,
is also necessary. More than ever, we must tackle the
challenges facing the Mediterranean area. We owe that
to the people concerned, to ourselves and to the melting
pot of culture, civilization and coexistence that the
Mediterranean represents.

The meeting rose at 5.05 pm.
