Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to begin by warmly thanking you and your
entire team, Mr. President, for the sustained efforts
throughout Uruguay's presidency of the Security
Council during the month of January. I also wish to
say just how much we appreciate your foresight in
recognizing the Council's priorities, your high degree
of professionalism in easing the Council's work and
your team's keenness to communicate with everyone.
I also welcome the initiative to convene this wrap-
up session on the Council's work in the month of
January, a month during which the Council dealt with
a particularly hectic schedule and extremely important
issues that have a direct impact on peace and security.

During the past few weeks, the international
challenges proved to be particularly complex, which
demanded fortitude and cooperation going forward.
Given those challenges -Israe1's persistent occupation
of Palestinian territory, the exacerbation of the risk and
dangers of terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, political and humanitarian crises
that are spreading from Syria to Central Africa to
Yemen, the many challenges facing West Africa and
sub-Saharan Africa, the issues of Cyprus and of Haiti,
the support for the historic peace accords in Colombia,
and now, our responsibility to protect civilians during
conflict - all these issues fall to the responsibility
vested in the Security Council to tackle challenges to
international peace and security.

Egypt, during previous meetings of the Council,
has spoken on critical issues. For that reason, I will
focus solely on the mission of the Council to Burundi
as a model for analysing the work of the Council in
effectively tackling crises on our agenda and to say that
the strength of the Council 1ies in its shared vision and
joint action in tackling such crises. As far as we are
concerned, the mission can be counted as among the
major achievements of the Council this month, given
that it represented genuine engagement with a crisis
that requires our close and timely attention because it is
of concern to the international community and because
of the reality of the situation and the means available
to resolve it. That was a visit that enabled the Security
Council to directly come to grips with the reality on the
ground. We were able to sit down and speak with a wide
array ofnational stakeholders. We held discussions with
those in charge of various spheres of life in Burundi and
came away from that with several positive indicators
that we then took to the Burundian leaders, to say that
they needed to strengthen their actions.

The message, therefore, on the part of the
Security Council to the President of Burundi could be
considered as one of the direct outcomes of that visit.
The informal dialogue with the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union also helped us to come up
with a comprehensive approach, and we also had other
means of better understanding the political and security
situation. I have full confidence that the members of the
Council came back with a deeper understanding with
what has taken place on the ground and a clearer vision
as to the options available to us.

