Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi (Namibia): Let me
begin by thank you, Mr. President, for once again
holding a meeting on the subject of international
terrorism as a follow-up to Security Council resolution
1269 of October 1999, adopted under your presidency.
This resolution condemns all acts, methods and
practices of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation. In the same vein, let me
take this opportunity to extend our appreciation and
thanks to the Legal Counsel for his introductory
remarks.

S/PVAZAZ

 

We appreciate your country's commitment, Mr.
President, to fight terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. As one of the most heinous crimes
threatening international peace and security,
international terrorism knows no boundaries and is not
targeted at any particular region or ethnic group. It is
indiscriminate and brings human tragedy of
unparalleled magnitude. In a bid to contain terrorism,
Governments are forced to impose harsh security
measures to stamp out terrorism and to protect their
citizens. Terrorists bury themselves within the
surrounding community, indistinguishable from
ordinary law-abiding citizens, and at the appropriate
moment, they emerge from the shadows to strike
before disappearing back into anonymity, thus
undermining confidence in the Government's ability to
maintain law and order by sowing fear among the
citizens.

Therefore, the inherent problems of fighting
against terrorism warrant cooperation among States.
The work being done by the United Nations to combat
this scourge are welcome by my delegation. Let me
stress, as we have on numerous occasions, that as the
Organization continues to work to put in place
measures to fight terrorism, a distinction continue to be
made between terrorism and the legitimate rights of
people under foreign occupation and domination,
fighting for their inalienable rights to self-
determination and freedom. Namibia supports the 1994
United Nations Declaration on Measures to Eliminate
International Terrorism, and we join the community of
nations to stand together in relentless pursuit, using all
necessary means to combat terrorism in all its
manifestations.

