Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): We
welcome Minister Le'onard She Okitundu.

The French delegation associates itself with the
statement that will be made by the permanent
representative of Belgium on behalf of the European
Union. However, I would like to make a few comments
in my national capacity.

First, I would like, in the presence of the
Secretary-General, to pay a warm tribute to the Special
Representative of Mr. Kofi Annan, Mr. Amos Ngongi.
This is the first opportunity we have had to hear him in
New York since he assumed his duties in Kinshasa in
September. We have all noted the extent to which he
has already mastered the details of this dossier, despite
its extraordinary complexity.

Similarly, I would like to pay tribute to the
exceptional work accomplished by the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) on the ground. Deployment of
that operation to support the peace process also has a
considerable impact on the life of the Congolese
population, as testified to in the report of the Secretary-
General. I was impressed to learn, for example, that the
population of Mbandaka has grown prodigiously since
the arrival of MONUC contingents. The Council,
which visited the city of Mbandaka in May, was able to
appreciate the extent to which the arrival of MONUC
staff has brought hope to peoples who, for too long,
have known only war and insecurity. To give hope to
the Congolese people is exactly what the report before
us proposes.

France gives its full support to the
recommendations contained in the report related to the
future of MONUC and the transformation of its
concept of operations. The third phase of the
deployment of the force must commence, and we must
begin to increase MONUC's presence in the east of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is entirely in
keeping with the position that we have always
defended in the Council. MONUC must go to the
border areas, where an essential part of the problem
exists and where part of the conflict's solution is to be
found. By beginning phase III and deploying to the
east, MONUC can better prepare itself to support the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration, and
repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR) of foreign armed
forces present in the country. This is one of the
essential facets of the peace process. MONUC must
establish contact, and then a regular and trustworthy
relationship, with those armed groups, about which we
still lack information.

Phase III will also make it possible for MONUC
to prepare to accompany the withdrawal movement of
the foreign forces in the country. Some countries have
already begun withdrawal - completely, in the case of
Namibia, and in large part, in the case of Uganda. We
are gratified by that. Other countries have not yet done
this, and they must start preparatory work without
delay, then start withdrawal.

With respect to DDRRR and to the withdrawal,
parties to the Lusaka Agreement have promised to give
us the information necessary for MONUC to carry out
its mission. Some information has been communicated,
but it is not sufficient. Now, very quickly, that
operational information must be transmitted to
MONUC.

The report touches upon other important points of
the peace process, first and foremost, the question of
Kisingani. The Council, in resolution 1304 (2000),
called for the demilitarization of the city. The
Secretary-General himself, during his visit to the
region in September, stressed the importance he
attaches to this issue. The report stresses the essential
role the situation in Kisingani plays in the future of the
peace process. It is the third-largest city of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the most
afflicted by the conflict. It is up to us to examine, in
close collaboration with the Secretariat, how the
activities of MONUC and United Nations agencies can
help make progress on this issue.

The inter-Congolese dialogue is another of the
pillars in the peace process, as defined in the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. Following the Addis Ababa
meeting, we encourage all the Congolese parties to
work to ensure progress in the dialogue, in order to
restore as soon as possible the positive spirit that
characterized the August meeting, which was such an
important milestone in the peace process.

The report of the Secretary-General rightly
stresses that the situation, generally speaking, is
moving in the right direction. But some issues continue
to be of great concern to us, and we must consider how
the Council and the entire international community can
try to address them. First of all, fighting continues in
the East of the country, where there is a lack of
security, which has its primary impact on the civilian
population. Every party to the conflict must bring all
its influence to bear to put an end to that situation. The
human rights situation remains a grave concern; we
cannot fail to regret the departure of the Special
Rapporteur for human rights, Mr. Roberto Garreton,
who came often to the Council to describe, with
conviction, his efforts to make progress in that area.

Secondly, the humanitarian situation throughout
the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is disastrous. The country faces an exceptionally grave
economic situation, which makes it even harder to
settle the conflict. International financial institutions
have understood that the future of the peace process
depends on the assistance we are able to provide. This
is an effort that the entire international community
must be ready to make as promptly as possible. The
reopening of river waterways has helped restore
economic links among various regions of the country.
But here again, the process has only just begun; it must
be continued and broadened.

Thirdly, we all know that illegal exploitation of
the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is among the catalysts of the conflict. Soon, we
shall hear recommendations from Ambassador Kassem,
which will help us decide on the proper course of
action.

Finally, we have noted heightened tension in
Burundi and also between Rwanda and Uganda. Those
matters cannot be isolated from the peace process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. These crises
can be settled only in a regional framework. We agree
with the Secretary-General, who in his report expresses
the view that Burundi should be associated more
closely with the Congolese process.

The peace process is making headway, but it has
not yet reached the point of no return. The Council and
MONUC have important roles to play, but
responsibility for the peace process must be borne first
and foremost by the parties to the conflict. The
Security Council is rightly planning to hold a further
meeting with the ministers members of the Political
Committee of the Lusaka Agreement. That meeting,
which will probably take place in New York on 9
November, will enable us to mark a new stage in the
partnership that has been established. Such trusting
dialogue, reinforced by progress and by the efforts of
the parties to the conflict, will make it easier for us to
help them implement their own peace process.

