Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti, namely, Argentina, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, France, Peru, United States and my
country, Uruguay. I would like to congratulate you, Sir,
and the delegation of Lebanon, for organizing this
debate to enable us to discuss the most recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2011/540) on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

The Group of Friends welcomes the presence
amongst us today of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, Ambassador Mariano
Fernandez Amunategui, and we thank him for his broad
ranging briefing. We would also like to underscore his
appointment and thank him for having assumed the
difficult task of leading the efforts of the United
Nations in Haiti in a critical moment in the history of
this country. As is indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General, for the first time in its history, Haiti
has seen a peaceful transfer of power between a
democratically elected president and another from the
opposition. On behalf of the Group of Friends, I would
also like to thank Mr. Edmond Mulet for his tireless
work as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and thank the entire staff of MINUSTAH for
their dedication and selfless sacrifice. I would also like
to express our firm support for MINUSTAH and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in his
attempts to improve stability, security and governance
in Haiti.

At this crucial moment, the Group of Friends of
Haiti once again expresses its continued support to the
Government and the people of Haiti as they rebuild
their country, consolidate peace, democracy and
stability, and promote recovery and sustainable
development. The Group expresses its satisfaction at
the improvements achieved in the overall security
situation. However, we recognize that political stability
is essential in order to stay the course towards
stabilization and reconstruction. The Group of Friends
of Haiti therefore encourages representatives of the
executive and legislative branches of the Government
to work in concert in order to meet the aspirations of
the Haitian people in accomplishing the reforms.

The Group is prepared to support Haitians in their
recovery and in the implementation of the Haitian
Government's strategy, which will transform projects
into realities, in close cooperation with the country's
authorities and MINUSTAH. The Group of Friends of
Haiti would also like to stress the importance of
cooperation between the international community and
the Government of Haiti in meeting the needs of the
Haitian people, particularly to help the more than
600,000 internally displaced persons living in more
than 1,000 locations, as mentioned by the Secretary-
General in his report.

In that regard, the Group of Friends recognizes
the efforts of the international community of donors
and calls upon them to meet their commitments
without delay. The Group also shares the concern
expressed by the Secretary-General in his report with
regard to the existence of sexual and gender-based
violence in the districts of Port-au-Prince, particularly
in internally displaced person camps, which is a
problem that requires concerted and continuous action.

The Group of Friends of Haiti would like to stress
that security and development are very closely
interrelated and are mutually reinforcing. Taking this
factor into account, there is a need for security that
goes hand in hand with economic and social
development. At the same time, the Group would like
to stress that there can be no genuine stability or
sustainable development in Haiti without the
strengthening of its democratic institutions.

In that context, the Group of Friends of Haiti
would like to stress the importance of promoting the
rule of law by strengthening Haitian institutions. We
would also like to reiterate the responsibility of
MINUSTAH to support the Haitian State in the areas of
the rule of law, good governance, the extension of State
authority and the promotion and protection of human
rights, in conformity with its mandate.

The Group of Friends of Haiti reiterates the need
for Member States and other interested parties to
continue to support Haitian authorities in strengthening
the basic structures of Government and in the
implementation of the Haitian Government's plan of
action for recovery and national development as an
efficient and coherent working framework.

Finally, given the enormous challenges that Haiti
still faces and the fundamental support provided by
MINUSTAH, the Group of Friends of Haiti reaffirms
the need to extend the mandate of MINUSTAH for one
more year in order to allow the Mission to continue to
meet its responsibilities in the current situation. The
Group of Friends of Haiti also shares the assessment of
the Secretary-General that a reduction in the military
and police capacities would not undermine the progress
that has been achieved to date in the area of security
and would not affect the capacity of MINUSTAH to
carry out its assigned functions. In the next few days,
the Group will present a new draft resolution on the
mandate and capacities of MINUSTAH for the
consideration of the Security Council.

Having come to the end of my statement on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti, allow me to
make a few brief comments in my national capacity
with regard to the Uruguayan contribution to
MINUSTAH.

Currently, Uruguay maintains a deployment of
1,124 men and women, military and police, in
MINUSTAH. Since the beginning of the Mission, in
2004, 10,000 Uruguayan men and women, working
through the United Nations, have contributed their
efforts to help to forge stability and a prosperous future
for Haiti. Eight of them lost their lives in the service of
the Mission.

The Government and the people of Uruguay feel
extremely ashamed at the complaints of presumed
misconduct and abuse and sexual exploitation on the
part of five members of the Uruguayan contingent in
MINUSTAH deployed in Port Salut. We have
emphatically expressed our rejection and indignation in
the light of these facts.

In view of this lamentable situation, the
Uruguayan Government has reacted rapidly, drastically
and unambiguously. We have designated one of our
most high-ranking military officials to conduct
investigations. He is currently on the ground and has
expressed his willingness to carry out the investigation
in close cooperation with the Office of Internal
Oversight Services. He has also taken the step of
referring the case to the ordinary criminal justice
system of my country.

This serious episode affects the image not just of
Uruguay but also of the United Nations. Nevertheless,
the Government of Uruguay is determined to carry out
a full investigation and to take any appropriate
measures in the framework of the impartial application
of justice and guarantees of due process. That is our
commitment to the people and the Government of
Haiti, to the United Nations system and to our own
people.

