I thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate on youth and peace and security. The United Arab Emirates attaches particular importance to the constructive role that young people play in the development of our youthful and fledgling country, and we are therefore pleased to participate in today's meeting. Today, as we all face a global health crisis, it is more important than ever that we champion young people as active agents at the nexus between global health and security. This year marks the fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015), on youth and peace and security, and we thank the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for its leadership in championing that initiative. It was a ground-breaking resolution, which recognized the important and positive role that young people play in the maintenance and promotion of international peace and security. Since the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015), the world has seen the many ways in which young people are creatively seeking to prevent violence and build peace across the globe, in devastated and conflict-affected societies as well as in those enjoying relative peace. Their work heralds the tremendous potential of peace and security dividends for all. Young people across the globe have articulated the view that peace and security are more than just the absence of violence, and, as such, these are matters of universal concern. They have stressed the importance of ending violence and addressing its symptoms as well as engaging with its underlying causes, including corruption, inequality and social injustice. Turning to the world's struggle to face the current pandemic, the role of youth has never been more vital. In the United Arab Emirates, youth are volunteering to support our country's efforts to navigate this global crisis through emergency- response trainings and safety workshops. Young people also took part in the national sterilization programme to disinfect the main cities in order to prevent the spread of the virus. The United Arab Emirates continues to believe in the transformative leadership of youth at the national, regional and international levels to address major global challenges. At the national level, the United Arab Emirates' leadership has taken concrete steps towards the meaningful inclusion of youth in decision-making processes. Since the appointment in 2016 of a Minister of State for Youth Affairs, several mechanisms and initiatives have been institutionalized, such as the establishment of youth councils and the adoption of a national youth strategy developed and championed by young Emiratis. These steps underpin an open policy of engagement, which is the cornerstone of nurturing a peaceful and thriving society. At the regional level, the United Arab Emirates continues to support youth in the Arab world. In a region shaped by pervasive security concerns, stereotypes associating young people with violence remain widespread and contagious. To counter such narratives, the United Arab Emirates promotes a model of moderation, tolerance and acceptance. In this model, we believe that youth are not part of the problem, but rather partners in the quest for more peaceful and prosperous societies. In December 2019 in Abu Dhabi, the United Arab Emirates, together with the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and Hedayah, hosted a regional conference on the theme "Empowering Youth and Promoting Tolerance: Practical Approaches to Preventing and Countering Violent Extremism Conducive to Terrorism". The conference brought together 300 participants, providing an opportunity to discuss initiatives and action plans to strengthen resilience against radicalization leading to terrorism, with a focus on youth empowerment and tolerance at the national and regional levels. This type of partnership is important if we are to benefit from and support young people's contributions to peace and to realize the potential of the world's 1.8 billion young people. Youth-led peace and security efforts are noticeably innovative and resourceful, making use of art, sport and media. From interpersonal engagements to spontaneous, autonomous and leaderless social movements mobilized online, the diversity of youth initiatives in this sphere is significant. Building thereupon, the United Arab Emirates hosts initiatives such as the Arab Youth Centre, which provides opportunities for young Arab pioneers in different fields to mobilize their peers and take part in the sustainable development of their communities. At the international level, the United Arab Emirates launched the Youth Delegates Programme in 2016, which involves Emirati youth in the official United Arab Emirates delegations participating in General Assembly meetings, committees and relevant international forums. The programme includes their participation in negotiations, side events and high-level meetings. In a similar vein, the United Arab Emirates encourages the Security Council to invite more young leaders to brief it on a regular basis to reflect on individual experiences while pursuing peace and security in their societies. Finally, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms its commitment to the important role youth can play in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and as a key aspect of the sustainability, inclusiveness and success of peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts. We also take this opportunity to encourage Member States and relevant United Nations organs and entities to consider ways to increase the meaningful and inclusive participation of youth in peacebuilding efforts in the furtherance of the youth and peace and security agenda.
