Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by thanking Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his briefing and
for the wealth of information he has provided the
Council this afternoon. I also welcome the presence of
Ambassador Tanin; it is a pleasure to have him among
us today.

For eight years the United Nations has been
strongly supporting the Afghan people and their efforts
to build a durable democracy, promote socio-economic
development and achieve sustainable peace.
Challenges remain today, and a difficult security
situation may be expected in the coming months. It is
important that the international community maintain
and strengthen its commitment to Afghanistan. Today,
my delegation recognizes the prime role of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy and the
priorities established at the Paris Conference as the
foundation for peacebuilding and development for the
Afghan people.

As the Special Representative said, the situation
in Afghanistan calls for a comprehensive approach and
a national vision. Besides military measures, this
should include the promotion of good governance, the
rule of law and development and economic growth
opportunities for the population. We also believe that
the Government and the people of Afghanistan should
claim ownership of the processes to achieve those ends
and that international efforts should be strengthened to
improve security conditions and the capacities of the
Afghan authorities in those areas.

The presidential elections to take place in August
will be a key step towards strengthening democracy in
Afghanistan, and the international community must
support and be engaged in that process. My delegation
welcomes the establishment, as part of the UNAMA
political component, of an office which will work with
political actors to guarantee a favourable climate for
free, impartial and broadly participatory elections.
Among other positive signs, we recognize the
forecasted reduction in poppy production for 2009,
progress in security sector reform and the continuing
improvement in political relations between Afghanistan
and Pakistan.

My delegation is concerned by the increase in
civilian casualties, the attacks against humanitarian

personnel and schools and the use of civilians as
human shields. In particular, we deplore the fact that
children continue to be principal victims of the
escalating conflict and that there are still attempts by
armed groups to recruit children. We call on all parties
to exert greater efforts to adopt measures to reduce
civilian casualties to a minimum, in accordance with
international humanitarian law, international human
rights norms and Security Council resolutions 1746
(2007) and 1806 (2008).

Costa Rica would like to see that concern
reflected in the draft resolution that is being negotiated.
The Council cannot allow UNAMA, the International
Security Assistance Force or the Afghan authorities to
be weakened by leaving out a commitment to protect
civilian victims of the conflict, in particular victims of
the insurgents. Still in the area of human rights, my
delegation trusts that greater efforts will be made to
protect women and to implement other gender policies.

Finally, we highlight the work of UNAMA in
coordinating the efforts of the international community.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the
coordination of those efforts under UNAMA's
leadership is indispensable to achieve the objectives set
forth in the mandate. We reiterate our support for
UNAMA and support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that its mandate be renewed for 12
months.

