Mr. Kaul (Germany): Our purpose today is to
welcome and thus to strengthen and consolidate the Basic
Agreement on Eastern Slavonia which was signed on
12 November in Erdut between the Croatian Government
and the local Serb representatives.

This Agreement and the understanding on it reached
by President Tudjman and President Milosevic in Dayton
represent a major step forward. The Basic Agreement
offers the best chance for a peaceful solution of the
conflict in Croatia and the best chance to avoid further
war that we have had in a long time. Germany wishes to
pay tribute to the moderation and wisdom of the leaders
involved on all sides, which made this Agreement
possible. It is, in our view, based on two important
principles. On the one side, the sovereignty of Croatia
with regard to Eastern Slavonia is acknowledged. On the
other, there must be full protection of and guarantees for
the rights of the local Serb population.

Let me also take this opportunity to express our deep
appreciation to all those who have helped to bring about
this Agreement, in particular Mr. Stoltenberg, the United
Nations mediator, and Ambassador Galbraith of the
United States of America. We are gratified to hear that
Ambassador Ahrens, the Chairman of the Working Group
on Minorities of the International Conference on the
Former Yugoslavia, was also able to contribute to the
difficult negotiations. We hope that his advice, based on
his experience and deep involvement, will also help us to
tackle the difficult issues raised by this agreement.

Let me be clear: the Basic Agreement marks, not the
end but, on the contrary, just the beginning of a process.
This process can lead and, we hope, will lead to the
peaceful coexistence of Serbs and Croats in the Republic
of Croatia. It is obvious that many difficulties lie ahead
and that much work needs to be done to achieve this aim,
to which we all aspire.

There must be no misunderstanding: the Basic
Agreement will enter into force only upon the Council's

 

adoption of a resolution establishing a Transitional
Administration and authorizing an international force to be
deployed during the transitional period. Thus, the Basic
Agreement confers upon the Security Council important
responsibilities. In the coming days and weeks, Council
members will have to work intensively on the details and
modalities of, in particular, the envisaged international force
and Transitional Administration. These are complex issues.
The German delegation is ready to contribute actively to
our deliberations and decisions.

Ultimately, however, it is only the Government of
Croatia and the local Serb party that can breathe life into
the Basic Agreement and make it a success. It is therefore
right that the draft resolution before the Council stresses the
need for them to cooperate fully on the basis of the
Agreement and to refrain from any measures that might
hinder its implementation. This also holds true for the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. On
9 November, the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia charged three officers of the Yugoslav
National Army from a Belgrade-based brigade with the
mass killing of non-Serb men, who, after the month-long
siege and eventual conquest of Vukovar four years ago,
were forcibly removed from the Vukovar hospital. This is,
in our View, a painful but appropriate reminder of the
responsibility that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
continues to bear for the unresolved situation in Eastern
Slavonia. Consequently, the leadership in Belgrade must
help actively to settle this question.

We will follow closely which side demonstrates - not
only through its words, but also through its deeds and
behaviour - its readiness to use the chance for a peaceful
settlement afforded by the Basic Agreement. It is in this
spirit that Germany will vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

