Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I join others in
welcoming the briefings from the Secretary-General,
Special Representative Zerrougui and UNICEF
Executive Director Anthony Lake. Their specific
examples and the scale of the numbers that they just
gave underline how important this is.

At the outset, I should like to express my gratitude
for the latest annual report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2016/360). I also
recognize the hard work that goes into this, and I really
want to thank the United Nations country task forces for
all that they do, often in very difficult circumstances,
to provide reliable evidence-based information on
violations against children. As the Secretary-General
said, they are courageous.

Sadly, as we have heard today, the evidence shows
that children continue to be targeted, maimed and killed
in conflicts across the world, so I should like to focus
my remarks today on two issues in particular.

First, as we heard so clearly during last week's
meeting on Aleppo (see S/PV.7744), the continuing
violence in Syria is putting the lives of hundreds of
thousands of children at risk. Continuing attacks on
populated areas, hospitals and maternity and paediatric
words, in particular by the Syrian regime and its allies,
all are having a devastating impact on children's welfare,
their physical and mental health and, ultimately, their
future. The children of Syria risk becoming a lost
generation, one without hope or prospects. Tony Lake
rightly pointed out the importance of education just
now. That is why the United Kingdom is championing
the essential role that education can play for children
affected by this conflict. Education can restore hope;
it can create prospects. We are building on the success
of the "No Lost Generation" initiative, which has
helped more than a quarter of a million children access
schooling in Syria and the region, to develop "Education
Cannot Wait", a fund for education in emergencies that
was launched at the World Humanitarian Summit. That
fund aims to address chronic underfunding by raising
$1.5 billion to reach more than 13 million children. It
aims to significantly improve how that money is spent
through supporting better ways of working together.
The United Kingdom has committed $40 million to
Education Cannot Wait over the next two years, which
will help reach more than 4.5 million children and
young people by 2018. I call on all Member States to
support this initiative today.

My second point concerns the sexual exploitation
and abuse of children by United Nations peacekeepers
and personnel. Children expect and trust peacekeepers

to protect them. Every time a peacekeeper fails to so,
that trust is undermined and, with it, the integrity of the
United Nations. It is absolutely crucial that respect for
children's rights within United Nations peacekeeping
operations be strengthened. The adoption of Security
Council resolution 2272 (2016) was a step in the right
direction. Zero tolerance must mean zero tolerance. So
we now need to see implementation ofthe commitments
we made in the resolution.

Troop-contributing countries as well as non-United
Nations forces must swiftly, thoroughly andtransparently
investigate all allegations of violations against children
committed by peacekeepers. Perpetrators must be
held to account and receive the harshest of sanctions
for child sex offences. If perpetrators are not held to
account by their own systems, we fully support the
Secretary-General's ability to repatriate military and
police peacekeepers, and we fully endorse his decision
to prohibit the States listed in the annexes to the report
on children and armed conflict from contributing
troops to United Nations peacekeeping.

Given the clear need for a greater focus on child
protection in United Nations peace operations, we
are also concerned by the potential consequences
of consolidating this work into the human rights
component of such missions, so we believe that this
change needs to be kept under review. The key here
is for the United Nations to preserve the specialized
role of child protection advisers and their direct, not
mediated, access to senior leadership. They must be
allowed to continue their important work in advocacy
with Government and dialogue with parties to conflict.

One other quick point before I conclude. It will
come as no surprise that we do not agree with Russia's
characterization just now of what is going on in Ukraine.
Abiding by international law has been a key element of
this debate. That must apply to Russia's actions as much
as to everyone else's.

Let me close with this final point. As we reflect
today on how much we have to do, it would be remiss
not to acknowledge how far we have come in this past
year. Last year, more than 8,000 children were released
from the hell that is life as a Child soldier. That is
8,000 children putting down their guns and picking up
their lives, 8,000 children now looking to the future
and hope, not inferior. In March, the Sudan signed
an action plan with the United Nations on ending the
recruitment and use of child soldiers. It was the last
Government with underage soldiers in its forces to do
so. And in May, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia signed an agreement with the Government of
Colombia to release all remaining child soldiers. This
was a vital step in bringing a decades-long conflict to
an overdue conclusion.

These are historic commitments, perhaps
unthinkable 20 years ago, when the Graca Machel
report (see A/51/306) was released. Such commitments
would not have been possible without the mandate of
the Special Representative, and they will have a huge
impact on children's lives across the world when they
are implemented.
So yes, there is much more to do. We can make a
difference; let us all work together to do so.

