Mr. Montafio (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
holding of this debate shows the Council's openness
to considering improvements in its working methods,
and that is why we welcome Azerbaijan's initiative.
In addition, Mexico welcomes and is grateful for the
work carried out by Ambassador Perceval and her
diligent leadership of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.

The progress that has been made in recent years
on some of the practices of the Security Council is
undeniable. The larger number of open debates and
public meetings and the increasing interaction between
the Council and police- and troop-contributing
countries are the direct result of the adoption of the note
by the President contained in document S/2010/507.
Unfortunately, progress has been uneven, and
questions remain concerning the holding of monthly
wrap-up meetings and whether that should become the
norm - an idea that has met with resistance among
some members of the Security Council. The rejection
of such simple proposals reinforces the stereotype of a
Security Council characterized by secrecy and prevents
a more dynamic and transparent relationship between
those who sit at this table, whether for two years or
forever, and those - like ourselves - who simply
observe as spectators.

Mexico would like to take this opportunity
to highlight the excellent information that the
representatives of the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean Countries provide to the rest of the regional
Group on a monthly basis.

The elected members of the Security Council are
those who have historically promoted and continue to
promote reforms to the working methods and those
who are more conscious of the value and importance of
transparency in their work. However, on many occasions,
those countries are marginalized in negotiations and
only included in the process once decisions are already
agreed. The democratic principles that rightly motivate
the Council should begin at home.

We express our satisfaction with the recent
establishment of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group. We hope that the work
of the group will help make the work of the Security
Council more efficient, transparent, inclusive and
legitimate.

We also believe that it is crucial to strengthen
cooperation between the Council and regional and
subregional organizations on issues of armed conflict
and crisis management, in particular when the Council
is acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

We must also foster greater interaction with
other Security Council bodies, in particular the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly, when considering
decisions with financial implications, such as the
establishment or renewal of the mandates of special
political missions.

Every day, the importance of changing the way in
which the Council ensures peace and security becomes
more apparent, as already mentioned by previous
speakers. The paralysis that has for prevented any
action on the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic for
more than two years now is a reminder that the current
composition of the Security Council and its functioning
need to be restructured in order to respond in an
effective and democratic way to the challenges on the
international agenda.

Mexico welcomes the recent proposal by France
to develop a code of good conduct among the five
permanent members of the Council, so that when the
Council is considering war crimes, crimes against
humanity or genocide, the five permanent members
collectively renounce their right of veto. We are willing
to work together to advance that initiative.

In conclusion, allow me to say that such realistic
improvements in the working methods of the Security
Council, the one proposed by the French delegation
and the ACT group, will undoubtedly contribute
to strengthening the Council's ability to maintain
international peace and security.

