Mr. Stareevic' (Serbia): First of all, let me
express the gratitude of Serbia to Judge Patrick
Robinson and Mr. Serge Brammertz, respectively the
President and Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, (ICTY), for all the
effort and professionalism they have invested in
presenting their reports (see S/2009/589, annexes I and II).

My country is highly appreciative of the fact that,
more than ever before, their reports are in essence in
full accord with Serbia's own assessment of the level
of cooperation that has been reached. Judge Robinson
and Mr. Brammertz have recognized the entirely of the
efforts that Serbia is making to comply with its legal
and moral obligations. The efforts and commitments of
the services engaged in tracking and apprehending the
remaining fugitives have been recognized in a manner
that confirms my country's political will and the
capacity of its institutions to complete successfully the
remaining tasks.

There are no impediments to Serbia's cooperation
with the ICTY at this time. Requests for assistance
with regard to the provision of documents, witness
protection and access to State archives are being
handled expeditiously. Most important, the efforts to
locate and apprehend Ratko Mladic' and Goran Hadiie
are continuing unabated. The search for those
individuals is being conducted on an everyday basis.
The Government institutions of the Republic of Serbia
are constantly taking all possible measures in order to
bring the two remaining fugitives to justice.

That will go a long way towards alleviating the
legacies of the past, some of which have hamstrung the
recovery of Serbian society and other societies in the
region for a long time. Also, the resolution of this one
last remaining problem will confirm Serbia's
willingness to face the truth about the events of the last
decade of the twentieth century and the crimes
perpetrated during the armed conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia. It will also demonstrate its maturity and
readiness to punish those responsible for the crimes
that were committed, regardless of their nationality or
the nationality of the victims.

Serbia continues to support the ICTY completion
strategy in its entirety and has maintained its
communication with responsible authorities on that
issue in recent months. Serbia's position on the
potential residual mechanism and the future residual
functions was submitted to the Security Council in
October 2008 and March 2009. I would like to reiterate
Serbia's great and lasting interest in those issues, as
well as to inform the Security Council that we remain
at its disposal for possible future discussions on the
matter in order to contribute to the resolution of those
important questions.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate once again
Serbia's commitment to full cooperation with the
ICTY. The reports presented to the Council today
affirm that commitment and attest to the success of the
joint efforts to bring that cooperation to a successful
end.

