Mr. Guterres: I thank all members of the
Council for their excellent interventions and for the
very relevant questions that were raised here today.

(spoke in French)

I would like to begin by thanking the
representative of France for his observations and by
trying to respond briefly to his questions.

First, it is true that in Chad, because of the
extreme shortage of natural resources, particularly
water and wood, there is an inevitable tension between
the local population, which is very poor, and the very
numerous - more than 200,000 - refugees who are
sharing the same resources, which are very, very
limited.

In that regard, we have had two types of
initiatives. First, we have created joint population-
refugee commissions to try to manage conflicts,
difficulties and problems and address them together.
Secondly, we have taken a number of initiatives to
lessen the impact of refugee camps on the natural
resources involved - particularly water, through new
uses, and wood, by introducing techniques that enable
us to substantially reduce the quantities of wood
necessary, inter alia, to prepare food for refugees, with
a view to preservation.

Tripartite agreements are now being negotiated
with all the neighbouring countries. Unfortunately, we
began too late, because it was very difficult to decide
who could sign on the Sudanese side: the Khartoum
Government or the regional government of the south.
We unfortunately lost months, which also shows the
difficulty and complexity of finally finding a solution
to the Sudanese problem - a solution that is now
enabling us to establish these agreements.
Recently, together with the United Nations
Development Programme, we developed a new
cooperation framework that we will try to build on the
ground, including by planning joint activities aimed at
sustainable solutions in Africa. But I must say in all
sincerity that the problem of the gap between
humanitarian assistance activities and development
assistance activities will not be easily brigaded through
inter-agency cooperation alone: it is a major issue for
the international community. Countries themselves
must display leadership and show the will to contribute
decisively to resolving the problem.

Indeed, when we look at the various actors on the
humanitarian and development sides, we see that they
have different cultures and different time scales, and
that they encounter extreme difficulties working
together on joint programmes to address problems that
are, in my view, joint problems. That is a key issue that
must prompt all of us to become involved.

Sometimes, even in a country such as mine,
international activities have been shared between
sectors dealing with humanitarian issues and sectors
concerned with development issues, and the internal
dialogue has not worked. That dilemma - which I
myself have seen in my national administration -
exists everywhere. It is a key issue, and I believe that
for all of us, resolving that key issue is an essential
condition for success, particularly when it comes to
preserving the peace after conflicts have been resolved
and ensuring support for refugee return operations.

The representative of France raised a central
issue: the relationship between humanitarian agencies
and peacekeeping operations. That is an issue that we
have never hesitated to address. We recognize the need
to preserve the civilian character of humanitarian
action, but we have always engaged in very significant
and strong cooperation with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, and we are prepared to
cooperate with peacekeeping forces in keeping with the
autonomy of our mandate. But we understand that,
without a minimum of guaranteed security in the
regions, it is absolutely impossible to have effective
humanitarian action. What is happening in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a good example
of a more systematic approach to such cooperation in
the area of protection. We expect good results in
keeping with the basic principles of humanitarian
action.

(spoke in English)

I thank the representative of the United Kingdom
for his comments. His first question was about the
cluster approach and the first results of its
implementation. I think it is fair to say that it is a new
approach; it needs a lot of flexibility in order to be
successful. It must not be transformed into a
cumbersome and bureaucratic approach; it needs a lot
of flexibility and must be effective on the ground as
quickly as possible. That is our main concern.

I believe that very relevant work was done at the
headquarters level in the various agencies to establish
an overall framework for the various clusters. But it is
on the ground that we now face difficulties. Just one
example is camp management in Pakistan. Although
our cluster is not supposed to deal with natural
disasters, it would be inconceivable for us not to be
involved in Pakistan, given the more than 3 million
refugees hosted by that country.

Now, there is a cluster for camp management and
a cluster for water and sanitation. If there is a water
problem in a camp, who is responsible? Who is the
provider of last resort? Only by confronting that
approach with the reality in the field will we be able to
solve the problems and to find the adequate
mechanisms to address them without bureaucracy in a
simplified way and with a basic concept. Action should
be conducted, in each situation, by those who have the
capacity to do so. That, I think, is the crucial element
for making the cluster approach work. If we stick to a
rigid framework even when it does not fit reality, of
course we will fail. That, I think, is the lesson we
should draw from the early stages of the Pakistan
operation, and I do believe that we have learned the
lesson and are going to improve our capacity to make it
work.

The representative of the United Kingdom raised
a lot of very relevant considerations about prevention
and conflict resolution. Of course, his intervention was
to a large extent centred on Darfur and Chad. I would
like to stress again that, in our opinion, the Sudan/Chad
problem is the biggest humanitarian problem we will
potentially face in the world today. In my opinion,
today the key element to making it move in the right
direction is to achieve, as soon as possible, a peace
agreement in Darfur. I do believe that all the efforts of
the international community and all the pressures
exerted by all countries that could and are willing to be
involved in the situation should be focused now on that
very clear and concrete objective. We should lose no
more time in ensuring that there is a peace agreement
for Darfur. Because the differences are so big among
the various actors, unless there is a lot of concerted
pressure and everybody acts together, there is a risk
that a peace agreement may not be made. If the peace
agreement is not made, I do believe that the situation
may trigger much worse developments in the near
future.

Now, a peace agreement is the beginning of a
solution to the large and complex problem of re-
engineering the society of Darfur. It will require a lot
of reconciliation afterwards. Without that, it will be
impossible to do it. I also believe that afterwards,
unless it has an adequate mandate, a force which needs
to be endowed with resources - and let us be honest
in acknowledging that the African Union has not been
provided with enough resources for the mission that it
was supposed to accomplish - and with credibility as
a deterrent - in the sense that those who violate the
peace and the ceasefire agreements will understand that
they risk severe punishment by that force - the risk of
failure is very big.

In our opinion, a peace agreement is absolutely
crucial. I think everybody should be involved and exert
pressure if that is to be possible. Secondly, the
credibility of a force - independent of the decisions
that this Council and other bodies will take on its
leadership, composition and nature - will be
absolutely crucial, as will a sustained effort to
reconstruct a society that will require a lot of re-
engineering, as I said.

The representative of the United Kingdom spoke
about the civilian character of the camps. That is
absolutely crucial and one of the biggest factors in
humanitarian action. It is very difficult to ensure,
because, as members know, we are not a State. We
have no army and no police force. In many countries,
we are effectively giving strong support to the local
police force to enable it to do its job; in others, the
situation is so difficult that we ourselves consider that
the conditions no longer exist for us to act in those
circumstances and that those camps should no longer
be considered refugee camps. We have done that in
Pakistan and are now in very strenuous discussions
with our partners, for instance, on the situation in
Makhmour Camp in Iraq.

As to the question of early warning, we have our
own early warning and monitoring mechanisms. They
are, of course, slim, but we have a very good dialogue
with other United Nations agencies and I do believe
that they can make a small but, hopefully, useful
contribution to creating a more effective capacity to
detect problems before they explode in today's world.
I should also like very much to thank the
representative of Greece for his comments about the
reform of the United Nations system and our role in
that and about the need for effective cooperation in
solving protracted refugee situations and for effective
responsibility-sharing in order to make that possible.

The representative of Greece made a very
relevant observation about repatriation and the need for
conditions of security and development to be present if
repatriation is to be successful. I would like to provide
information on the results of different surveys we have
conducted in several parts of the world. Contrary to my
expectations, even more important than the solution of
the security problem if repatriation is to be effectively
triggered and successful, the main concern of refugees
is related to livelihood conditions - to jobs, to
development, to schools, to health care and to other
conditions that will allow a dignified life.
Unfortunately for us all, the insecurity problems are so
big that the aforementioned considerations sometimes
come second in the concerns of many refugees when
they consider the prospect of going back home.

(spoke in Spanish)

I wish to thank the Ambassador of Argentina for
his very positive words on our work. I also wish to
note our great interest in the recent decision taken by
Argentina to become a host country in the context of
shared responsibility in the resolution of refugee-
related problems. Argentina played an important role in
developing the Mexico Plan of Action, the framework
agreement for Latin American cooperation in the
support and protection of refugees and the resolution of
their problems. I believe that the exemplary Mexico
Plan of Action should be supported not only by us, but
by the entire international community as well,
especially in the resolution of certain acute
displacement crises in Latin America, above all in
Colombia.

(spoke in English)

I would like to thank the representative of
Slovakia for his comments and his interest in internally
displaced persons and the efforts we are making.
Effectively, there has been progress. We have
established a global framework. We are now in the
process of starting work in three pilot-project countries
that have been selected: the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Liberia and Uganda. I do believe that -
progressively, carefully and without ambitions that
cannot be met by our own resources and capacities -
we will be able gradually to respond to that very
dramatic issue of today's world.

There has been effective progress in repatriation
everywhere and, as the representative of Slovakia
noted very accurately, Afghanistan is probably the
most successful repatriation movement ever to have
been supported by UNHCR.

The representative of Slovakia raised some
concrete questions about the situation along the border
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda.
There are two main points of concern. One to which he
referred specifically is in relation to the people in
Kisoro, now numbering only 80,000. Many have
already gone back, but they were living along the
border without any real shelter. Today, we are building
a small clinic and 10 large temporary shelters. We are
introducing, together with the World Food Programme,
a programme of high-protein food support for those
people. We consider that the solution, of course, is not
to keep them in those circumstances and we have
agreed with the Government of Uganda that the best
place further inland - because refugees should not be
kept on the border - is in Nakivale, where we already
have 16,000 refugees and where preparations are being
made for people who may want to go. A certain
number - exactly 5,278 - have registered to go to
Nakivale and we will now promote that movement in
order to make sure that conditions are effectively
provided for dignified support. Unfortunately, many
others are still looking into the possibility of going
back, and providing assistance to them in their current
location is much more difficult, but we are doing our
best.

Another place, in the Kanungu district, has a
group of about 5,000 people which is more interested
in going back to the Congo. A few hundred of them
have agreed to be relocated, and we are once again
preparing, with the Government of Uganda, a
relocation programme. What I can guarantee is that as
soon as it happens, we send people there and we start
to determine, situation by situation and person by
person, what the solution could be. Of course, this kind
of thing is a nightmare for any organization, because it
is erupting at every moment, here and there, and we are
constantly needing to divert resources and people from
one operation to the other to be able to give an
effective answer to concerns such as the ones that have
been expressed here.

I should like to express my deep gratitude to the
representative of Japan and to say that I fully support his
observations on burden-sharing and on the sustainability
of voluntary return. I should like to pay tribute to the
contribution of Japan and of Mrs. Ogata - my
predecessor - in particular in support of the concept of
human security, which is probably one of the richest
concepts in terms of helping to bridge the gap between
relief and development and to create conditions for
sustainable return. I can assure the Council that
cooperation with Ambassador Fujisaki is excellent and
that we truly are working together very enthusiastically
in order to enable UNHCR to be much more effective
and relevant in the humanitarian community.

I should like to express my deep gratitude to the
Ambassador of Denmark. Denmark has been extremely
active in the humanitarian reform process and a very
staunch and permanent supporter of UNHCR's
activities all over the world. Let me answer her first
question about the financial implications of internally
displaced persons in a very candid way. I said at the
beginning of the process that we wanted to be fully
engaged, in a predictable way, with internal
displacement all over the world, according to the
framework that was established through the cluster
approach, but that we considered that it would not
make sense to divert resources from refugees to
support internally displaced persons.

That is clearly our approach. But there is - and I
am going to be very frank in this respect - a double
accountability: the accountability of the agencies and
the accountability of the donors. The donors must be
very clear when they take decisions on where the
money is going and on where it is coming from. We
had the experience in Pakistan of funds diverted from
operations in Africa to the operation in that country.

The problem is even bigger, because when we try
to make sure that no resources are diverted from
refugees to internal displacement situations, we cannot
even ensure that, if we do not involve ourselves in
internal displacement, the funds are guaranteed for
refugees. Indeed, what happens in some circumstances -
what has, in fact, happened in some circumstances - is
that the money then goes from traditional refugee
operations to other agencies involved with internally
displaced persons in other circumstances. I believe,
therefore, that there must be a very frank, open and
transparent dialogue between agencies and donors to
make sure that additionality is a reality. If that is not
the case, we would be pretending that we are dealing
with additionality, but, in fact, we would be
undermining the needs of some to try to benefit others
who are, of course, in a very dramatic situation.

Our financial prospects are difficult. We faced a
very difficult exchange rate problem in 2005; that is a
technical question I should like to move through. We
are now making a very strong effort so that we are able
to conduct our operations in 2006 with a minimum of
negative impact on our operations, but it is also
obvious from our side - the result of the meeting we
had last week with representatives from all over the
world - that we also need to reform ourselves very
strongly in order to be able to deliver better and to be
able to adapt better to today's realities.

Unfortunately, many agencies of many kinds -
not only United Nations agencies - operate in
circumstances that do not favour the best cost-benefit
analysis, as the Council is aware. We will do our best
to address this problem in a very forceful way, because
we really must ensure that funds that are scarce are
fully used to meet the needs of those who require
support. We must minimize as much as possible all of
the other costs that international organizations as a
whole tend to have.

I should like to express my deepest appreciation
for Denmark's initiatives, namely in the area of
development assistance to refugees, and in some very
relevant programmes across the world, for instance in
Uganda. In those operations, the idea of the
sustainability of durable solutions is very much
present.

I am confident about our enhanced cooperation
with the United Nations Development Programme, but,
as I said earlier, the problem is a much bigger one. The
problem, which is global if all the international
community acts, is to establish the linkage between
relief and development. To be honest, my assessment is
that that linkage is not yet there yet and that the
process does not really work sufficiently well in
today's world.

The early recovery cluster will be very important,
and the difficulties in that cluster are proof of that. I do
not blame anyone for those difficulties. We face the
same difficulties in our cluster. I wish only to stress
that the problem goes beyond the creation of a cluster
with a certain number of agencies. The problem is in
the way that the international community addresses the
situation.

(spoke in French)

I wish to thank the Ambassador of the Congo for
his statement, particularly with respect to his concern
for humanitarian workers. They suffer the
consequences of lack of security with outstanding
courage and determination. I see this in my colleagues
themselves, I see this in other circumstances, other
agencies, other countries, other institutions. It is one
aspect that is very important to us.

I should like to note that the "Convention Plus"
initiative is now mainstreamed in our work; it is no
longer just a specific area for UNHCR's work but is
present in all its aspects: in the development of our
reintegration support capacity as one solution in the
context of shared responsibility for the promotion of
lasting solutions and in the area of development
assistance, as a guarantee, within our limited sphere of
activity, of the success of, inter alia, return operations
and of specific initiatives on the ground, including the
plan of action for Somalia, which endeavours to
translate into specific actions the work done on
irregular flows - one of the pillars of the "Convention
Plus" idea.

(spoke in English)

I would like to express my deep gratitude to the
representative of the Russian Federation and to say that
I will be visiting his country very soon. I look forward
to the development of our cooperation. I would like
mainly to stress his very relevant words about the
reforms in our own Organization and his support for
those reforms. I think they are quite in line with what I
said to the Ambassador of Denmark: that we, too, need
to reform ourselves to be able better to deliver. It is not
only about asking for more money to do more things; it
is about making sure that we are more cost-effective
and more humanistic in our approaches to refugees and
other persons of concern.

I should like to thank very much the Ambassador
of Ghana. Ghana has had remarkable success in the
way it has handled the crisis of refugees from Togo in
the recent past, and we were very impressed with the
quality of and the capacities for protection already in
place in Ghana and with the effectiveness of the
authorities of Ghana in that field. He posed a very
relevant question: the credibility of the process of the
determination of refugee status in the present context. I
can assure him that this is one of the main concerns of
my Office, and I thank him very much for his
comments.

I would like also to thank very much the
representative of the United States for his comments,
especially for his support for our involvement in the
area of internal displacement. It is indeed very
important - and I would stress again what I said to the
Permanent Representative of Denmark - that, acting
together in a transparent way, donor countries - and
the United States is the biggest donor country in
support of the activities of UNHCR - and the
agencies can effectively work to make sure that
resources are not diverted. It is only through open
dialogue about, and knowledge of, what each party is
doing that we can guarantee that. That is a basic
condition for the accountability that the United States
so strongly supports.

(spoke in Spanish)

I would like to express my great appreciation for
the comments made by the representative of Peru. As I
have said, Mexico's plan of action, regarding which
Peru has been one of the countries to show the greatest
support and interest, is one of the groundbreaking areas
in which UNHCR is active. For us, the appreciation for
all the refugee work done in Latin America is
extremely important. Latin America is a continent with
a very significant asylum tradition. That tradition
continues and is evolving, and we view it as very
positive and as an example that we believe will be
replicated throughout the world.

(spoke in English)

Finally, Mr. President, allow me to express to you
my deep gratitude for your comments and for what was
in fact a very comprehensive analysis of the problems
we face. There is a very easy explanation for that: you,
Sir, have been dealing with these problems yourself.
Allow me to say that, when I look at you, I do not see
the President of the Security Council; I see one of us.
What I see is your contribution and that of your
country, along with the knowledge you yourself bring
and that gained from the extreme generosity with
which your country has addressed these problems -
sometimes in circumstances that are extremely difficult
even for us to bear. You know better than I do how
difficult it was for us and the World Food Programme,
working together, to make sure that the nutritional
situation in camps in Tanzania did not become
completely unacceptable. As I said, it is a great honour
to see you as one of us.

With regard to returns, all I can say is that this
has always been a major concern for me. The decision
I always take is not to interrupt support for returns,
even in the absence of funding. We would go into the
red to do so, assuming all the consequences of doing
so. Because, if there is something noble in our work, it
is to help people to go home. If there is something
rewarding, it is to see the smiles of children and the
determination of people, as well as the desire of the
overwhelming majority of refugees to want to go
home.

Let me end with this observation. There is an idea
in the developed world that there are refugees
everywhere whose main objective is to migrate to the
developed world. In the complex population flows we
are witnessing everywhere, it is true that that we have
people in need of international protection; we have true
refugees. But my experience is that the main concern
of the millions of refugees in Afghanistan and the
hundreds of thousands of refugees hosted in Tanzania
is to go home. That was a surprise to me. We must
ensure that voluntary repatriation is possible and that
the conditions are met for returns to be sustainable. It
is important that, when addressing the problems of
refugees in the world, public opinion be fully aware
that the main objective of the overwhelming majority
of refugees throughout the world is to go home. We
should all do our best to help them to go home.

For that, prevention is crucial. For that, a regional
approach in dealing with crises is crucial. And for that,
bridging the gap between relief and development is
crucial. I believe the Council has a key role to play in
making those three things work.

