Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): First, I should like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Chile's presidency of the Security
Council this month. I should also like to thank Foreign
Minister Mufioz for presiding over this meeting. I
congratulate Malaysia, Venezuela, Angola, New
Zealand and Spain on their election as non-permanent
members of the Security Council and wish them every
success.
The United Nations bears a historical and legal
responsibility for the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State with full sovereignty over its entire
national territory. This responsibility is based on
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 181
(II) which, as we all know, concerns the partition of
Palestine, and resolution 273 (111), which defined the
terms of Israel's membership of the United Nations,
conditional on its compliance with resolution 181 (11)
providing for the establishment of the State of Palestine,
as well as resolution 194 (III) concerning the return of
Palestinian refugees to their homes.

Regrettably, what happened thereafter was quite
the opposite. On the one hand, the United Nations
implemented half of its resolution 181 (II), and
completely set aside the implementation of resolution
194 (III). On the other hand, Israel has launched
continuous acts of aggression against the peoples and
countries of the region, backed by the unprecedented
military, political and economic support of its
protectors and sponsors, including by supplying it with
various types of sophisticated weaponry, assisting it
in acquiring nuclear technology and weapons, and
providing it with submarines equipped with missiles
capable of carrying nuclear warheads.

Moreover, following its creation, Israel followed
a policy of expansion and ethnic cleansing, in spirit
and in letter, that led to its occupation of Arab
territories in 1967. According to Israeli historians
themselves, successive Israeli Governments have
committed systematic and documented violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
that are tantamount to war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Settlement activities represent a top priority
in the policies of all Israeli Governments, despite
the fact that, according to everyone - including
Israel's own apothecaries of the elixir of life and
survival - such activities undermine any chance for
the establishment of a geographically contiguous and
viable Palestinian State and the Palestinian people's
right to self-determination. Israel has not stopped there.
It has imposed racist laws and desecrated Christian and
Muslim holy sites, expelled Palestinians from their
homes, and conducted campaigns of arbitrary arrest
and human torture, including against children, women
and the elected leaders of the Palestinian people.

Today, in spite of all of this, some Council
members continue to deny Palestinians even the right
to demand their most fundamental rights, including the
establishment of their desired State on their national
soil and setting a date for ending the occupation. All
the while, they continue to protect Israel from any
accountability for its unjust, illegal and aggressive
policies.

In the framework of that same barbaric Israeli
policy, Israel continues its occupation of the Syrian
Golan since 1967. Syrian citizens living under the yoke
of this occupation suffer a bitter, intolerable reality.
We therefore demand that United Nations shoulder
its responsibilities by addressing this reality with the
seriousness and attention it deserves, in implementation
its own relevant resolutions, in particular Security
Council resolution 497 (1981). It is unacceptable that
the United Nations should remain powerless to compel
Israel to implement these resolutions, including those
related to the cessation of its systematic and gross
violations of human rights, or indeed to put an end
to the settlement policy, terrorism, repression, racial
discrimination and arbitrary detention against Syrian
citizens under occupation that restrict them in all walks
oflife. Israel is also planning to steal the Golan's natural
resources, including water, oil and gas. Recently, the
Israeli Supreme Court lifted the ban on prospecting for
oil in the occupied Syrian Golan, thereby permitting
exploration companies to begin drilling activities in
violation of international law.

Facing international silence about its practices,
Israel has gone into deeper alliance with the hordes of
Takfiri ideologists spreading destruction and chaos in
Syria. Israel has waged more than one active aggression
on Syrian territory in violation of international law and
the 1974 Disengagement Agreement. Such aggressions
have increased tension in the region to unprecedented
levels in a way that threatens large-scale consequences.
What is truly outrageous is that we have heard no
condemnation of such acts of aggressions from the
Security Council, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, or the Spokesperson of the Secretary-
General.

During the current crisis in Syria, Israel has added
yet another new chapter to its record of violations by
providing support for terrorists in the area of separation
in the Golan, including through the treatment of
injured terrorists in Israeli hospitals, in violation of the
Disengagement Agreement, in a way that endangers the
very lives of United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (UNDOF) personnel. That is documented in
the Secretary-General's recent report on UNDOF
(S/2014/859), as well as in Israeli media reports. Such
support has increased the freedom of movement of
terrorist groups, including in particular the Al-Nusra
Front, affiliated with Al-Qaida, in the area ofseparation,
and their ability to continuously kidnap UNDOF
peacekeepers. We must address this dangerous reality
with the required seriousness and attention and without
delay, especially since stakeholders in the Department
of Peacekeping Operations have demonstrated an
unjustified disregard for our warnings and information
that we have provided over many years.

I have not touched on the involvement of some
well-known regional Arab and international parties
in dealing with the terrorists in the area of separation
in order to focus exclusively on the item under
consideration, dedicated to the Arab-Israeli conflict.
For the same reason, I will not respond to the misleading
allegations made by the representatives of the United
States, United Kingdom, France, Saudi Arabia and the
European Union. It is quite obvious to everyone that
such allegations merely seek to divert attention from
Israeli crimes and to decrease international pressure
on Israel, in spite of the fact that the aforementioned
Member States in particular do not respect Security
Council resolutions related to countering terrorism,
specifically resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014).
The ink is still wet on those documents.

Despite the difficult circumstances prevailing in
Syria, I emphasize here and now that the Syrian Golan
is and will remain Syrian territory. We will continue to
struggle for its independence until it is fully restored
to the borders of 4 June 1967. That right is not subject
to negotiation, bargaining or any statute of limitations.
No Israeli action will change anything in that regard.
Israeli actions, including the so-called decision to annex
the Golan, which is in fact the crime of annexing the
Golan, are null and void. They have no legal effect, as
reaffirmed in the relevant United Nations resolutions,
particularly the Security Council's own resolution 497
(1981). What we would like to state and stress about the
inevitability of Israeli withdrawal from the occupied
Syrian territory also applies to the occupied Palestinian
territory and the area that remains under occupation in
southern Lebanon.

