Mr. Barnes (Liberia): At the outset, Madam
President, I would like to join previous speakers in
congratulating you and the delegation of South Africa,
under whose presidency this debate is being conducted.

My delegation is gratified by the opportunity to
participate in this crucial debate on the relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
particularly the African Union (AU), in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Liberia is a beneficiary of that cooperation, as
evidenced by the deployment by the United Nations
peacekeeping force which has been largely responsible
for maintaining peace and stability in my country. It
should be noted that the Liberian experience has given
practical meaning to the classic provision of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and can be
seen as a success story of this relationship.

We would like to address three priority areas of
concern to the Liberian delegation which, we believe,
when implemented, would further enhance the
cooperation between the two organizations. First, there
is the potential for significant cost savings inherent in
the deployment of the AU peacekeeping mechanism

and rapid response as opposed to applying immediate
solutions from areas outside the continent of Africa.
Secondly, response to conflict in a timely manner is
better addressed with geographic proximity. Thirdly,
there is a philosophical imperative that holds that
African problems require African solutions.

With respect to each of the aforementioned
factors, the African Union, in order to succeed, must
have its capacity expanded. That, we believe, should be
the underpinning objective of United Nations-AU
cooperation.

It is an established fact that one of the underlying
causes of conflict and strife on the African continent is
poverty. It is therefore the fervent belief of the Liberian
delegation that the most effective solution to poverty
reduction and conflict is sustained capacity-building. A
valuable lesson learned from our national crisis is that
solid cooperation between the African Union and the
United Nations should be anchored by a cohesive
capacity-building mechanism. We view that as the best
solution in preventing conflict and adequately
addressing the problems of poverty and development in
Africa, even as we expand our efforts in Darfur and
Somalia.

We pray that, as this institution re-engineers itself
in the light of the multifaceted issues of globalization,
the approach of building sustainable capacity to reduce
poverty and conflict will be its guiding principle.

