The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as Minister of Foreign
Affairs, International Trade and Worship of the
Argentine Republic.

I would first like to thank Secretary-General Kofi
Annan for his statement. I wish to thank him in
particular for the concepts set out in his intervention,
which provide us with crucial guidance in following
the Haitian political process. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Juan Gabriel Valde's, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
detailed briefing on the current situation in Haiti. As
we near the end of his term as Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
we would like to convey to Ambassador Valdes our
particular gratitude for his political and professional
skills and, of course, his human qualities, which
greatly contributed to a promising future for
MINUSTAH and Haiti.

In that regard, Argentina would like to reiterate
its particular desire to see as the next special
representative a national of a Latin American country
contributing troops to the Mission.

I would, of course, like in particular to
congratulate Mr. Rene Preval, President-elect of Haiti,
as well as to thank him for his presence at this meeting
and for his statement concerning his country's future
challenges. Argentina would also like to convey its
warmest greetings to the people of Haiti, who turned
out in great numbers to carry out their civic duty
despite the difficulties they had to overcome to
exercise their right to vote.

We also wish to thank the Organization of
American States for its invaluable cooperation in
organizing the elections.

Argentina would like to affirm in particular that it
associates itself with the statement made this morning
by Mr. Samuel Insanally, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Guyana, on behalf of the Rio Group.

My country believes that the upcoming transfer
of power to a representative and democratic
Government will be the beginning of a new chapter in
the history of Haiti as well as an opportunity that must
not be squandered, so that the Haitian people and their
leaders, with the ongoing support of the international
community, may finally leave behind instability,
poverty, stagnation and political violence.

We believe that it is possible at this stage to make
a preliminary assessment of the presence of the United
Nations in Haiti. We believe that MINUSTAH has been
a decisive factor in successfully re-establishing the
secure and stable environment that contributed to the
holding of the electoral process, thereby laying the
foundations for the reconstitution of institutions and
the relaunching of economic activity.

Moreover, the Mission has made it possible to
demonstrate Latin America's commitment with respect
to events in the hemisphere, and especially its
commitment to the tasks of peacebuilding in the
region. As a result, our country and the other Latin
American troop-contributing countries in MINUSTAH
have initiated a coordination process among their
Foreign Ministries and Defence Ministries with the aim
of achieving greater efficiency in the work of the
contingents and with the final goal of identifying joint
and complementary projects in the field.

The Security Council and agencies in the field
have a great responsibility ahead of them: to cooperate
in this new stage so that the mistakes of the past will
not be repeated. The ongoing electoral process must be
swiftly brought to a conclusion to permit the speedy
handover of power and the forming of the Parliament,
as well as local and municipal governments. The
elections are a first step towards democratic
reconstruction, but long-term stability requires other
elements as well. We reiterate, in this context, our
conviction that social and economic development is
crucial to guarantee security and democratic
governance.

We are aware that President Preval has an
immense task ahead of him. The strategy for
peacebuilding must, in our opinion, focus on several
pillars. The first is security, the need to consolidate the
security situation that, we must say, has been
improving in recent months. Second is the rule of law.
It is crucial to rebuild institutions that make it possible
to move forward with the establishment of the rule of
law. Thirdly, a long-term plan must be implemented for
sustainable economic revitalization that would make it
possible to direct the energies of the Haitian people and
the support of the international community. Fourthly,
there is need to very swiftly build or rebuild a basic
infrastructure that would bring essential basic services
closer to citizens. It is crucial to assure the people, in a
tangible way, that democracy will bring about specific
advantages and that those advantages will be visible.
Among the outstanding challenges, the new
Government, with the support of the international
community, will have to continue to work for
reconciliation among the Haitian people through an
inclusive political dialogue. Reconciliation is not
legislated; rather, it must be rooted in the sum of
efforts of all members of society. The road to
understanding and the acceptance of democratic rules
will make an essential difference in overcoming
problems of the past.

Reforms of the police and of the judicial and
correctional systems must be fostered. Haiti needs to
reform its security structure so that it may count on a
well-equipped, modern and efficient system that fully
respects individual guarantees. Our country is ready to
cooperate in the area of justice and the promotion of
human rights. Haiti must have qualified officers and
strong and trustworthy democratic institutions.

In the area of development, the international
community must continue to support Haiti in
elaborating a comprehensive strategy to reduce
poverty. It will be crucial for the new authorities to
redefine their priorities in the context of the Interim
Cooperation Framework, identifying priority projects
that would meet the genuine needs of the Haitian
people. Job creation and the provision of basic social
services are two of the central issues to which special
attention must be paid in the near future.

Argentina will continue its cooperation and will
support Haiti through its presence in MINUSTAH and
through cooperation projects already presented through
the Interim Cooperation Framework, as well as
coordinating humanitarian assistance through the
White Helmets initiative. But we would like to reaffirm
the commitment and the agreement reached with
President Preval during his recent visit to Buenos
Aires, according to which the cooperation will enable
adding on and having an important impact. It will be
coordinated, and the action is not merely one that
pleases the donor but is often not advantageous to the
recipient. And so, we will continue to be available to
President Preval.

The new stage that is beginning in Haiti will
demand the commitment of all, especially of its ruling
class. Haitian society in its entirety has an important
challenge ahead, and it should be involved in a
peaceful and effective way in the daily political
process.

In this context, we would like to take advantage
of the presence of President-elect Rene Preval to
reaffirm the long-term commitment of the international
community, and especially of Latin America, to the
development and the strengthening of lasting rule of
law in his country. We have no doubt in our ability to
work together and constructively to achieve these
goals.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the President of the
Economic and Social Council, the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia, Ambassador Ali Hachani.

