Mr. Prosor (Israel): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's important debate on counter-
terrorism. I would like to express my appreciation to
the Chairs of the Committees for their professional
work and for their informative briefings this afternoon.

As we gather here today, 1 million Israelis are
facing the frightening reality ofHamas terrorism. In the
past few days, including tonight, Hamas has launched
nearly 200 rockets into our cities, our homes and our
schools. It hides behind civilians to carry out those
horrific attacks. Instead of treating the Palestinian
people as human beings, it uses them as human shields.
It uses Palestinian schools to launch rockets at Israeli
schools.

That cannot continue. No nation, no people and
no Government should be expected to accept the daily
targeting of its civilians. Israel will not play Russian
roulette with the lives of its citizens.

Today Israel was compelled to exercise its right to
self-defence. We will continue to launch surgical strikes
on military targets in Gaza in response to Hamas rocket
fire. Israel is not interested in escalation, but we have a
right and a duty to defend our people.

Gaza poses a danger to the world that no one can
ignore. In letter after letter and speech after speech,
we have conveyed the danger of the situation in Gaza.
Under Hamas rule, terrorism has become one of Gaza's
main exports. It is a haven for and a hotbed of global
terrorist organizations like Al-Qaida and a giant arsenal
for deadly Iranian weapons.

Let me also point out that the Palestinian Authority
often speaks in the halls of the United Nations about
its peace-loving intentions. Yet it embraces the same
Hamas terrorists that are firing rockets into Israel as
we speak.

Israel commends the ongoing work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate (CTED). Those bodies have done an
excellent job of monitoring the national implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001). Israel is playing an active
role in the fight against terrorism at the national,
regional and international levels. We fully implement
resolution 1373 (2001) and submit periodic reports to
CTED. Here at the United Nations, we are strengthening
our professional cooperation with CTED. I would like
to commend Executive Director Mike Smith for his
able leadership. We appreciate his regular briefings to
Member States. That ongoing dialogue is critical.

Israel continues to support the Terrorism Prevention
Branch of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), especially in the development of
legal tools for counter-terrorism. In that regard, Israel
has offered to host a legal seminar in the field, under
the auspices of UNODC.

Israel is also engaged in technical assistance
initiatives for capacity-building with a large number
of States and regional organizations in Africa, Central
America, East and Central Asia, and elsewhere. In
particular, we work closely with the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, and NATO.
Those collaborative efforts span a range of issues, from
money-laundering to border control, from aviation
security to terrorist financing. In that regard, we look
forward to next week's special meeting on the pressing
issues ofpreventing and suppressing terrorist financing.

The Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities is an essential part of the effort
to isolate terrorists and deny them the means to inflict
harm. There has been considerable progress towards
establishing clear and fair procedures about how
individuals and entities are included on the consolidated
list. To that end, Israel recently completed the process
of adapting its legislation to ensure compliance with
resolution 1267 (1999) and the consolidated list.

The creation of the Office of the Ombudsperson
has become one ofthe counter-terrorism success stories
of the United Nations, and we support the extension of
Judge Prost's mandate. Her recent report offers specific
suggestions for improving the effectiveness of her
Office. Those suggestions are particularly timely in the
consideration of the renewal of her mandate.

I wish to reiterate Israel's full support for
resolution 1540 (2004). More could be done to enhance
dialogue between the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and Member States. In
particular, we would welcome periodic informal
briefings by the Expert Coordinator of the Committee.

The international community must step up its
efforts to keep the world's most dangerous weapons out
of the hands of the world's most dangerous actors. This
means that we must develop international standards
that truly prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and dual-use items. Today in particular, we
see grave threats to the global non-proliferation regime
in Syria. The world cannot ignore the frightening
reality that Bashar Al-Assad's stockpiles of chemical
weapons could soon be placed in the hands of non-State
actors, such as Hizbullah. We must all wake up to
this danger, today, not tomorrow. Action is necessary;
the red lines are clearer than ever. It is time for the
world to do something to prevent the continuous flow
of weapons to terrorists in our region. Let me be
clear - the transfer of Iranian and Syrian weapons to
Hizbullah and Hamas is not just a threat to Israel; it is
a threat to peace and security everywhere. Turning a
blind eye to those weapons is like allowing dynamite to
pile up in a tightly packed room. One spark could set off
catastrophic consequences.

Terrorism does not begin with an attack on a bus or a
cafe'. That is how terrorism ends. Terrorism begins with
words and thoughts of hatred. Addressing incitement
to terrorism represents another long-term yet effective
part of the counter-terrorism equation. In the Middle
East today, State-sponsored incitement fills schools,
mosques and the media. Across the region, terrorism
and martyrdom are being taught and glorified to the
next generation. Let us invest in the future now. We
must show zero tolerance for this indoctrination into
hatred. We need education that promotes peace rather
than hatred. We need education that promotes tolerance
rather than violence, and mutual understanding rather
than martyrdom.

Member States regularly reaffirm their
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. A casual observer of global events
would be confused by this periodic ritual. There is a
logical disconnect between many of the words spoken
in the Council and the actions on the ground. Some
States pledge themselves to the fight against terrorism
in this Chamber; at the same time, they harbour
terrorists at home. Some States condemn terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations; at the same time, they
excuse terrorist acts. Some in this Chamber claim to
recognize the rights of victims of terrorism while they
finance, arm and train those who murder them.
Iran stands chief among those nations. It serves as
the primary sponsor, central banker and chief trainer
of terrorists, from Bangkok to Baghdad. Together
with Syria and Hizbullah, it forms a trio of terror
that threatens innocents everywhere. The victims
of terrorism depend on every State to take the words
spoken here and put them into action. As long as the
international community fails to act with unity, we
will undoubtedly suffer more horrific acts of terrorism,
and we will undoubtedly again sit in this Chamber and
speak once more about a wake-up call.

I find it impossible to believe that there is even one
State among us that is not already fully awake to the
danger of terrorism. There are very few that have not
directly suffered its consequences. Terrorism is not a
substitute for the ballot box. It is not a card to be pulled
from one's sleeve when diplomacy becomes difficult.
We must be steadfast in our commitment to fighting
terrorism anywhere and in any form it may take. The
challenge before us demands nothing less.

