Mr. Serrano: I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for inviting the European Union to
participate in this important debate. The candidate
countries Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia
align themselves with this statement.

In the interest of brevity and heeding the
President's call, I shall summarize the key messages set
out in more detail in the printed version of this
statement.

The African Union Assembly proclaimed 2010 as
the Year of Peace and Security in Africa. Today's
debate gives us the opportunity to share lessons from
concrete situations, brief one another on the tools that
are available and examine the increased cooperation
with regional organizations in conflict.

We see this discussion as a continuation of the
Council's focus on protection issues, including last
week's highly relevant debate on protection of civilians
(see S/PV.6354).

Conflict prevention is one of the main objectives
of the European Union's external policy. To that end,
the European Union has strengthened its crisis-
management capabilities in recent years and pursues a
wide range of policies and actions from development
cooperation and external assistance to efforts aimed at
strengthening human rights, the rule of law and
accountability, along with cooperation with
international partners and non-governmental
organizations.

The Joint Africa-European Union Strategy, in
particular the Partnership on Peace and Security,
embraces a wide set of objectives and activities
addressing short- and long-term security challenges.
We hold regular joint consultations on crises or
2

emerging threats, and our close cooperation is
facilitated by a designated Special Adviser on African
capabilities. The European Union provides funding for
African-led peace support operations, and we are often
invited to assist in many crisis situations in Africa
through other tools at our disposal, such as EU special
representatives and European Union crisis management
operations.

We commend the growing role of the African
Union and African regional and subregional
organizations in conflict prevention and mediation
efforts in Africa. International contact groups are also
useful tools for coordinating efforts to tackle crisis
situations. Some of these bring together the African
Union regional organizations, the United Nations, the
European Union and other relevant partners. We could
do more to strengthen relations among these
organizations by developing a common methodology
for identifying and addressing emerging conflicts and
the capacities needed.

In implementing the African Union-European
Union Action Plan on the Peace and Security
Partnership, we put particular emphasis on cooperation
in the field of mediation as a tool of first response to
emerging or ongoing crises. The United Nations is
certainly the most important and experienced actor in
the area of mediation. At the same time, regional and
subregional actors are increasingly the first to respond,
given their knowledge of local and regional dynamics
and their credibility in the regional context.

Our cooperation therefore aims at developing a
common understanding and broad guidelines, through
regular African Union-European Union-United Nations
exchanges.

As other speakers before me have stressed,
justice contributes to the consolidation of peace and to
conflict prevention. The experience in Africa shows
how accountability for the most serious crimes must be
part of any lasting solution, not least for its deterrent
effect on ongoing conflicts. Accountability for past
violations of human rights, as well as the overall
reform of the justice sector, should thus be integrated
in security sector reform and other institution-building
efforts.

The Peacebuilding Commission also plays an
important preventive role regarding the countries on its
agenda. In our view, the Peacebuilding Support Office
should deepen its interaction with other actors within
10-45510
the United Nations system, such as the United Nations
Development Programme and the Department of
Political Affairs, in particular the Mediation Support
Unit, in order to exchange experiences and build on
best practices. The United Nations Inter-agency
Framework Team plays a helpful role in that regard.

Looking ahead to the coming months, in
particular the tenth anniversary of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) in the autumn, we should never
underestimate the key role that women can play in
conflict prevention. Women are often powerful and
capable actors in their communities, and the
information provided by women's groups can be
valuable in the early detection of tensions. Women
should be encouraged and enabled to participate
equally and actively in formal and informal mediation
processes and peace negotiations. Africa has led the
way in operationalizing resolution 1325 (2000). In this
anniversary year, much more remains to be done to
fully implement that landmark document. The
European Union will strongly support such efforts.

