Mr. Wittig (Germany) (spoke in Spanish): I am
very grateful to the presidency of Guatemala for having
taken the initiative of convening this very important
debate. We welcome your personal presence in the
Council today, Mr. Minister.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, as
well as the President of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Judge Sang-Hyung Song, and Mr. Mochochoko
of the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC for their
briefings.

Germany aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union to be delivered later during this debate.

Ten years after the entry into force of the Rome
Statute, the Council and the ICC have developed an
enduring relationship based on common objectives.
Sustainable peace and security must solidly rest on
justice, the rule of law and human rights. Justice itself
requires accountability. Both are crucial aspects of a
comprehensive approach to conflict prevention and
conflict resolution. The Council's recognition of that
linkage has materialized through its own creation of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda. Given their largely overlapping constituency,
it is only natural that the Council and the ICC should
closely collaborate. While the Council exercises its
responsibility on behalf of all 193 Members of the
United Nations, 121 States have now acceded to the
Rome Statute, bringing the ICC ever nearer to the goal
of universality. Allow me therefore to congratulate
Guatemala for having become the most recent State
party to the Rome Statute.

The Rome Statute of the ICC has provided the
Security Council with important options to directly
pursue the path ofjustice. It has expanded the range of
action under the Council's mandate. In turn, the Council
has repeatedly recognized the important contribution
of the ICC and the other international Tribunals to
the fight against impunity for the most serious crimes
of concern to the international community. That was
reiterated most recently when the German Minister
for Foreign Affairs, in his capacity as President of the
Security Council, addressed the General Assembly
during the High-level Meeting on the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels (see A/67/PV.3), on
24 September. At the same time, we need to recognize
the respective characteristics and differences of both
organs, which define the essence, scope and limits of
their mutual relationship. The Council is a political
organ and the ICC is an independent court of justice.
Therefore, despite their often complimentary functions,
any notion of one organ serving the other is misguided.

Furthermore, not all Council members have acceded
to the Rome Statute. Some Council members have at
times voiced scepticism vis-a-vis the Court. They have
even questioned its role regarding the interplay of
peace and justice. At the same time, the Council has
demonstrated unity on such issues when referring the
situations in both Darfur and Libya to the ICC. On
other occasions, the Council has been deeply divided
and, as a consequence, remained inactive. Syria is a
case in point where not only peace and security are at
stake, but where victims of daily and well-documented
crimes cry out for justice.

In the context of referrals, there are a number of
steps that the Council, the United Nations as a whole
and the individual Member States concerned can take in
support of the ICC in exercising fully the responsibilty
that stems from interacting with the Court. First, with
regard to referrals by the Security Council, by referring
the Darfur and Libya situations to the ICC, the Council
has proven its readiness to incorporate that option in
its tool box of measures. The Council must retain its
willingness to use that tool as a last resort, as an act of
political responsibility by the Council. A referral does
not prejudge the findings ofthe Court and its organs. At
the same time, we look forward to the ratification of the
Rome Statute by the greatest possible number of States
so that referrals become more and more obsolete.

Secondly, with regard to cooperation, just a few
months ago the former ICC Chief Prosecutor expressed
in this Chamber his intense frustration at the fact that
the four arrest warrants in the Darfur case had not been

implemented (see S/PV.6778). Germany fully shares
that frustration, as the lack of cooperation seriously
undermines the Court's credibility. But just as much as
States must cooperate with the Court, the responsibility
of the Security Council does not end with a decision to
refer a situation to the Court; rather, the Council needs
to carefully watch over all steps and measures taken
by the Court and the Prosecutor in following up on the
Council's requests to investigate a given situation.

With regard to notifications of non-cooperation,
the Council should actively take note of such a breach
of States' obligation to cooperate and clearly express
its views on the matter. The cooperation of States also
encompasses allowing the full application of the Rome
Statute, including those provisions that relate to the
privileges and immunities of ICC staff in exercise of
their functions, as well as to the full application of the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Court.

Thirdly, with regard to financing, both as a State
party to the Rome Statute and a member of the Security
Council, we have the strong view that when the Council,
acting on behalf of the international community, refers
a situation to the ICC, ensuring the expenses on the
ICC side should be borne by the United Nations rather
than by the State parties. We do not concur with the
position taken by some Council members in that regard
that implies that the pursuit of justice should be a free
ride. Accordingly, the Security Council should avoid
any reference to the apportionment of costs in possible
future referrals. Both the Assembly of States Parties to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
and the General Assembly have in respective resolutions
recently opened the way for the ICC and the United
Nations to jointly address that issue. We look forward
to a solution that is a clear expression of international
support for the practice of referrals.

Finally, I would like to thank again the presidency
for having organized this important debate. Germany
would support the holding of regular debates on this
topic.
