I thank Ambassador Inga Rhonda King, Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; Ms. Karin Landgren, Executive Director of Security Council Report; and Mr. Edward Luck for their briefings. Russia extends its appreciation to Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for chairing the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions. We thank the Estonian presidency for organizing this open video-teleconference on the working methods of the Security Council. We need to keep issues related to the functioning and effectiveness of the Security Council on the agenda. The pandemic has given an unexpected boost to the topic that we discuss today. I would like to thank our colleagues from China and the Dominican Republic for their very professional and effective stewardship in their capacity as President in March and April, respectively. Now our Estonian colleagues are also on the right track. Despite somewhat protracted discussions on the provisional working methods in these extraordinary circumstances, the Council was eventually able to agree on the modalities. We see that today the Council is operating rather well in the circumstances in which we find ourselves. We welcome that and call for keeping to this agreed modus operandi. Today we have all the tools to allow us to work nearly as intensely as - or even more intensely than - we used to. We have everything, including the records; the only difference is in the name, but there are legal reasons for that, which cannot be ignored. I heard today that we need to devise contingency plans. I think we have already done so, and today we are operating under those plans. But we need further contingency plans relating to our operation and functioning in the post-lockdown environment. That time will inevitably come. We have to start preparing for it now. We have always stressed that the issue of the working methods in the Council is a delicate one. We are pleased that the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions adopted a number of important provisions to improve the work of the Security Council at the end of 2019. Russia has always consistently supported the Council's efforts to improve its working methods. We share the aim of making the work of the Council more democratic and transparent. To give an example, at the beginning of this week we strongly advocated for an open video-teleconference with the participation of Director-General F. Arias of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, since many of questions we planned to ask him are definitely of interest to the public. Syria, as an interested party, also advocated for that. It is a pity that our initiative was not supported by those colleagues who champion support for transparency on other occasions. Having said that, we fully support those who advocate that a balance between efficiency and transparency should be found. We truly believe that the Council can and should do more for the sake of improving the effectiveness of its work. We welcome the progress made in recent years, and thank our Japanese and Kuwaiti colleagues for their painstaking efforts in 2017 and 2019, respectively. As a result, we have a renewed note S/2017/507, and stress that its provisions are yet to be implemented in full. I would like to specifically stress the issue of penholdership. As we are all aware, note 507 reiterates that any member of the Security Council may be a penholder and that more than one member may act as co-penholder. However, the reality is that three permanent members remain today sole penholders on most of the country-specific dossiers on the Council's agenda. We would like to use this opportunity to draw the Council's attention in this regard to our draft presidential note on penholdership. We are ready to actively and constructively engage with all Council members in order to adopt it. There is no doubt that this would be a step in the right direction, helping enhance the effectiveness of the Council's work and ensure that the drafting of Council documents is conducted in an inclusive manner enabling the full participation of all members of the Council. And the products themselves will be better from the outset and easier to edit and agree on. We consistently raise the issue of humanitarian delistings and exemptions. There is a lot to analyse and enhance here. More food for thought is the idea of extending the Ombudsperson institution across all sanctions committees. We believe that it would be a significant step forward in improving the fairness and transparency of the sanctions regimes and enhance the rule of law in the implementation of the Council's decisions. We are confident that the Council should stick to its priorities, focusing on major issues of great urgency that represent threats to international peace and security. We appeal once again for the Council's agenda not to be overloaded and abused with the consideration of thematic subjects on the agenda of the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council or other United Nations bodies. Efforts to improve the Security Council's working methods can bring about practical results only when Council members reject politicized approaches and coordinate their initiatives on the basis of mutual respect for each other's concerns and priorities. With regard to the subject of today's discussion, we would like to highlight the issue of the submission of the report of the Council to the General Assembly. As we all understand, that document remains a sort of outreach to the broader United Nations membership in the General Assembly. We are satisfied with the progress in the preparation of the report for the year 2019. It proves the ability of the Council to operate in a constructive manner with the aim of reaching consensus. It is our hope that this time the Council will be able to respect the deadline it set itself for adopting the report no later than 30 May, even though we all agreed such a deadline would take effect starting from the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly.
