The President: I shall now give a briefing in my
capacity as Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).

I have the honour to brief the Security Council on
the activities of the 1540 Committee since 21 July this
year and to introduce the Committee's third programme
of work, for the period 1 October through the end of
2005.

The main task of the Committee for the last three
months has been the examination of national reports
submitted by States. I am very pleased to announce that
this objective, which is an important part of monitoring
States' efforts to implement resolution 1540 (2004),
has been carried out successfully.

Since June 2005, the Committee, with the
valuable support of its group of experts, has examined
124 national reports. On the basis of this process and
with a View to better understanding the measures
undertaken or planned by States to implement
resolution 1540 (2004), the Committee decided to
solicit additional information and/or clarification in
areas covered by their first reports. As a result, letters
have been forwarded to the submitting States through
their Missions in New York, together with the
individual matrices used for processing the first
reports. The Committee has requested States to address
the information gaps identified in their reports and to
inform the Committee accordingly within two months
from the date of the letter. We stand ready to develop a
constructive and transparent dialogue with all States in
addressing the issue of additional information.

The Committee will continue to examine further
first reports that are received from States, as well as
additional information being provided in response to
the letters. In that regard, I would like to inform the
Council that 21 States have already provided additional
information with respect to their first reports. All of
this data will be processed accordingly by the
Committee.

In order to broaden its knowledge about States'
efforts to implement resolution 1540 (2004), the
Committee decided to build a legislative database that
will be used as a supplementary information tool for
the further examination of the reports. This database
will contain links to relevant public sources of
information about States' national legislative and other
regulatory measures. The final product of the work
under way will be shared with the reporting States at a
later stage.

Turning to the question of reporting and outreach,
on previous occasions I stated that by April 2006, the
Committee would have to provide necessary
information to enable the Security Council to assess
the progress States have made in implementing the
resolution and to decide what should be done
subsequently.

The Committee can properly fulfil its remaining
mandate only if all States submit their reports on time,
as the Council has called upon them to do. Given the
provision of sufficient information, the Committee can
present to the Security Council a report on what has
been achieved so far by States in implementing the
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004), and on which
implementation gaps need to be further addressed.

As of today, 67 Member States have yet to report.
I would like to call again on those that have not yet
done so to submit their first reports without further
delay. Reporting is the best tool to allow the
Committee to account for States' implementation
efforts and to promote assistance for those which
encounter reporting or implementation difficulties.

All States should be aware that, unless they meet
their obligations in full, such as by enacting and
enforcing effective national legal and regulatory
measures, their territories may be used for the transit
shipping of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) and
related materials, or for the financing of illegal
activities or as a safe haven to broker the sale of
WMD-related materials in other countries. However,
we recognize that fully implementing the resolution
will be a long-term undertaking that will require
additional dialogue and coordination.

The Committee has continued to raise the issue of
further reporting and has promoted the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) through outreach activities.
On 8 September 2005, together with the Chairpersons
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the
Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee, I had the
opportunity to address the second World Conference of
Speakers of Parliaments. This was the first occasion to
reach out to leaders of national legislatures to inform
them of our achievements as well as of the challenges
ahead, and, more important, to seek their support in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) through the
incorporation of its provisions into national legislation.

I would like to express my gratitude to Argentina
and the United Kingdom for contributing to the
organization of the first regional seminar, entitled
"Advancing in the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004)", for countries of Latin
America and the Caribbean. The interactive format of
the discussions that took place in Buenos Aires from
26 to 28 September has contributed to a better
comprehension of the objectives of resolution 1540
(2004) as well as of the steps to be pursued by States in
the implementation process.

The Committee also had the opportunity to
promote its outreach programme in Africa and Eurasia
and was represented by its experts at the Uganda
workshop on the global bargain for biosecurity and
health and at the Seventh International Conference on
Export Controls, held in Sweden. We will continue to
approach all countries that have yet to report. I have
expressed my readiness to reach out again to members
of all regional groups in New York. We have already
met Member States from Latin America and the
Caribbean. Informal interaction with other regional
groups will follow soon.

The Committee, with the support of Member
States and the United Nations Department for
Disarmament Affairs and its regional centres, will
continue its outreach activities. Seminars and
workshops aimed at raising the awareness of the
proliferation problem worldwide, facilitating further
reporting and advancing the implementation process,
are useful tools for our work. In this context, I would
like to welcome the statement made by China in the
First Committee of the General Assembly on

10 October indicating that China is giving positive
consideration to hosting a regional seminar on issues
related to resolution 1540 (2004) and is discussing this
matter with relevant United Nations bodies.

The issues of improving reporting performance
and late submission are considered in a coordinated
manner by the three Committees. We are making use of
country visits by the CTC and the 1267 Committee in
order to raise the issue of reporting.

On the subject of assistance, in considering first
national reports, the Committee has identified offers of
and requests for assistance. Information on offers of
assistance is available on the website of the 1540
Committee and includes, in some instances, areas in
which a specific country has indicated that it is able to
provide assistance, as well as initial contact
information. The Committee will seek to expand this
information, as appropriate. The Committee will
continue to act as a clearing house on the issue of
assistance. In further examining the first reports and
additional information from States, the Committee will
keep up-to-date information on the issue of assistance
in order to contribute to the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). In order to effectively perform
its role as a clearing house on assistance, the
Committee will continue to request States, as
appropriate, to designate contact points on assistance.

As I mentioned before, full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) by all States is a long-term
objective that goes beyond the current mandate of the
Committee. It will require continuous efforts at the
national, regional and international levels on capacity-
building and assistance, as well as monitoring and
measuring progress made by States in implementing
the resolution.

I am confident that the Security Council will
consider how best to ensure that the work of the
Committee makes an enduring contribution to
non-proliferation.

As the process of examining national reports
continues, the Committee will interact and cooperate,
as appropriate, with the relevant international, regional
and subregional organizations in order to facilitate the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Working
relationships with those organizations are being
developed, as appropriate.

In the same vein, the 1540 Committee will
maintain close cooperation with the CTC and the
Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee, as
envisaged in resolution 1566 (2004) and in statements
by the President of the Security Council of 25 April
2005 (S/PRST/2005/16) and 20 July 2005
(S/PRST/2005/34). The Committee's experts will work
closely with the experts of the other Committees,
making every effort to maximize synergies between
and among the experts of the Committees.

Transparency will remain a priority of our work.
The Chairman and the Vice-Chairmen will reach out on
a regular basis to Member States. This will include
work with the United Nations media, including through
joint briefings with the Chairpersons of the CTC and
the Committee on Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions. The
Committee will keep updating its dedicated website as
an additional source of information on issues related to
resolution 1540 (2004). A separate entry on assistance
was added to the website. The Committee will also
continue its practice of informing organizations outside
the United Nations about our work through attendance
at international, regional and subregional meetings and
conferences. I will make full use of these opportunities
to address, in particular, the issues of further reporting
and implementation.

On behalf of the Committee, I look forward to the
cooperation of all States as the Committee carries its
work forward in the months ahead.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

