Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency of the
Council and to thank you for having convened this
open debate on the situation in the Middle East.
Secondly, my delegation wishes to align itself with the
statement made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Kazakhstan on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.

It is with deep concern and growing frustration
that we continue to endlessly address the situation in
the Middle East, particularly the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. As we begin a new year, we neither do so in
the expectation that we will make tangible progress in
the peace process, nor do we anticipate that we will
even take a step closer to our noble goal of achieving a
solution. On the contrary, we begin this new year with
a sense of pessimism that my delegation believes is
certainly well founded and based on troubling
developments on the ground.

Regrettably, Israel continues its expansion of
illegal settlements in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, against all norms of international law and
despite the condemnation of their illegal acts by the
international community. With the number of housing
units being built in the West Bank having grown to
1,850 in 2011, the expansion of illegal settlements
since 2002 is taking place on an unprecedented scale.
In East Jerusalem alone, the eventual construction of
thousands of apartment units will almost certainly
change the geopolitical realities on the ground.

In a report recently published by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, since 1967
Israel has established about 150 settlements in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. In addition to the
2

unabated expansion of settlements, Palestinian
structures and residences in both the West Bank and
East Jerusalem are being demolished. It has been found
that over 60 per cent of Palestinian structures
demolished in 2011 were in areas allocated to
settlements. Furthermore, a greater expansion of
settlements has been accompanied by a corresponding
increase in settler violence against Palestinians and
their property, which has become more systemic rather
than a rarity.

The result of these activities is the continued
suffering of the Palestinian people. While morally
wrong, the settlements are also illegal under
international law as they violate article 49 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention and run contrary to Israel's
obligations. In this connection, Malaysia supports the
action taken by NAM. to request Switzerland, in its
capacity as depositary of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, to reconvene at the earliest opportunity a
conference of the high contracting parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention for the purpose of upholding the
obligations and responsibilities incumbent upon the
high contracting parties in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. This is in
accordance with recommendations contained in
General Assembly resolutions 64/10 and 64/254.

Thus far, the calls of the international community,
including the United Nations, to stop these illegal
activities continue to fall on deaf cars as Israel stays on
its hastened path down the wrong side of history. This
it does unapologetically and without an ounce of
remorse, which begs the question: Does Israel have any
obligations at all to begin with?

At this juncture, it goes without saying that Israel
would need to halt illegal settlement activities that
have resulted in great injustice to the Palestinian
people. Illegal settlement activities have also time and
again stalled peace talks. All sides must realize that, in
order to achieve peace in Palestine and the Middle
East, negotiations would need to begin in a spirit of
sincerity, goodwill and trust. Obviously, this is not easy
to accomplish, but, for a start, all parties should refrain
from engaging in provocative actions that would
certainly do more harm than good.

As the deadline set by the Quartet to come
forward with comprehensive proposals on territory and
security is upon us, Malaysia feels that the Security
12-21419
Council, serving as the custodian of international peace
and security, must do its part to ensure that conditions
are ripe for all parties to resume negotiations on
finding a solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
Malaysia is of the opinion that, if a fair and peaceful
solution to the conflict is to be achieved, the onus to
compromise and make way for negotiations does not
fall on Palestine alone. Israel's insistence that Palestine
assume direct negotiations without any preconditions
does not reflect Israel's willingness to be fair and to be
more accommodating to its future neighbour.

While my delegation speaks today with a sense of
pessimism, make no mistake that we remain resolute in
our commitment to finding a lasting two-State solution
based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the
capital of Palestine, where both sides could live side by
side in peace and taking into account the security
concerns of both. It is our earnest desire to see future
discussions on the issue take a different tone that is
more positive and reflects substantial progress on the
ground. The time for peace is now and we must not
miss this opportunity. Prolonging the conflict will only
create more problems and is not in anyone's interest.

