Judge Pocar: It is a distinct honour to appear
before the Security Council for the purpose of
presenting the sixth report of the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1534 (2004). This report outlines the
progress made by the Tribunal in achieving the
objectives of the completion strategy from June to
November 2006. It also describes the remaining steps
to be taken and the ongoing challenges faced in this
regard. It is my intention today to provide the Council
with an overview of the key aspects of the report and to
update members on further achievements made by the
Tribunal since the submission of the report.

Before doing so, however, allow me to express
my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for your country's
ongoing commitment to the Tribunal's work in
contributing to the maintenance of international peace
and justice through the prosecution of those most
responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law in the former Yugoslavia.

Mr. President, I recall with appreciation your
country's statement before the Security Council this
past June, which supported my call for the international
community to provide immediate assistance in
arresting our six remaining high-ranking fugitives.
Qatar also stressed the importance of all Member
States of the United Nations to continue meeting their
obligation to enhance the work of Tribunal, which is
especially crucial at this stage in the Tribunal's history,
and for that, I thank you, Mr. President.

By way of preliminary remarks, I note that, as the
Council is well aware, the Tribunal has emerged in the
past six months from a period wherein it faced extreme
difficulties that required rapid response and adjustment
to change. In spite of this fact, the Tribunal achieved
one of the most, if not the most, productive periods in
its history. In July 2006, as a result of significant
reorganization of the Trial Chambers and efficient
pre-trial management, the Tribunal commenced its
remaining two trials of multi-accused six months ahead
of schedule, namely Milutinovie et al. and Popovic' et
al.

Consequently, at one point during the reporting
period, the Trial Chambers were able to try an
unprecedented number of 25 accused in six trials
simultaneously. Furthermore, in the past six months,
the Appeals Chamber brought eight proceedings
involving 11 accused to a close, marking the most
productive year in the history of the Appeals Chamber.
In the first quarter of 2007, the Tribunal will finish
trials against four accused and close proceedings
against five accused on appeal.

The Tribunal's commendable efforts during the
reporting period are evidenced by its ever-diminishing
caseload. To date, cases against 100 accused, out of a
total of 161 indicted, have been closed. While
proceedings against 61 accused remain to be
completed, out of that number, 13 have already been
tried and are at the appeals stage, 24 are currently on
trial, only 14 are in the pre-trial stage, four are pending
rule 11 bis motions for referral, and the remaining six
accused are still at large.

At the current rate of the Tribunal's progress, and
barring any unforeseen difficulties, all trials of accused
in the custody of the Tribunal are now scheduled to be
completed no later than 2009. Furthermore, the
Tribunal expects that all appellate work can be
concluded within two years of the end of trials.

I stress, however, that the Tribunal is not content
to rest with those dates. It is constantly looking for
new, creative ways to complete trials even earlier than
planned, while upholding due process norms. In that
regard, it is with pleasure that I inform members that
06-66373
we have been able to reorganize the judicial workload
and allocate Tribunal resources to exceptionally allow
for the commencement of a seventh trial, on 10 January
2007, against Dragomir Milosevic. That has been
possible because of the flexibility and dedication of the
judges of the Tribunal, as well as the cooperation of the
parties and the Registry.

The efforts made to run seven trials
simultaneously are direct proof that the Tribunal is
working harder than ever to ensure that proceedings
against the accused will be completed as soon as
possible. However, I must emphasize that, for the
Tribunal, efficient completion of all trials is not only a
matter of meeting completion strategy target dates; it is
also a matter of respecting fundamental human rights
norms. Because of the increased pace of proceedings
before the Tribunal, the rights of the accused to be tried
expeditiously, and not to be held in pre-trial detention
for unduly lengthy periods of time, are more
effectively respected.

On the issue of the detention of our accused, I am
also pleased to advise the Security Council that our
working group, established for the purpose of
implementing the recommendations of the Swedish
audit of our Detention Unit, completed its report on
4 October 2006. A public version of that report was
made available to States Members of the United
Nations on 29 November 2006. The working group
reiterated the findings of the Swedish authorities that
the conditions of the Detention Unit are of the very
highest standards and concluded that the majority of
recommendations made by the Swedish authorities
were both reasonable and feasible. Some of those
proposals have already been implemented by the
Detention Unit management, and others are currently
being addressed.

In that respect, I have pushed for a policy of
expedited transfer of convicted accused to States where
they are to serve their sentences. That is not only a
matter of improving conditions within the Detention
Unit; it is also a matter of upholding human rights
norms in keeping the convicted separated from the
accused while in detention. To that end, during the
reporting period, four convicted were transferred to
Austria, Italy and Denmark upon the closing of their
cases.

Before providing the Council with an overview of
the judicial activity of the Tribunal during the reporting
period, I would like to make a few brief remarks about
the resolution of the situation with respect to the
accused Vojislav Seselj. As members are aware, Mr.
Seselj had been refusing to take food and medicine
since 11 November 2006 and had refused to be
medically assessed by the United Nations detention
doctor since that time. As President of the Tribunal, I
kept a close watch on the situation and, in the light of
Mr. Seselj's refusal to be medically assessed by the
doctor of the United Nations Detention Unit, I ordered
the transfer of Mr. Seselj to the Dutch penitentiary
hospital, where there were better facilities to deal with
any medical emergency that might have arisen.

During the period in which Mr. Seselj maintained
his refusal, the Tribunal consulted with the
International Committee of the Red Cross and arranged
for three doctors of Serbian, Russian and French
nationality, selected by Mr. Seselj himself, to visit him
in the penitentiary hospital. Furthermore, the Trial
Chamber issued an order suspending proceedings in his
case and also ordered the Dutch authorities to take all
necessary action in accordance with internationally
recognized standards to preserve his life.

During this time, the Tribunal kept the
international community - in particular the members
of the Security Council, through their embassies in The
Hague - fully apprised of developments in an open
and transparent manner through meetings, press
statements and a diplomatic seminar. I also personally
sent written correspondence to the diplomatic
community, including the President of the Security
Council and the Secretary-General. I am pleased to
report that on Friday, 8 December 2006, Mr. Seselj
ceased his refusal to take food or medicine and that,
since his recovery in a Dutch hospital facility, he has
been returned to the Detention Unit. Mr. Seselj's
decision to resume taking food and medicine was
linked to decisions issued by the Registry and the
Appeals Chamber, which addressed some of his
demands.

I wish to stress that, at all times during Mr.
Segelj's refusal, the Tribunal had all procedural
guarantees at its disposal for appropriately handling the
situation, and they functioned well. Certainly, the
situation posed a difficult challenge for the Tribunal,
but it was successfully resolved without sacrificing the
integrity of the Tribunal's Rules of Procedure and
Evidence.
Those matters aside, I would now like to continue
by providing the Council with an overview of the
achievements of the Trial and Appeals Chambers to
date. Over the past six months, the three Trial
Chambers continued to hear six trials simultaneously
and managed 17 cases in the pre-trial stage. The Trial
Chambers rendered judgements in the Oric case on
30 June 2006 and in the Krajisnik case on
27 September, and are expected to issue judgements in
the Mrksic and Martic cases early next year. In
addition, the Trial Chambers rendered judgement in the
Jovic contempt proceeding on 30 August 2006.

Alongside that unparalleled caseload, the Trial
Chambers were actively involved in preparing new
cases for trial. I note in particular that, in July 2006,
Trial Chamber II joined the Gotovina case with the
Cermak and Markac cases, which was affirmed on
appeal. Similarly, the Appeals Chamber continued to
function at full capacity, issuing 170 written decisions,
including 20 interlocutory appeals, three referral
decisions, 131 pro-appeal decisions, one contempt
decision and 12 review, reconsideration or other
decisions both from the ICTY and from the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). In
July 2006, final judgement was rendered in the
Ntagerara and Gacambitsi cases. The Appeals
Chamber also delivered final judgments in the Simic
and Galic cases in November. Additionally, as a result
of efficient pro-appeal management, the appeal pending
in the case of Strugar was withdrawn by both parties,
owing to Strugar's age and health conditions.

Turning now to address in more detail the
Tribunal's proactive approach to implementation of the
completion strategy, I will elaborate on the progressive
measures taken by the Tribunal towards its
achievement during the reporting period.

First, the Tribunal has taken further steps in the
past six months to increase the efficiency of its trials
and appeals. It has fully embraced the changes
advocated by the working groups on speeding up
appeals and on speeding up trials, and has
consequently seen marked improvement in appeal and
trial efficiency. The beneficial results of the policy of
the Tribunal are demonstrated by the control being
exercised by the Trial Chambers in the cases of
Milutinovic and Prlic.

In addition, the judges have remained vigilant in
looking for new ways of improving the practices and
procedures of the Tribunal's trials, such as by adopting
further rule amendments. Rules 92 ter and 92 quater,
adopted in September, have increased the ability of
Trial Chambers to consider written statements and
transcripts of witnesses in lieu of oral testimony where
that evidence goes to the acts and conducts of an
accused.

Furthermore, judges have taken action to expedite
trial proceedings by placing limits upon the parties'
cases. As I reported to the Security Council in June, the
judges adopted an amendment to Rule 73 bis
authorizing Trial Chambers to either invite or direct the
Prosecution to select those counts in the indictment on
which to proceed. The Prosecution is responding
positively to directions from the Trial Chamber to
reduce the scope of its indictments.

Considering that it is critical to the success of the
Tribunal for the judges and the parties to work together
towards completion of the Tribunal's mandate, trial
judges have also made efforts to build consensus with
the Prosecution by finding other ways to focus their
cases, as well as those of the Defence. That policy has
led to limiting the time available to the parties in
dealing with their respective cases.

In addition to the concrete measures taken by the
judges, the efficient completion of trials and appeals at
the Tribunal has been possible during the reporting
period in large part because of the dedicated work of
its highly competent and qualified staff. In my previous
two reports to the Security Council, I underscored the
fact that the realization of the Tribunal's completion
strategy depends largely upon the Tribunal's improving
its procedures until its closing by drawing upon its past
experiences. This is possible only if the Tribunal is
able to retain its staff, who have the historical
experience of the Tribunal's operations and a sense of
ownership of the Tribunal's mandate. In order to ensure
retention of its best staff, accelerated promotions have
been implemented whenever possible.

Secondly, the Tribunal increasingly relied on ad
litem judges for realizing completion strategy
objectives. As highlighted in my last report, the
contribution by ad litem judges to the work of the
Tribunal was greatly enhanced by the Council's
adoption of resolution 1660 (2006), which increased
the number of ad litem judges from nine to 12 and
allowed for the assignment of ad litem reserve judges
to the multi-accused cases. It cannot be emphasized
enough that those judges have been an extremely
valuable resource for the Tribunal. In the past six
months, four ad litem judges were assigned to two of
the multi-accused cases. In addition, four serving ad
litem judges were assigned to second cases so as to
allow new trials to commence as efficiently as
possible.

Thirdly, the Tribunal has continued its work in
referring cases involving intermediate- and lower-
ranking accused to national courts in the former
Yugoslavia pursuant to Rule 11 bis, which is vital both
with respect to meeting the completion strategy goals
and for the legacy of the Tribunal. During the reporting
period, two cases involving three accused were
transferred to the region. To date, referrals involving 11
accused have been completed, nine of which have been
transferred to the Special War Crimes Chamber in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and two of which have been
transferred to the authorities of Croatia for trial before
its domestic courts. Only three cases remain pending
before the Referral Bench, and one referral decision
has recently been appealed.

I remind the Council that, upon referral of cases
to the region, the work of the Tribunal does not end
with respect to those cases. Under our Rules, the
Tribunal continues to monitor the domestic trials in
order to ensure that they are being conducted fairly and
with full adherence to human rights norms. It is critical
to the success of the Tribunal's completion strategy and
to upholding the rights of victims, as well as those of
the accused, that all referred cases are conducted in full
compliance with the highest standards of due process. I
am happy to report that, on 14 November, the trial of
the first referred accused, Stankovic, came to a close in
the Sarajevo Special War Crimes Chamber, and the
Tribunal is satisfied that that trial met the requirements
of due process.

On this note, the Tribunal is acutely aware of the
need to further the rule of law in the former Yugoslavia
by providing continued and sustained support to local
judiciaries and prosecutors in the region. Consequently,
during the reporting period the Tribunal engaged in
numerous efforts to strengthen the capacity of national
jurisdictions. Making use of its field offices, the
Tribunal liaised closely with the local judiciaries and
took part in a number of professional symposiums,
which I will not list here.
Access to the Tribunal's website continued to be
a key tool for outreach to legal professionals and the
general public in the former Yugoslavia.

I urge the Security Council, and the international
community as a whole, to protect our achievements
thus far in the region and to take the necessary steps to
fully entrench the rule of law, particularly by providing
continued and sustained support to the local judiciaries
and detention facilities. It is those courts that will
continue the historic work of the Tribunal in trying
perpetrators of war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide long after the Tribunal has completed its
mission. Furthermore, it is crucial for reasons of
stability and reconciliation in the region that these
national trials uphold the highest standards of due
process so that justice is done and is seen to be done by
the victims and the international community as a
whole.

Finally, the success of the Tribunal in the
efficient completion of its proceedings has always
hinged significantly upon State cooperation and non-
interference in cases once they have commenced.
During the reporting period, the Russian authorities
ensured the transfer of Zelenovic to the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which then transferred him to
the Tribunal in June. However, apart from that single
transfer, States failed to arrest and transfer the
Tribunal's remaining six high-level fugitives.

The Tribunal is deeply troubled by the failure to
apprehend these accused, especially Ratko Mladic and
Radovan Karadzic, and I urge all States to take
immediate, concrete measures to actively seek their
whereabouts. The judges of the Tribunal remain
adamant that we must not close our doors without their
arrest and trial. To do otherwise would mean that the
International Tribunal would not have fully discharged
its mandate, and the message and the legacy of the
Tribunal that the international community will not
tolerate impunity for serious violations of international
humanitarian law will be dangerously undermined.

Let me now provide the Security Council with an
updated prognosis for the Tribunal's implementation of
the completion strategy. I wish to confirm, as stated
previously, that trials will have to run into 2009.
Currently the Tribunal has nine trials in the pre-trial
stage, in addition to its six ongoing trials and 13 cases
pending appeal from judgment. As it is anticipated that
all trials currently pending will likely be subject to
appeal, the Tribunal will probably have 15 appeals
following the conclusion of those trials, which are
expected to be disposed of within two years of the end
of the trials. There remain, however, a number of key
factors that will influence whether the conclusion of
trials and appeals within this time frame remains
feasible.

First, the primary factor remains the success of
the multi-accused trials. Currently, these trials are
running very smoothly. However, there are indications
that, absent the Trial Chambers' firm control and full
cooperation of the parties, these trials may run longer
than originally anticipated. As can be observed from
the Milutinovic and Prlie trials, it is proving to be a
running battle to ensure that the proceedings remain
within the shortened time frame allotted by the Trial
Chambers. Recently, the Prlic' Trial Chamber issued a
further decision reducing the amount of time allocated
to the Prosecution for the presentation of its case,
which has been certified for appeal before the Appeals
Chamber and has to be decided by the Appeals
Chamber shortly.

Secondly, while the Judges continue to do
everything in their power to ensure the expeditious
conduct of proceedings while respecting due-process
norms, there are, naturally, factors outside of their
control, including illness of the accused or counsel,
lack of cooperation by the parties, unavailability of
witnesses and the absence of full State cooperation,
which may have a negative impact on the speed at
which these cases proceed.

Thirdly, completion strategy target dates may be
threatened if referrals of cases of lower and
intermediate accused to the region were to be revoked
and sent back to the Tribunal due to a failure by local
courts to uphold fair-trial principles.

Finally, I have already raised the critical issue of
the six outstanding fugitives, and in particular, the
necessity of apprehending Mladic and Karadzic. For a
decade, the Tribunal has repeatedly called on Member
States to ensure the arrest of those fugitives, without
result. The continued failure to ensure their arrest now
renders the 2009 date for the completion of all trials
doubtful. Again, the mandate of the Tribunal cannot be
regarded as fully implemented without the trials of
those high-level accused.

In conclusion, the Tribunal remains entirely
committed to meeting the completion strategy
objectives while upholding the highest standards of due
process, and it continues to forge full speed ahead with
its mandate as part of the furtherance of peace and
security in the former Yugoslavia. The Tribunal is
constantly refining its practices and adopting the
necessary mechanisms to improve the efficiency of its
proceedings and uphold the rights of the accused to be
tried without undue delay. Furthermore, it is exploring
new measures, such as its commencement of a seventh
trial during the reporting period, to reach those goals
and to retain the support of the international
community until its mandate is fully completed. The
Tribunal is also turning its attention to the future,
actively working to secure the rule of law in all the
States of the former Yugoslavia through its partnership
with local judiciaries.

The Tribunal remains ever indebted to the
Security Council for its steadfast support to date.
Owing to the Council's visionary thinking in
establishing the Tribunal in 1993, it has now become
common practice worldwide to hold individuals
responsible for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide. I call upon the member States of the
Council to maintain their support for the Tribunal in
the final years of its mandate. As this report indicates,
there is still much work to be done. Together, we must
see the historic work of the Tribunal through for the
cause of international justice, the continued fight
against impunity, and the promotion of international
peace and security.

