Mr. Hadjiargyrou (Cyprus): Allow me at the
outset to express to you, Sir, the warm congratulations
of my delegation on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. Our
congratulations also go to His Excellency Ambassador
Wang Yingfan for his able leadership in guiding the
work of the Council during the previous month.

Cyprus has aligned itself with the statement
delivered by the delegation of Belgium on behalf of the
European Union earlier in the debate. I would,
however, like to delineate the position of my
Government on an issue that we consider of particular
importance for our region.

Since the beginning of the recent violent events in
the Middle East, the Government and people of the
Republic of Cyprus have expressed sorrow and concern
over the escalation of violence and the loss of so many
lives. The current situation aptly demonstrates the
explosive consequences of the long delay in bringing
about a solution to the Palestinian problem. All
interested parties and the international community at
large should consider with the utmost seriousness the
tragic reality of everyday conflict, which brings with it
the simply unacceptable loss of life and property and
violations of human rights that affect the lives of
millions of innocent people on a daily basis. Once
more we urge both parties to show maximum restraint,
since it has been demonstrated time and again that
resort to violence not only fails to produce any tangible
benefits for either side, but, on the contrary, aggravates
an already tense situation.

We strongly condemn any and all forms of
terrorism, including the recent suicide bombings in
Jerusalem and Haifa that resulted in deaths of many
innocent civilians. At the same time, we urge Israel to
desist from actions the thrust of which is the collective
punishment of the Palestinian population, and to avoid
a disproportionate response to violence.

Both Israel's decision to close Orient House and
other institutions in Jerusalem and the recent incursions
of the Israeli army into the Palestinian territory are
particularly disturbing. Such actions provoke the
feelings of the Palestinian people and exacerbate the
current explosive state of affairs. Action brings
reaction and with it further blows to the prospects of
peace. We call upon Israel to reverse this decision as
soon as possible and abide by its commitments to
respect the inviolability of those institutions.

Cyprus condemns, in an unequivocal manner, the
extrajudicial executions of Palestinians by Israel. These
executions are illegal under international law and
unacceptable in the eyes of the international
community. At the same time, we urge the Palestinian
Authority to exert every effort in order to control
outbursts of violence. Only in this way will the
destructive cycle of hatred subside.

I take this opportunity to express my
Government's particular concern for the suffering of
the most vulnerable part of the population - women
and children - and its dismay at the tragic loss of
these innocent people's lives. We believe that the
provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of
1949, should be fully respected.

The Republic of Cyprus reiterates its support for
a just and lasting settlement to the Arab-Israeli conflict
based on resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973),
including the concept of the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by war, the right of every State
in the region to live in security and the principle of
land for peace. A lesson drawn from the present
escalation of violence is that unless peace efforts and
initiatives are based on international law the peace
achieved will remain on very shaky foundations.

Solutions to problems must be perceived as fair
and accepted as such by the populations concerned,
particularly in cases where we have prolonged
occupation and denial of the legitimate rights of these
populations to live in peace, dignity and security with
their neighbours. Otherwise the sense of resentment
and opposition will undoubtedly sweep away any
agreements that are based on ephemeral considerations.

The Republic of Cyprus strongly supports the
non-selective, comprehensive and immediate
implementation of the recommendations of the
Mitchell report, which we hope will put an immediate
end to the violence and create the necessary conditions
for the resumption of the peace process. In this respect,
we fully subscribe to the position expressed by the
European Union and other members of the
international community concerning the need for the
establishment of a monitoring mechanism to assist in
the implementation of the report's recommendations.

The Republic of Cyprus strongly calls upon both
sides to refrain from using armed force against each
other and to return instead to the negotiating table as
soon as possible. The establishment of peace in the
region cannot and will not be achieved unless the
Palestinian issue, which constitutes the core issue of
the Middle East problem, is tackled with courage,
determination and the necessary political will by all
parties.

Cyprus believes that the forces of moderation on
both sides should be strengthened, while at same time
the extremists should be isolated. Only in this way will
we be able to revive the hope of the vast majority of
the peoples of our region for the establishment of a
permanent peace and to realize their vision for a new
Middle East. For in this cradle of three major religions
and civilizations, coexistence cannot but constitute the
only acceptable way. History, after all, has given us
ample proof of that.

