The President (interpretation from French): The
representative of the United Arab Emirates was asked to
speak. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

Mr. Al-Suwaidi (United Arab Emirates)
(interpretation from Arabic): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President for your tremendous efforts in conducting
the proceedings of the Council in the context of our
consideration of the agenda item "The situation in the
occupied Arab territories". On behalf of my delegation, I
would also like to thank you sincerely for this opportunity
to address the Council after the vote on the draft
resolution.

I would also like to express deepest gratitude to the
representatives of the countries of the Non-Aligned
Movement that are members of the Security Council that
cosponsored the draft resolution and, in particular, to the
Permanent Representative of the Sultanate of Oman,
Coordinator of the Non-Aligned Caucus of the Council
for this month. His sincere and persistent efforts in all
stages of the procedure relating to the draft resolution,
right through its submission to the Council, are much
appreciated. Nor can I fail to express our gratitude to the
other members of the Council that voted in favour of the
draft resolution.

The Council has met in urgent session to examine
the grave actions of the Israeli Government in East
Jerusalem aimed at expropriating 53 hectares of land in
order to establish settlements. This runs counter to the
Fourth Geneva Convention, of 1949, the norms of
international law, the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly and the text of the
Declaration of Principles signed by Israel and Palestine on
13 September 1993, which provides that the question of
Jerusalem should be solved through negotiations on that
city's final status. Those negotiations are set for May
1996, in accordance with Security Council resolutions 242
(2967) and 338 (1973).

Since the United Arab Emirates is currently
presiding over the Council of the League of Arab States,
allow me to express my profound regret that the draft
resolution, submitted by the non-aligned caucus of the
Council, was not adopted. It is also unfortunate that the
United States voted against the draft resolution.

 

In spite of the many letters addressed to the Secretary-
General and the President of the Security Council by His
Excellency the Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations and this month's Chairman of the Arab Group -
on behalf of the Arab States and the Chairman of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference - in which they all
ask the Council to take immediate action to put an end to
Israeli violations in East Jerusalem, and ask that Israel
make a commitment to honouring the Declaration of
Principles until the final status of Jerusalem is negotiated in
May 1996, and in spite of the urgent meeting held on 6
May 1995 by the League of Arab States, from which a
letter was sent to the Secretary-General and to the President
of the Security Council - in spite of all these Arab and
Islamic appeals to the Security Council, the draft resolution
submitted to the Council by the non-aligned caucus was not
adopted.

The Security Council has just heard the statements by
the members of the Council both before and after the
voting, all of which confirmed the special position of Al-
Quds Al-Sharif in the international community. I believe
the Council is today fully aware of the negative
consequences of not adopting the draft resolution, not only
in the Arab and Islamic world, but all the world over. Of
course, by not adopting the draft resolution, the Council
clearly shows disdain for the claims of the Arab and
Islamic States. None the less, I ask the Council yet again to
continue to demand that Israel rescind its decision to
expropriate Palestinian and Arab lands in East Jerusalem.

The President (interpretation from French): The
representative of Israel wishes to speak, and I now call on

him.


