Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes this debate and is grateful
to the Mexican presidency and to you, Minister Go'mez
Robledo, for your initiative. I would also like to extend
our appreciation to the Deputy Secretary-General for
her introductory remarks, which set out some of the

challenges faced in this area, and to express our
gratitude for the thoughtful intervention by Under-
Secretary-General Patricia O'Brien, who is a fellow
member of Middle Temple.

For the United Kingdom, the rule of law is at the
heart of its foreign policy. Since the United Nations
was founded, the importance of respect for the rule of
law in the maintenance of international peace and
security has been self-evident from the principles and
provisions of the Charter. There is now widespread
recognition that the rule of law is a principle that
applies much more broadly across the spectrum of
issues dealt with by the United Nations, and by the
Security Council in particular. I want to set out a few
examples, many of which are dealt with in the draft
presidential statement that we will adopt today, which
the United Kingdom fully supports.

The United Kingdom believes it is important for
all States to settle their disputes by peaceful means.
Judicial settlement remains a vital part of the
mechanism for the peaceful settlement of disputes and
for advancing the rule of law at the international level.
The International Court of Justice stands at the apex of
the international judicial machinery. Its contribution to
the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
advancement of international law is profound. While
there are other roads to the Court, the option exists for
Member States to accept the compulsory jurisdiction of
the Court in accordance with Article 36, paragraph 2,
of the Statute. The United Kingdom is the only
permanent member of the Security Council to have
accepted the Court's general jurisdiction in this way.
We call on other Members of the United Nations that
have not yet done so to consider taking a similar step.

The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), and actively
participated in all the discussions that took place at the
recent Review Conference in Kampala. The ICC
continues to play a key role in delivering international
justice and combating impunity. The United Kingdom
also strongly supports the various international
criminal tribunals and courts. These bodies should
receive the full support of the Security Council as they
seek to carry out their mandates.

The United Kingdom remains committed to the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional
Protocols. Last July we co-hosted, with the British Red
Cross, an event to celebrate the sixtieth anniversary of
the Conventions. That provided us with an opportunity
to focus on the excellent work carried out by the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
British Red Cross in the field of international
humanitarian law. We need to focus on the challenges
ahead and respond to the changing nature of warfare.

The United Kingdom has long been a champion
of improving sanctions listing and de-listing
procedures. As such, we strongly welcome reforms that
build on the significant improvements that have been
achieved in recent years. Such reforms are evidence
that the Security Council has listened to, and acted
upon, the concerns of the wider international
community. By doing so, it has ensured that United
Nations sanctions continue to be a vital tool in the fight
against terrorists such as Al-Qaida and the Taliban.

The rule of law is not only a part of relations
between Member States. As the remarks made this
morning by the Deputy Secretary-General succinctly
demonstrate, there are major challenges and constraints
facing the delivery of rule of law assistance in conflict
and peacebuilding situations. Improving security and
justice and committing to a functioning rule of law is
an essential component of peacebuilding in post-
conflict States. As the Permanent Representative of
Uganda said earlier, justice is not an alternative to
peace; the two are complementary. Re-establishing and
reinforcing the rule of law and associated institutions
are vital steps in helping to create and sustain the
necessary conditions under which activities such as
effective peacebuilding can take place.

Finally, the implementation of the
recommendations in the Secretary-General's 2009
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (S/2009/304) is key to ensuring a more
effective and coherent international approach to
peacebuilding. We need to see tangible improvements
on the ground in sectors such as the rule of law.

We welcome therefore the call in the draft
presidential statement for a Secretary-General's report
to the Council on the rule of law and transitional
justice in conflict and post-conflict settings. With this
in mind, we urge the Secretary-General to focus that
report on a review of the delivery of rule of law
assistance in the countries on the Council's agenda.

