Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): My delegation is
pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over this important
meeting of the Security Council. We join others in
commending you and the delegation of Pakistan for
your skilful and excellent stewardship of the Council
during the month of May. We further commend you for
the initiative of convening this meeting to discuss the
efforts of the United Nations in promoting peace and
security in Africa. Debate on this subject is most
timely. We recognize the preoccupation of and
importance attached by the Council to African issues,
which take up some 60 per cent of its work. We
welcome the Council's effort to refocus itself on the
conflict situations in Africa, especially in light of
recent tragic events there. We are very pleased that the
Council adopted resolutions 1484 (2003) and 1485
(2003) this morning.

Peacekeeping constitutes an important instrument
at the disposal of the Security Council. However, the
Council must avoid selectivity and double standards in
establishing United Nations peacekeeping operations,
especially in Africa. Malaysia has contributed military
and police personnel to most of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa, beginning with the
first mission in the Congo in the early 1960s.

Strong commitment and continued and sustained
support in terms of manpower, financing and material
by United Nations Member States are essential in
ensuring the operational success of peacekeeping
operations. The effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping missions should not be jeopardized by a
lack of necessary funding and adequate and well-
trained and equipped personnel from Member States.
The Council and the Secretariat should make every
effort to engage Member States, particularly troop-
contributing countries, at the planning stage and at
every subsequent phase of any particular operation. We
all know that dispatching peacekeeping missions at less
than their required strength and with inadequate
equipment can result in tragic consequences, as has
been the experience in the case of some previous and
current operations. What has happened in Ituri
province is a clear example. The dispatch of the
Interim Emergency Multinational Force in support of
the United Nations mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is a very positive and timely response by
the international community.

Beyond the deployment of peacekeeping missions
in existing conflict situations, there is a need for the
Council and the United Nations as a whole to develop
effective strategies for the prevention of armed conflict
and for post-conflict peace-building, including efforts
to disarm, demobilize and reintegrate ex-combatants in
a post-conflict situation. Concrete measures must be
taken to consolidate and sustain the peace. Malaysia
associated itself closely with the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) initiative
during its membership of the Council in the years 1999
and 2000. We wish to reiterate our conviction that each
and every component of the DDR process must be
given due importance, equal emphasis and adequate
funding to ensure success and the non-return of former
combatants to conflict. Like all other United Nations
programmes and activities, the problem of adequate
funding in the effective implementation of the DDR
programmes must be addressed. Generous support from
the international community is critical, especially from
those who have the means in terms of money and
technical expertise. The relevant organs and agencies
of the United Nations must be fully involved in the
post-conflict peace-building process. The private sector
can certainly be encouraged to play an important role
through reconstruction, investment and other relevant
economic activities.

My delegation believes that there is a need for the
Security Council - and the United Nations in
general - to seriously and systematically address the
root causes of conflict in ways that could minimize the
potential for further and more protracted conflict and
instability on the African continent. In that regard, we
welcome the work of the Open-ended Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Causes of Conflict and the Promotion of
Durable Peace and Sustainable Development in Africa,
established by the General Assembly in its resolution
53/92. We sincerely hope that all the proposals made
will be fully implemented. We also welcome the
establishment of the Economic and Social Council Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on African Countries Emerging
from Conflict and the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
Guinea-Bissau. A comprehensive and integrated
approach towards African issues and better
coordination in that regard within the United Nations
system, involving the principal organs - the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council and the Secretariat - United Nations
agencies and the Bretton Woods institutions, should be
urgent priorities.

My delegation also wishes to underscore the
important role that can be played by regional
organizations, arrangements and agencies in the
promotion of regional peace and security as well as
economic and social development. Regional
cooperation can be a key to the creation of a peaceful
and cooperative environment. The institutional
linkages and mechanisms of cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and the
African Union and subregional organizations must be
strengthened. We welcome the revival in the African
Union of organs responsible for conflict prevention and
resolution and all other initiatives being pursued by the
African Union (AU) - including the Peace and
Security Council of the AU - in the promotion of
peace and security on the continent.

My delegation strongly supports the practice of
dispatching Security Council missions to conflict areas,
not only to supplement the efforts undertaken by the
Secretariat, but also, and more important, to enable
Council members to better appreciate the situation on
the ground and the complexities of the problems that
the Council must deal with. We welcome the
forthcoming Council missions to Central Africa and
West Africa early next month. We agree with the
statement in your non-paper, Mr. President, that

"... the two missions should be a powerful signal
to all parties to the conflicts in Africa that the
Council intends to maintain its focus on African
issues and will remain actively engaged with
Africa".

Indeed, that powerful signal should not be seen as
coming only from the Security Council; it should also
be regarded as a strong message from the entire United
Nations membership. We note that similar missions
undertaken in the past have proved valuable to the
Council's work. Malaysia participated in the Council's
mission to East Timor in 1999. We would recommend
that such exercises be undertaken on a more regular
basis in the future, not only to Africa but also to other
regions. That would demonstrate the Council's
continuing commitment to ensuring the engagement of
the United Nations in the promotion of peace and
security. We look forward to being informed of the
findings and recommendations of those missions.

In addressing the issues at hand, we all know
what the problems essentially are, what ought to be
done and where the responsibilities lie. There is clearly
a need for more serious commitment and action on the
part of all concerned: the Security Council, the entire
United Nations membership, the rest of the United
Nations system, the international community at large
and, above all, the parties in conflict. We must all do
our utmost to assist in resolving current conflicts in
Africa and preventing new ones from occurring. The
key to that lies in political will: the will to take the
necessary measures and to follow up on them. That
political will to act and to deal with conflict situations
should be demonstrated in an even-handed fashion
wherever they occur, whether in Africa or elsewhere.

We are impressed with the incremental but
tangible steps that have already been taken by African
countries themselves. We believe that all their efforts
must be supported by the international community. The
Security Council can help in further encouraging and
generating that support through its actions and
decisions. This debate is another step in the right
direction. We commend you, Mr. President, and the
Council.

