Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Since this is perhaps the last meeting over which you,
Sir, will preside this month, I wish to take this
opportunity to express to you my delegation's gratitude
for the effective way in which you have led the
Council's work during this very difficult month. I also
express my delegation's appreciation for your having
included on the agenda of this wrap-up meeting the
theme "Conflicts in Africa: Security Council missions
and United Nations mechanisms to promote peace and
security".

My delegation believes this exercise to be timely
and necessary. The Security Council's missions to
Africa have become a crucial instrument for its
decision-making process. These missions are carried
out with United Nations support and thus with the
direct or indirect participation of Member States. My
delegation therefore believes that today's discussion is
integral to the commitment to the transparency with
which the Security Council should undertake its tasks.

The decision-making process in relation to
conflicts in Africa must be as comprehensive as
possible. Conflicts are caused by a conjunction of
circumstances that are often deeply rooted in history,
with organizational forms, power structures, formulas
for the exploitation of natural resources and ancient
modes of domination that are perpetuated by many of
these conflicts. It is necessary for all these elements -
ethnic and inter-State disputes, fighting among various
political factions, the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons, the employment of mercenaries and the use
of children as combatants - to be taken into account.
They must be integrated into the vision that the
Security Council will embrace when it takes crucial
decisions for the peace and the future of Africa.
Mexico believes that analysis of the conflicts must be
approached from this comprehensive perspective, also
taking into account the regional dimensions that
explain their deep-rooted causes. We must do so in
dialogue and communication with regional
organizations, with the political leaders, with members
of civil society - with all those who participate
actively in these processes and who must be part of the
solution.

The Security Council must also tackle Africa's
problems in a creative process of cooperation with
United Nations bodies in all spheres of activity. Africa
is the point of convergence of all United Nations
agencies and of their work. Therefore, Council action
must reflect the spirit and the goal of cooperation that
we in the Council have called "partnership" with the
bodies of the United Nations.

Conflicts in Africa are also associated with
unforeseen situations related to grave natural disasters
and with endemic situations such as famine and
epidemics. Therefore, those elements should also be
understood comprehensively in our work. Of course,
the financial conditions and the economic prospects
that African countries face must also be incorporated as
elements of judgement; hence the importance of
engaging in dialogue and interaction with the Bretton
Woods institutions and other international financial
institutions.

To resolve Africa's problems, we must address
their causes with long-term endeavours that have a
genuinely preventive nature. In that connection, we
believe that it is the international community's efforts
with regard to education that, over the long term, must
yield the best results in order to establish conditions of
peace, stability, understanding and harmony in Africa.

All of that can be appreciated when we leave the
Council Chamber and go out and encounter reality in
Security Council missions to Africa. There is an abyss,
sometimes very difficult to cross, between our
conceptions of Africa's problems as we sit in this
Chamber and those that we gain upon encountering -
albeit briefly and sometimes superficially - those
problems on our journeys to Africa. But Security
Council missions to Africa are proving to be a basic
tool for achieving, first of all, a direct dialogue
between Security Council members - as was pointed
out here by Ambassador Greenstock - and the leaders
of the countries with respect to which the Council must
take decisions. They are also an opportunity for
dialogue with civil society and with the actors involved
in the conflicts. They are an opportunity to have direct
contact with United Nations operations and to establish
more fluid communication - beyond that on paper -
with the Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General and with all the bodies that are working
together under the United Nations banner in the
Organization's missions in African countries.

From the work that my country is doing in the
Sierra Leone Sanctions Committee, we understand that
fundamental aspects for making decisive judgements as
to the role and nature of the sanctions are the ability to
engage in dialogue with the communities affected by
such Security Council decisions; the ability to establish
direct communication with United Nations
representatives who daily assess the impact of
sanctions and the difficulties posed by their
implementation; and the ability to reaffirm our
commitment to full compliance with such measures,
face to face with the leaders of the countries in the
region and with the political actors whose conduct we
wish to influence through such mechanisms.

In that way, the Security Council has, over the
past year and a half, carried out a series of missions
that, from Mexico's perspective, have had very positive
results. In February last year, the Council sent a
mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea, which, inter alia, had
the task of pointing out to the parties the priority that
the Council placed and continues to place on settling
conflicts peacefully and by expressing the will of the
parties. The Security Council then had the opportunity
to support the work of the United Nations and to make
the message of peace very clear. The Council has also
carried out missions in Central Africa and in West
Africa that have been part of its work in recent years.
We see the establishment of dialogue between the
Council and the main players in the region as the
fundamental purpose of those missions.

In that connection, the exchange of opinions with
governmental representatives and with members of
various political factions have given the Security
Council the opportunity to assess the importance of its
own decisions in a much more real and direct way.
Recently, the Council has considered the question of
sending a multilateral force to support the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), particularly in Ituri
province. In that respect, my country would like to
stress its support for and gratitude to the Uruguayan
contingent, which is now trying to carry out its
humanitarian mission in Ituri and Bunia under
extremely difficult conditions. We believe that the
decision adopted by the Council to send an Interim
Emergency Multilateral Force to Africa is a correct and
necessary decision that expresses the Council's
determination to fulfil its commitments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We believe that the mission, to be led by the
Permanent Representative of France, will also have the
opportunity to assess what new measures the Security
Council can adopt in order to help substantively to
consolidate the peace process under way in that
country and in that region.

We feel that it is particularly important to follow
up on the measures proposed by the Panel of Experts
with respect to the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, which is at the root of many of the conflicts
that we must tackle today in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We also must make neighbouring
countries understand their obligations and their
responsibility not only to stay outside of the conflict
and fully to respect the sovereignty and self-
determination of the Congo, but also to prevent the
trafficking of any arms and any action from their
territory that would foster violence and confrontation
within the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Security Council will also soon undertake a
visit to West Africa. This will be a new opportunity to
strengthen the efforts of the Council in the region and
to provide an accurate regional perspective.

The situation in West Africa has deteriorated
following the resurgence of internal conflicts in various
countries - conflicts that are interlinked in a very
complex fashion. This visit to Guinea-Bissau, to Cote
d'Ivoire, to Liberia and to Sierra Leone, as well as
dialogue with neighbouring countries in the region,
will also be an opportunity for the Security Council to
adopt, in future, decisions that will help these peace
processes. In particular, the Security Council will have
the opportunity directly to assess the difficult
conditions being experienced in Liberia, whose
situation contributes significantly to the instability
prevailing in the region. We must also, in carrying out
this exercise, review the role of the sanctions, both in
Sierra Leone and in Liberia.

There are other conflict situations in Africa to
which the Security Council must also provide its
ongoing attention. This is the case of Somalia, where
the internal conflict is becoming increasingly acute and
the humanitarian situation of the civilian population is
constantly worsening. We believe that in this respect
the Council must consider additional measures in order
to encourage the holding of an inclusive dialogue, with
the participation of all of the parties in Somalia,
reasserting the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
independence and unity of Somalia.

Lastly, we would like to stress the fundamental
threat posed by the illicit trafficking of arms, and its
connection with terrorist acts and with the continuation
of armed conflicts. We must make an effort to stop the
trafficking of small arms and light weapons in Africa,
which have the effect of actual weapons of mass
destruction. The number of victims claimed annually
by conflicts where they proliferate and where there is
indiscriminate access to them by combatants shows
that these arms are, for all intents and purposes,
weapons of mass destruction.

The Security Council must encourage actions to
prevent conflicts. To that end, it will be necessary to
strengthen the cooperation of the United Nations with
regional bodies in the terms already discussed here in
previous meetings, in particular in the meeting that
took place in April between the Security Council and
representatives of various regional organizations, in
which Africa was properly represented.

Mexico is determined to continue to foster ties of
friendship and cooperation with Africa. Our country is
convinced of the need to devote special attention to the
peoples of Africa and expresses its willingness to
contribute to promoting peace, security and
development for the benefit of its peoples.

