Mr. Hachami (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend to you, Mr. President, our
profound thanks for your prompt response to the
request of the League of Arab States and the Non-
Aligned Movement to hold an urgent meeting of the
Security Council on the grave and serious
developments that the brotherly country of Iraq has
witnessed since the outbreak of the conflict.

This war has erupted despite the multiple
international appeals regarding the importance of
finding a peaceful settlement to the question of Iraq
that could be accepted by all parties and that would
reflect the aspirations of all Member States of the
United Nations. Through many international and Arab
efforts, Tunisia has sought to contain the crisis and to
find a settlement within the framework of international
legitimacy and the United Nations in a way that
ensures the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Iraq and spares the Middle East more tension and
instability.

Since war is now a fait accompli, His Excellency
Mr. Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, President of the Republic
of Tunisia, has expressed his deep regret and concern
over the grave and adverse impact that this conflict will
have on the brotherly people of Iraq and on the Middle
East as a whole, because the conflict will increase the
perils and risk of instability. It comes at a time when all
the people of the region are in dire need of security and
peace so that they can devote their energies to
reconstruction, development and the establishment of
good, cordial relations with one another.

Tunisia calls on all international parties to work
to contain the present conflict, to overcome its adverse
impact and repercussions and to return to a peaceful
approach to dealing with the issues pending. That way,
the people of Iraq and the region will be spared further
catastrophes, particularly in the light of the continuing
deterioration of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories as a result of the Israeli attacks
on the Palestinian people.

