The President: I thank Mr. Karzai for his kind
words expressed to this institution.

I shall now make a statement on behalf of the
members of the Council.

On behalf of the members of the Council, let me
extend once again a warm welcome to the Chairman of
the Afghan Interim Authority, Mr. Hamid Karzai, and
his delegation to the Security Council. We thank you
for your statement on the situation in your country.

At the very outset, allow me to assure you of the
Council's unqualified and unreserved support for your
quest for peace, justice and stability in Afghanistan.
The Council remains committed to helping advance
this process, which is on the right track. We stand
ready to extend the necessary assistance to the people
of Afghanistan, who have suffered virtually every
privation known to mankind and who deserve a better
future.

The Security Council reaffirms its wholehearted
commitment to supporting the Interim Authority and
the transitional process. In that light, we welcome the
International Conference on Reconstruction Assistance
to Afghanistan held in Tokyo and the efforts of the
Afghan Support Group, as well as bilateral donors, as
they are vital and integral to assisting the Interim
Authority. Council members emphasize that rapid
disbursement of assistance and good coordination in its
delivery, in full cooperation with the Interim Authority,
are essential.

The Security Council expresses its concern about
the episodes of lawlessness in Afghanistan. It
commends the efforts of those States contributing to
the International Security Assistance Force and
welcomes the progress the International Security
Assistance Force is making in assisting in the
restoration of security in Kabul and its surrounding
areas. We emphasize that the United Nations and non-
governmental relief operations must be allowed to
operate in security and with full freedom of movement,
particularly in those areas most in need of humanitarian
assistance.

In all its decisions, the Security Council has
stressed the point that it is for the people of
Afghanistan themselves to freely determine their own
future. The Security Council will continue to support
all efforts based on the Bonn Agreement, leading to the
formation of a Government in Afghanistan that should
be broad-based, multi-ethnic and fully representative of
all the Afghan people and committed to peace with its
neighbours. It is essential for the Afghan Interim
Authority and for a new Government of Afghanistan to
fully respect the basic human rights of all Afghan
people, regardless of gender, ethnicity or religion.

There is still a lot to do to assist the Afghan
people in what appears to be one of the most
challenging and imposing tasks of our time. For real
success to be achieved in the Afghan political
stabilization, we believe that the following two issues,
among others, need urgent attention.

First, the reconciliation, reconstruction and
rehabilitation process should not be derailed by any
outside pressure or intervention. Here we appeal to the
international community to continue extending its
valuable support to the Afghan Interim Authority in
order to take the country away from the legacy of war,
misery and instability.

Secondly, it is high time that leaders and
representatives of different ethnic groups within
Afghanistan forwent their differences and invested in
the construction of a nation with sound democratic
credentials.

The members of the Security Council take good
note of the decree banning the cultivation, production,
processing, abuse and illicit trafficking of narcotic
drugs, which was issued on 17 January under your
signature, Sir. Likewise, we welcome the decree on the
rights of women. Such bold steps prove that the Interim
Authority is resolute in its objective of reinstating
peace and stability in Afghanistan as well as creating
the conditions for Afghans to lead a normal life. We
also welcome the appointment of women to key
positions in the new administration, including in the
Cabinet. Council members recognize that the success
of the Bonn Agreement will depend on the people of
Afghanistan themselves.

The Security Council welcomes the central role
played by the United Nations in assisting Afghanistan
and expresses its full support for the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, Ambassador Lakhdar
Brahimi, in the accomplishment of his mandate.

It would be remiss on our part not to mention the
significant contribution made by the humanitarian
agencies and their staff, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and all the non-governmental
organizations in Afghanistan. The Security Council
underscores the importance of ensuring their security.

Finally, Sir, on behalf of the members, I appeal to
all Afghans and to the United Nations Member States
to build on the momentum created through your efforts
and those of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, so that the institutions and
mechanisms put in place by the Interim Authority
could operate smoothly towards a better future for the
Afghan people.

There are no further speakers left on my list.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 9.55 am.
