Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I would like to thank the
Chinese presidency for convening today's open debate
on strengthening multilateralism and the role of the
United Nations as an issue that is ever important and
topical against the backdrop of current global challenges.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
Head of the Delegation of the European Union.

The international challenges of the twenty-first
century have become more complex, transnational and
multidimensional. To overcome these intertwined and
interrelated issues, a coherent and holistic response
by the international community is needed. We must
demonstrate not only that collective international
action works but that it is also in all of our best interests.
Estonia is committed to promoting the respect for
international law and a rules-based international order.
For us, international law is an existential matter. It is
of utmost importance that we make full use of all the
instruments and that we act with full responsibility in
preventing and ending conflicts. In order to make the
whole system work, every country has to play its role.

In that regard, we strongly support the Secretary-
General's reform efforts to make the United Nations
more responsive, effective and modernized in order
to be more capable of dealing with today's challenges.
Making an effort to increase the transparency and
accountability of the United Nations system should be
part of our ambitions. Helping to make good progress
on all three main strands of the Secretary-General's
reform agenda is by far the best way in which all of
us can make a tangible contribution to strengthening a
multilateral, rules-based international system.
Although in recent times we have been witnessing
growing disunity and disagreements on a number of
topics, it is clear that the international community
needs the Security Council to uphold and promote
international law by responding decisively to grave
violations of international law, including that of
humanitarian law and human rights law. We need to
keep up our efforts to strengthen the legitimacy of the
Security Council resolutions and their implementation.
Ifwe want the Council to fulfil its purpose ofmaintaining
international peace and security, its practices need to
be updated so that it is not hamstrung by the use of the
veto, especially in the case of atrocity crimes.

Modern conflicts threatening international peace
and security are characterized by the ever-broader
use of new technologies. Being ready to adequately
respond to those kinds of new challenges is important
if we want to ensure that the United Nations peace
and security architecture stays relevant in times of
a dynamically evolving international environment.
Estonia is firmly of the position that crimes have to be
prevented, investigated and prosecuted, irrespective of
the way they are committed, be it by using kinetic force
or cyber means. International law is applicable when
cyber means are used to threaten international peace
and security. It is our view that the Security Council can
and should use all powers deriving from the Charter of
the United Nations to take action in such cases.

To conclude, as the saying goes, listening well is
as powerful as talking well and is as essential to true
conversation. We should learn from those wise words in
order to strive for deeper cooperation and empathy, both
within the Security Council as well as with the wider
United Nations membership and other actors. Estonia
stands ready to engage in that partnership to better
uphold international law and maintain international
peace and security.

