The President: I should like to make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of the United
States of America.

I would like to thank the two Presidents and the
two Prosecutors for their briefings today. The United
States welcomes the assessment of the Prosecutors and
the Presidents on the implementation of the Tribunals'
completion strategies. We commend the Tribunals,
judges and staff for their diligence and dedication. We
note in particular our appreciation for the tireless
efforts of Prosecutor Hassan Jallow, and we welcome
the new Prosecutor, Mr. Brammertz, back to the
Council.

The United States urges the Tribunals to continue
to implement their completion strategies with
maximum efficiency. We are encouraged by the
relatively small number of cases that remain in the pre-
trial stages, and we expect that the Chambers will work
to bring those cases and trials currently in progress to
resolution as soon as possible. With that in mind, I
would like to make three points.

First, we commend the Tribunals for their efforts
to transfer to national jurisdictions, as appropriate, the
cases of indictees who are not accused of bearing the
highest levels of criminal responsibility. Those efforts
must be accompanied by the ongoing support of the
international community for the domestic judicial
capacity of Rwanda and the countries of the former
Yugoslavia.

Secondly, the 17 individuals who have been
indicted by the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and remain at large must
be brought to justice. The United States urges the
international community to work towards securing the
arrest of those indictees as soon as possible.

Thirdly, the United States calls on all States to
fulfil their obligations to cooperate with the Tribunals.
We are troubled by reports that suggest that the ICTR
fugitive and alleged genocide financier Kabuga is now
in Kenya. We note with particular concern Prosecutor
Jallow's assessment that the Government of Kenya has
not fully cooperated with the Tribunal's effort in
seeking Kabuga's apprehension. The United States
urges Kenya to act immediately on the Tribunal's
recommendations and to take additional steps to deny
Kabuga access to his network of support.
The apprehension of ICTY indictees, particularly
Mladic and Karadzic, remains essential to ensuring
lasting reconciliation in the Balkans. We call on all
countries in the Western Balkans, and Serbia in
particular, to fulfil their obligations by arresting and
transferring all fugitives to the ICTY. We applaud the
efforts of the Prosecutors in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Croatia and the Office of the War Crimes
Prosecutor in Serbia to work closely with ICTY
authorities and to share information. We urge those
countries to continue to increase information-sharing
and to allow the transfer of war crimes proceedings
between the States as appropriate.

As the Tribunals implement their completion
strategies, the United States will continue to support
efforts to ensure that the residual issues can be
successfully addressed following the Tribunals'
eventual closure. Again, we thank the Presidents,
Prosecutors, Registrars and their staff for their pursuit
of accountability and their service to the memory of the
victims.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Slovenia.

