Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I want to thank the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina for his briefing. We have
taken due note of it and of the content of his quarterly
report (S/2016/395, annex). I would like to reaffirm to
Mr. Valentin Inzko Spain's support for his work and the
work of his Office.

As a State member of European Union, Spain
aligns itself fully with the statement to be delivered by
the observer of the European Union.

Twenty years have elapsed since the Dayton Peace
Agreement was signed, which gives us an opportunity
to evaluate the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
with a certain perspective in order to assess the success
stories and progress that has been made, as well as
the challenges that remain. We have taken note of the
High Representative's assessment of the country's
achievements in the last quarter towards compliance
with the five objectives and two conditions established
for the completion of his mandate and the closure
of his Office. We reiterate our appeal to all political
stakeholders in Bosnia and Herzegovina to redouble
their efforts and continue to progress towards the
achievement of all these objectives as soon as possible.

We very much welcome the positive role being
played by the European Union-led peacekeeping force
Operation Althea, which is supporting the authorities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina in maintaining security
and contributing to their training and capacity-
building. In the current context, the mission remains
a necessary element in guaranteeing the country's
stability. Moreover, we reiterate our full support for
the work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and its Residual Mechanism. We hope that
their decisions and rulings will not be exploited along
partisan lines by certain groups for the purpose of
further exacerbating the tensions in the country.

Over the past six months, there has been a positive
political environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which,
at the international level, has led to greater dialogue and
cross-border cooperation with neighbouring countries,
as evidenced in the border treaty with Montenegro. On
the domestic level, this positive political environment
has led to concrete reforms that allow Bosnia and
Herzegovina to continue on its path towards full
integration with the European Union.

Bosnia and Herzegovina's application for
membership to the European Union is a very positive
sign and needs to be assessed on its own merit, since,
as I said, much remains to be done, such as continuing
to implement the mechanism of interinstitutional
coordination, adapting it to the Stabilization and
Association Agreement and carrying out the reform
agenda. We remain convinced that headway in all these
areas will have a positive impact and lead to concrete
improvements in the lives of all the citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and in the country's socioeconomic
situation.

Among the pending issues that still need to be
resolved is the publication of the results of the 2013
census, which is key to ensuring the smooth political
functioning of the country. Of equal importance are the
situation of Mostar and the attitude of the Republika
Srpska authorities, as has been pointed out by the High
Representative, with regard to such problems as the
refusal to move ahead in registering State properties
located on its territory

We are concerned about the divisive rhetoric of
some political leaders and representatives, in particular
of the Republika Srpska, where they continue to wield
the threat of a referendum, which poses a real challenge
to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country
and jeopardizes the system established by the Dayton
Peace Accords. We must not lose sight of the fact that
the political stability of the entire region depends to a
large extent on the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Spain continues wholeheartedly to support the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also uphold the need for the political
leaders of the country to respect the rule of law and the
principle of equality in all their actions. That principle
is an indispensable element not only of peaceful
coexistence in the country, but also for constructive
and cooperative relations with neighbouring countries.
Respect for that principle is the only way that Bosnia
and Herzegovina can make headway in its European
integration process.

