Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): The
Permanent Observer of Palestine has asked for the
floor once again because he wishes to express dismay
with regard to the second statement made by the
representative of Israel. During our debates at the
United Nations - including those in the Security
Council - we have always tried to avoid mentioning
persons and personal matters while discussing issues. I
would hope that we could be as objective as possible.

The Israeli party chooses again to attack the
Palestinian leader, who is the elected President of the
Palestinian people. I do not exactly know what
objective can be achieved by doing that, except to fire
more deadly bullets into the peace process or the hope
for peace. What is wrong with the leader of the
Palestinian people calling for independence? What is
wrong with the intifada and independence? That may
have been wrong for Israel, but fortunately not for the
international community. The intifada that lasted seven
years was a non-violent communal expression of the
Palestinian people, and its rejection of the occupation
and its insistence on the right to self-determination and
to establish its own State.

Defenceless civilian Palestinians have paid a high
price for the intifada, of which we are proud. We are
proud of our people. We are proud of our sacrifices.
There is nothing wrong with that. This collective and
principled position of our people is correct.

The representative of Israel wishes to continue
talking about persons. Perhaps it behooves us to recall
the record of Mr. Ehud Barak, the Israeli Prime
Minister; that man, who allowed the ill-fated visit of
Ariel Sharon on 28 September 2000; the man who
conspired with Ariel Sharon to permit this visit
although he knew its implications beforehand; the man
who follows the doctrine "timeout from the peace
process" and who has a declared position to end the
peace process, even for a short time; the general who
has "a pin-point strike doctrine", as if the Palestinian
people were mere objects and targets against whom he
can practise his advanced military theories; the Prime
Minister who did not observe one promise with the
other negotiating party; the person who did not
implement any of the agreements concluded.

Mr. Barak did not withdraw one centimetre from
the Palestinian territories, except the ones that Mr.
Netanyahu had agreed to withdraw from. Mr. Barak
stopped the peace process with the Wye River process.
He did not advance even one centimetre in
implementing the agreements between the two parties.
Finally, he is the man who leads us now to the brink of
catastrophe. Ask Israeli commentators and Israeli
political forces about what is being said of his great
leadership.
We do not object to what has been stated today
about the events in Israel. We have always stated our
rejection of all acts committed against Israeli civilians.
We have condemned terrorist acts in all their aspects,
including State terrorism and terrorism caused by the
occupation itself. To a great extent we do not oppose
what has been said about the bus incident in Gaza
because children are children, regardless of their
nationality. No one wishes to inflict harm on any child,
but is it not our right to remind you that the children
who were injured on the Israeli bus were fewer that the
80 Palestinian children who were killed at the hands of
the Israeli occupation? Eighty Palestinian children have
been killed by the Israeli occupation forces. Where is
the equality here? Where is the fairness?

There are two things we do not accept. The first
thing we deem untenable is for anyone to think that the
Israeli child is more precious than the Palestinian child.
The second matter is that we refuse to absolve the
Israeli Government of its direct responsibility for these
acts because they bring settlers, including their
children, in an illegal manner that contravenes the
Security Council and the Fourth Geneva Convention,
which prevents the transference of population. They
come to occupy a territory. They collect fewer than
5,000 settlers to occupy about 40 per cent of the Gaza
Strip. Do you know how big the Gaza Strip is? 360
square kilometres of arid, fallow land devoid of any
natural resources, including water. In addition to that,
40 per cent of the other land is under Israeli
occupation, where fewer than 5,000 Israeli settlers
reside illegally. Is this a natural occupation? No. Is this
apartheid? No. This is a unique event, unprecedented in
contemporary history, which will later be called the
Israeli occupation with all its deep and painful
implications resulting from the aforementioned Israeli
practices.

They are directly responsible for these events.
The occupation is the source of these events. The
violation of international law is also the cause of these
events. Finally, I hope that people will not only
remember the Israelis who died or only the five injured
Israeli children. We condemn that. But we do not want
people to remember them only and for things to stop
there. How about the scores of Palestinian children
who were killed in cold blood by snipers, at the hands
of the occupation soldiers? You must have read several
reports. There were several films on that issue. Their
plight is indeed sad.

I did not intend to delve into all these matters, in
order to remain at a level becoming of the Council, but
the Israeli representative insists on dragging the matter
on in this way. This is unfortunate and should end. But
the end comes through a change in the mentality of the
occupier. Peace requires mutual respect and recognition
of the existence and equal rights of the other party.
This is what the approach should be, rather than
addressing the other party in a condescending manner,
as if to say I am the master, I am the occupier, while
the other party must understand that the Security
Council will be of no avail to it and international law
will be useless and that crying and pain will also be
useless. But he has to defer to the master because the
master is the one who will grant him something that he
should accept. But this is untenable. The beginning of
change starts with a change in mentality, by
recognizing that there is an occupation and by
accepting the other as an equal as well as by accepting
his dignity.

In conclusion, we wish to thank all the members
of the Security Council and all those others who spoke
in the Council. I wish in particular to express our
appreciation for the statement made on behalf of the
European Union. We agree with that statement. We are
ready to work with the members of the European Union
and other members, as well as with all the parties
concerned that are ready to make efforts to resolve the
situation and to reach peace in the Middle East region.

