Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the close of Peru's mandate in the Security Council
during this biennium, I have also come to the end of
my functions as the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
of the Working Group established pursuant to
resolution 1566 (2004) on two initiatives in the fight
against terrorism. The comments I am about to make, I
make under my sole responsibility, and are not
attributable to any other delegation, nor should those
be seen in any way as a record of the work of these
subsidiary organs.

The measures established and progressively
adapted by the Security Council in resolutions 1493
(2003), 1596 (2005), 1698 (2006) and 1771 (2007), in
general terms aim at preventing all Congolese or
foreign armed militias or groups operating in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly in the

east, from being supplied with arms and/or
participating in military activities. To that end, the
Committee established a list of persons and entities
which have infringed on these measures, including
individuals involved in the financing of these illicit
acts, in particular in the trafficking of natural
resources. As of July 2006, that list should include
those individuals who recruit children or commit grave
offences against children in conflict situations.

Peru feels that those measures have been
established in order to support the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; to halt the spiral of
violence; to ensure the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of these groups and militias; to
encourage the process of the integration of the armed
forces and police of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as reform of the Security sector; and to
contribute towards the protection of children victims of
conflict.

We must acknowledge that it was not possible to
make substantive progress in the monitoring of the
arms embargo, nor in controlling the financing of the
illicit trafficking in arms through the exploitation, trade
and illegal transfer of natural resources, nor in the
monitoring of the travel ban of the individuals on the
list.

As reflected in the report submitted by the Group
of Experts that assisted the Committee in its tasks, the
measures appear to be of limited effectiveness in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in neighbouring
countries. One must bear in mind that it is all the more
difficult to distinguish between legal and illegal flows
of arms or natural resources when the principal
protagonists are non-State actors, when conflict is rife
in border areas and when monitoring efforts must cover
a territory as vast and porous as that of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The ability to monitor those
measures is increased when there is cooperation with
States that have the ability to control the movements of
individuals and the circulation of valuable primary
materials or with States that are able to monitor
consignments to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with all the necessary details.

In view of this situation, the chairmanship of the
Committee focused its work on two aspects - as a
facilitator seeking to promote cooperation between
those States directly concerned in implementing the
measures and in their support of the Group of Experts,
and as a catalyst seeking to forge the consensus that is
crucial for the work of the Committee.

This was a period during which the Security
Council and the principal national, regional and
international actors joined efforts to help establish an
elective and effective Government within the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This convergence
of aims has been the greatest strength of the Committee
in its dialogue with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and also in its dialogue with Rwanda, Uganda
and Burundi and also with States outside of the region.
Thus, the Committee has witnessed the improved
cooperation of border countries with the Group of
Experts over the two-year period.

In turn, this convergence enabled the Committee
to include a number of individuals and entities subject
to the Council's measures, which has meant that the
number of tasks linked to the list has increased. On this
point I wish to note that we welcome the agreement
reached within the Committee to facilitate the transfer
of listed and charged individuals to the International
Criminal Court in The Hague. This may have been the
Committee's greatest contribution to the fight against
impunity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
towards strengthening international criminal justice, in
cooperation with the Congolese authorities.

With regard to the activities of the Committee,
the key concern of the chairmanship has been to
provide follow-up to the reports and recommendations
issued by the Group of Experts and my delegation has
encouraged ongoing contacts and exchanges of ideas with
the Group of Experts. We hope that the new Group of
Experts - which is to submit its report on 15 January
2008 - will continue to effectively contribute towards
the work of the Committee. In turn and in line with the
decision taken by the Security Council, the Committee
discussed how to make use of cooperation with the
International Criminal Police Organization, including
through the participation of its representative to the
United Nations. Consideration of measures in that
regard remains pending.

In addition, we address the recommendations of
the informal Working Group on General Issues of
Sanctions contained in resolution 1732 (2006), in
particular those sanctions that could be immediately
implemented. I also wish to recommend the ongoing
consideration of this issue.
One year following the elections and a number of
months after the establishment of the Government of
the third republic in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, two processes must find an appropriate and
convergent solution. On the one hand, there is the need
to support the elected authorities in exercising their
functions in terms of internal order, the protection of
their people and State security and exercising control
over their natural wealth. On the other hand, there is
the persistence of national and foreign illegal armed
groups who receive arms supplies and financing for
their activities, attack civilian populations, disregard
State authority - as is unfortunately the case in the
Kivus - and cause regional destabilization.

Security Council resolution 1771 (2007) contains
the first expansion of the exemptions to the measures
adopted by the Council between 2003 and 2006; it is
likely that this adaptation will continue. My delegation
is of the view that this post-transition process should
continue; it is crucial for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region and for the stability of the
continent. It should also continue to be guided by the
shared and unanimous vision of the Council, of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and of the countries
concerned.

To conclude, I would like to thank the Security
Council Subsidiary Organs Branch, led by
Mr. Aleksandar Martinovic. In particular, I would like
to thank Loraine Rickard-Martin, David Biggs and
Francesca Jannotti-Pecci for their invaluable and
unwavering support over these past two years. I also
wish to convey my gratitude to delegations for their
constructive cooperation with the chairmanship and to
Counsellor Vitaliano Gallardo of the Peruvian Mission
for his daily participation and involvement in the work
of the Committee.

Allow me now to turn to the work of the Working
Group established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004)
to consider and submit recommendations to the
Council on practical measures to be imposed upon
individuals, groups or entities involved in or associated
with terrorist activities, other than those designated by
the Al-Qaida/Taliban Sanctions Committee, and to
consider the possibility of establishing an international
fund to compensate victims of terrorist acts and their
families through voluntary contributions. At the
Working Group meeting held in April 2006, it was
ascertained that the conclusions contained in the report
under the previous chairmanship - held by the

Permanent Representative of the Philippines - had not
changed and that therefore the circumstances did not
allow for substantive progress in those two areas.

In keeping with the general views of the Group,
the Chair decided to continue to address these issues
through bilateral contacts and in particular to continue
the process which had led to the adoption of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General Assembly resolution 60/288) to the extent that this
framework could contribute elements relevant to the
goals of the Working Group mandate. As we know, the
rights of victims and possible compensatory
mechanisms are elements contained in the Strategy,
and the Counter-Terrorism Task Force is working in
this area. We believe that the Security Council should
take these elements into account when it continues to
addresses this issue.

With regard to the adoption, by the United
Nations of a list of terrorist entities and individuals in
addition to the existing list on Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, this would require reconciling the differing
viewpoints held by Member States.

I would like to conclude by thanking delegations
for their contributions and the Security Council
Subsidiary Organs Branch for its assistance. I wish also
to take this opportunity to thank the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate for its support for
our work as Chair of Subcommittee A of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. Finally I would like to thank
First Secretary Yella Zanelli, protocol of the Peruvian
Mission, who was intensely involved in both areas.

