Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): I thank the High
Representative, Mr. Petritsch, for his comprehensive
briefing. We commend him for his energetic leadership in
helping Bosnia and Herzegovina emerge from the
miseries of its recent past.

The High Representative's report makes it clear that
Bosnia and Herzegovina is far from functioning as a
unitary State, and it notes explicitly that the ruling
political parties maintain opposing visions of the State in
which they are supposedly united. What is particularly
disturbing is that this unproductive attitude prevails
unabated at the level of the collective Presidency. Indeed,
the biggest problem facing the country now appears to be
the continued failure of its leadership to take collective
responsibility rather than behave like unreformed
ethnically based warlords protecting their own, and their
communities', narrow, entrenched interests.

 

The same lack of commitment on the part of the
country's political leaders is manifest in the economic field.
In fact, economic and political vested interests converge in
such a way that political dividing lines are maintained in
order to protect economic interests. This absence of real
leadership is unproductive and stands in the way of the full
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement in
accordance with the aspirations of the vast majority of
citizens of all ethnic groups. Economic reform is an urgent
matter if efficient use is to be made of the assistance
provided by the international community and lasting
economic stagnation is to be avoided.

The third main area for Dayton implementation is the
return of refugees and displaced persons. Their return is
essential to sustainable peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and remains a litmus test for the peace process. I should
like to reiterate my Government's View that the question of
the return of internally displaced persons and refugees, and
assistance to those who are willing to return, should be
given the highest priority by all authorities at all levels. In
this context, the Netherlands wholeheartedly supports the
approach to the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons taken by the High Representative.

In summary, I would like to assure Mr. Petritsch that
we subscribe fully to his three strategic priorities of
economic reform, acceleration of returns and institutional
strengthening. We agree that economic reform is the most
potent weapon for changing the economic status quo, which
currently consolidates the entrenched interests of the
leaders. Finally, we are encouraged that the impoverished
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina are realizing more and
more that their leaders are keeping their own personal
interests closer to heart than the interests of their people.
Indeed, the election results can be seen as an indication
that, at last, the political landscape may be changing.

