Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): When
Panama accepted the responsibility of assuming a seat
on the Security Council, it did so with a View not to
imposing its own national criteria, but to acting on
behalf of and for the Members of the Organization in
respect to the maintenance of international peace and
security.

Given that understanding of its responsibility to
the international community, Panama expresses its
concern today about the pressure that has been exerted
in the Council's decision-making on the matter at hand.
We regret to say that we do not have a clear grasp of
the factors that led to this situation. We are concerned
that the topic on which we have decided today far
transcends the situation in Myanmar. The topic we are
addressing is the functions and mandate of this
Council, and specifically its capacity to act
preventively and in conformity with the scope and
range of Articles 32, 33 and 34 of the United Nations
Charter.

We are all aware of the important changes that
have occurred in the international situation since the
Charter was adopted. We are discussing - and will
discuss in future - threats to international security. We
recently had a debate in this Chamber on this very
issue. We also have to discuss the functions of the
various bodies of the United Nations in the face of
these new realities. In particular, we have to discuss the
functions of the Security Council, which is its
responsibility. I hope that when we have that
discussion we will understand that all of these bodies
should act as part of a whole and not in a segregated
and individual fashion.

With regard to the vote in favour of the draft
resolution, Panama would like to go on record that we
voted on the understanding that the resolution
incorporated the views of the neighbouring countries
and of the Non-Aligned Movement, namely, that
Myanmar currently is not a threat to international
peace and security. We cast our vote on the
understanding that this draft resolution did not prevent
action by other bodies of the Organization, particularly
action by the Human Rights Council - although we
would have preferred greater clarity on that particular
point. We cast our vote on the understanding that the
draft resolution had the intent to give support - and
succeeded in so doing - to the good offices of the
Secretary-General currently under way with the
authorities of Myanmar.

Panama regrets that we have not been able to
reach consensus on this item, and we feel that in this
we have all failed.

