Mr. Richmond (United Kingdom): The Secretary-
General's report (S/1998/1109) makes depressing reading.
We have witnessed another year of conflict, population
displacement and yet more suffering for the people of
Afghanistan. Nor is it only the Afghan people who have
suffered. The murder of the staff of the Iranian Consulate
in Mazar-e-Sharif has been rightly condemned by the
international community. The murders of Lt. Colonel Calo
and other United Nations staff were also atrocious acts,
demonstrating a total disregard for the brave efforts of
United Nations personnel to bring hope to Afghanistan.
The Taliban must cooperate in the investigation of those
crimes.

The further deterioration in the human rights
situation in Afghanistan, including the latest persecution
of ethnic and religious minorities, is particularly worrying.
Following the massacres of prisoners of war last year,
there is a grave danger that Afghanistan is sliding into a
spiral of atrocities.

This is why the United Kingdom strongly supports
the Secretary-General's proposal to establish a unit of
civilian monitors within the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan (UN SMA). We hope the monitors
will be able to give early warning of ethnic or religious
conflict in order to help prevent further gross violations
of human rights. They will need the factions' full
cooperation. We will be pressing the factions to work
constructively with the monitors.

It is deeply disturbing that some countries which
profess to support peace in Afghanistan continue to
prolong the war by supplying the factions with arms and
funding. The call on all States to demonstrate their
commitment to peace by stopping the supply of arms is
as clear and strong in the draft resolution before us today
as it was in resolution 1193 (1998). All Member States
should comply with that call.

There can be no question of the Security Council's
taking sides in the Afghan conflict. The Secretary-
General's report makes it clear that all factions are guilty

 

of abusing human rights, violating Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions and inflicting further
suffering on the people of Afghanistan.

The Council's responsibility is to the Afghan people.
It requires us to increase the pressure on all factions to stop
the fighting and to recognize that the conflict can only have
a political solution which safeguards the rights of all ethnic
and religious groups in Afghanistan. Our first objective
must be to get the factions back to the negotiating table.

Both as a member of the European Union and through
its bilateral programmes, the United Kingdom is one of the
principal donors of humanitarian aid to Afghanistan. We are
committed to continuing that assistance. It is deeply
frustrating that the factions - and in particular the
Taliban - are preventing aid from reaching their own
people. They must allow the safe and effective delivery of
aid, in accordance with international principles, without
further delay.

The international community must also act to prevent
the conflict from threatening lives beyond Afghanistan's
borders through the export of international terrorism and
illegal drugs. Afghanistan's record is one of the worst in
the world in these areas.

I would like to conclude by reiterating the United
Kingdom's strong support for the efforts of the Secretary-
General, his Special Envoy, Ambassador Brahimi, and the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan. We hope
that they will continue their work for peace in Afghanistan.
Too often, they have been working against the odds. If they
are to succeed, all States must give them their full and
active support. We welcome the work of the "six plus two"
in this regard and urge them to redouble their efforts. With
all these points in mind, the United Kingdom will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us.
