Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank Special
Representative Abou Moussa for his briefing and for
his dedication to pursuing the importance mandate of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA). As Mr. Moussa has said, Central Africa
faces critical challenges to its peace and security and
requires ongoing support from the United Nations.
Today's meeting provides an important opportunity for
the Council to look holistically at the issues and the role
that UNOCA and the broader United Nations presence
in the subregion can play in addressing them.

Most prominent among these challenges, perhaps,
is the situation in the Central African Republic, one
of the most dire human rights and humanitarian crises
confronting the Council and the world. Communities
in the Central African Republic that have previously
coexisted in peace have been decimated by cycles of
violence and revenge. The country is being torn apart,
with severe consequences for the region. We pay tribute
to the African and French forces that deployed quickly
to the Central African Republic and took military action
that has literally saved many lives. The adoption of
resolution 2149 (2014), authorizing the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) should
mark a turning point in the international response to
the crisis.

We have also seen the growing threat of terrorism in
Central Africa, including the expansion of Boko Haram
into the region. We have all condemned Boko Haram's
recent attacks against civilians and its abduction of
more than 200 schoolgirls in Nigeria, an act that has
shocked the global conscience. Like others, Australia
has offered its support to the Government of Nigeria.

The abhorrent targeting of schoolchildren brings
to mind the tactics of another group that has wreaked
havoc on the region - the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA). That group's killing, raping, pillaging and
maiming has terrorized civilians for more than 20
years. The International Criminal Court arrest warrants
for the LRA's leaders - the first arrest warrants issued
by the Court - have now been outstanding for close
to nine years. It is essential that Joseph Kony and the
other surviving senior LRA leaders be held to account
for war crimes and crimes against humanity.

We have made significant progress towards
achieving the goal of putting an end once and for all
to the LRA. The recent trends are promising. Overall
LRA attacks and resulting deaths are down, despite
a seasonal spike; the number of displaced in LRA-
affected areas has been halved; and defections are on
the rise. Australia commends the African Union (AU)
Regional Task Force for its significant impact in the
fight against the LRA and the critical support being
provided by the United States and European Union.
We welcome the recent capture of LRA commander
Charles Okello in an operation that also rescued three
women and seven children. My first central message is
this - we must maintain the momentum and support
for current efforts to put an end to the LRA.

We are concerned, however, that the crises in the
Central African Republic and in South Sudan risk
undermining the progress achieved to date by diverting
attention, resources and regional security forces away
from anti-LRA efforts. We are also concerned by
reports that senior LRA leaders may be based in north-
eastern Central African Republic and that some ex-
Seleka combatants are suspected to be colluding with
the LRA. The Secretary-General's report (S/2014/3l9)
also cites credible sources suggesting that LRA leader
Joseph Kony and senior LRA commanders have recently
returned to seek safe haven in the Kafia Kingi enclave
between the Sudan, South Sudan and the Central
African Republic. We know that the LRA will exploit
any security vacuum and seize the opportunity to
regroup. That is its modus operandi. Since the collapse
of State authority in the Central African Republic, LRA
attacks in the country's east have risen sharply, and the
group has targeted prefectures outside the AU Regional
Task Force's principal area of operations.

That brings me to my second point. It is imperative
that the United Nations and African Union missions
in the region - the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, the African-led International Support Mission
in the Central African Republic, MINUSCA and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur - continue to deepen their information-sharing,
coordination and cooperation in efforts to combat the
LRA. The various sanctions committees and groups of
experts active in the region are an important component
of that effort and can provide further information and
options to address the LRA's financing, weapons and
operations.

By leveraging the resources deployed in the
region and increasing coordination among them, we
can better protect civilians in LRA-affected areas and
keep ahead of the LRA. Otherwise, gains made in
increasing stability in one area risk being offset by the
re-emergence of the LRA elsewhere. Indeed, that has
been the case following security gains made around
the Garamba National Park in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which has been followed by a rise in
attacks further west - hence the logical conclusion
is that UNOCA has an important overarching role, in
particular to enhance the implementation of the United
Nations regional strategy.

Finally, we must support UNOCA and regional-led
efforts to address other, often related challenges to
Central Africa's peace and security, including the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and the
poaching and trafficking of wildlife. The development
of a road map for counter-terrorism and the
non-proliferation of small and light weapons in Central
Africa, and the pledge by regional leaders to honour the
10-year moratorium on the sale of ivory stockpiles to
protect elephants, are all important initiatives. Those
types of initiatives will help to restrict and reduce the
illicit means by which the LRA and other groups are
able to arm themselves, and are fundamental to long-
term peace and stability in the region.

Let me conclude by thanking Special Representative
Moussa again for his commitment and leadership since
UNOCA's inception. We look forward to working with
his successor, Mr. Bathily.

