Mr. Sana (Rwanda): I too thank the Chair for
his briefing and able leadership at the helm of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).

Rwanda continues to support the ongoing
negotiation talks between Iran and the P5+1. We take
note of the start ofnegotiations on the final nuclear deal.
It is unfortunate that there were reports of excessive
demands in the round of talks that ended on 20 June,
which slowed the process. We hope that negotiators will
use the break to rally the camps and come back on 2 July
with realistic demands that will lead to a common text
by 20 July as scheduled.

The role of the 1737 Committee in support of the
P5+1 process is vital to its success. We agree with the
Chair that only the Security Council itself can alter
the sanctions measures applied by the Council. We
acknowledge the opportunity presented by the P5+1
talks towards achieving the objective ofthe Committee.
That is why we should not hesitate to take action that
would facilitate the success of the ongoing talk.

The reported arms embargo violation by Iran on
31 March concerning the ship Klos C is unfortunate. We
urge Iran to desist from any activity that might violate
the decision of the Council.

Recalling the last briefing (see S/PV.7146) and
today's briefing by the Chair, it was mentioned that the
Committee had on several occasions continued to seek

Iran's comment regarding the carbon fibre prohibition,
and to date it has yet to receive a response. We strongly
encourage Iran to cooperate and engage with the
Committee on that or any future queries. Similarly, we
take note of Iran's compliance with the regulation of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
commend the transparency measures undertaken in
that matter as part of the IAEA report of 23 May.

Iran continues to implement its commitment under
the November 2013 Joint Plan of Action. In the same
line, the cooperation provides positive momentum as
Iran and the P5+1 attempt to reach a comprehensive
agreement. Taken together, we remain hopeful that
Iran's action on the Joint Plan of Action and the
11 November agreement with the IAEA are encouraging
signs of the willingness of Iran to be more transparent
about its nuclear activities in the areas of proliferation
concerned.

Finally, Rwanda always believes that a diplomatic
solution is the only way to resolve the bottleneck over
Iran's nuclear programme.

