Mr. Deng (South Sudan): As this is the first time that
my delegation addresses the Security Council during
your presidency, Madam President, permit me to begin
by congratulating you and your delegation on assuming
that responsibility for the month of March 2014 and by
wishing you every success in your leadership. I would
like to assure you of the full support and cooperation
of my delegation. I would also like to commend your
predecessor for her leadership of the Council for the
month of February, when I had the honour to exchange
views with her on the crisis situation in our country. I
want to assure her and the Council that the concerns
the Council asked her to share with me have been duly
conveyed to the authorities at home, and I have been
assured that they are being given serious consideration.

Permit me also to take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and take note of his
statement on the operational challenges facing the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). I
also thank the Executive Director of UN-Women for
her reflections on her visit to South Sudan and on the
current humanitarian situation. I would like to assure
them both that the Government of South Sudan will
give their observations due consideration and attention,
with a view to improving cooperation as we jointly
engage in expediting recovery for the people of South
Sudan. My gratitude is also due to Ms. Hilde Johnson,
who has borne the brunt of the burdens of the UNMISS
responsibilities during these very trying times.

It is of course very painful to listen to the details
of the situation as just presented. We realize that all of
it is strongly motivated by the desire on the part of our
colleagues in the Secretariat and the Council to help
the people and the Government of South Sudan. As the
representative of South Sudan, my reaction cannot be
one of defensiveness, denial or discomfort in hearing
what has been said. All I would say, however, is that,
realizing that we have a mutual interest in addressing
the crisis and restoring peace, security and stability
for our people, we need to see the situation, when
possible, from both perspectives. It is in that light that
my statement will reflect my desire - our desire 4 to
bridge the differences and to try to work together in
addressing the crisis.

Despite the difficulty our relations have been
confronted with during the current crisis, the
Government of South Sudan continues to sincerely
appreciate and support the work that the Security
Council, the Secretary-General and other bodies within
the United Nations system continue to carry out in South
Sudan under extremely challenging circumstances.

It is to the trauma, fustrations, pain and anger
caused by the devastating violence that broke out on
15 December 2013 that much of the negative public
outcry against UNMISS should be attributed. It is
undeniable that, had UNMISS not opened its camps
to fleeing internally displaced persons, thousands
more would have lost their lives. It is also obvious that
the country has nothing to gain, and much to lose, in
alienating the United Nations and the international
community at large. I know personally that the
leadership of South Sudan, in particular President
Salva Kiir himself, remains deeply appreciative of the
role the United Nations is playing in the country and
is unwaveringly committed to continued cooperation
with the Organization.

Much appreciated also is the role played by
the community of international non-governmental
organizations in working with UNMISS to save lives.
We appreciate the development of the crisis-response
plan for South Sudan, which aims at continuing to
save lives and helping the people of South Sudan begin
the process of restoring peace and normalizing the
situation in the country. As a Government, it is indeed
our responsibility to do our utmost to cooperate closely
with those who are trying to help us alleviate the
suffering of our people.

The Government of South Sudan is doing its best,
under very difficult circumstances, to prove to its
people, and indeed to the international community, that
it wishes to see a speedy end to the current conflict
that is devastating our country. It is well known that
President Salva Kiir is strongly committed to peace,
unity and national reconciliation. The Government
remains committed to the talks of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) with the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in
Opposition and has agreed to the deployment of the
IGAD regional force and the monitoring verification
mechanism to the affected areas. The SPLM/A in
Opposition, which currently controls Nassir, Malakal
and Akobo, has, regrettably, not accepted the regional
force or the monitoring verification mechanism.

In crisis there are also opportunities. Since the
process of negotiations takes time, South Sudan will
probably adopt a two-phased approach. The first phase
is to end the violence as soon as possible, along with, of
course, providing much needed humanitarian assistance.
The second phase will be a more in-depth discussion
of what went wrong and how the mistakes of the past
can be corrected so as to put the nation back on the
path of sustainable peace, development and prosperity,
which the people of South Sudan so badly need and
deserve. We are deeply grateful to regional leaders and
international partners that have assisted South Sudan
in having an opportunity to discuss differences and to
strategize on the way out of the crisis.

We cannot, of course, take lightly the anti-UNMISS
sentiment that is reflected in the demonstrations across
South Sudan and may indirectly have led to some
infractions of the status-of-forces agreement. I would
like to assure the Security Council that that is not the
policy of the Government of South Sudan. The Cabinet
discussions and decisions reflect the notion that the
United Nations is indeed a principal partner of South
Sudan and represents the goodwill of the international
community towards our country. Again, I speak not
only for the Government but also for the President
personally in saying that the Government intends to
exert all efforts to calm the situation and to contain
the hostile statements and demonstrations. Indeed, the
Government of South Sudan deeply regrets the loss of
life among humanitarian personnel as a direct result of
the heightened tension in the conflict.

As I have said, I make these remarks not only as a
representative of the Government but also as someone
who has engaged with the authorities on all such issues.
I note and should say that, during my visit to Juba for a
conference of ambassadors, I requested and was granted
permission by the President to visit the detainees, both
the four still in Juba and the seven in Nairobi. I gained
an insight of the extent to which, despite all the sharp
differences, there was a profound desire on all sides, at
least among the detainees to whom I talked, to end the
hostilites as rapidly as possible so as to restore peace,
unity and reconciliation.

Despite my appreciation for all that is said by the
United Nations about the situation in our country, we
appeal to the international community to appreciate not
only the democratic freedom of peaceful demonstrations
but also the frustration and anger inciting the people,
especially when certain actions take place that give
them the impression, however mistaken, that those
representing the United Nations may be sympathetic to,
and supportive of, the other side in the conflict. In saying
that, let me emphasize that the United Nations cannot
of course take sides. However, misunderstandings in a
crisis situation can generate hostile reactions. As I have
said before, continuous engagement and constructive
dialogue are the way to correct such misunderstandings.

Much of my statement is the result of my engaging
with the authorities, be it with the leadership, the
President, the Vice-President or the relevant ministers.
In fact, earlier today, I spoke with both the President
and the Vice-President. My remarks are exactly those
that they asked me to convey to the Council.

As reflected in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2014/158), the Government of the Republic of
South Sudan is aware that the Security Council is
considering changes to the UNMISS mandate. Given
the reality of the conflict in South Sudan, it is of course
understandable that the Security Council will revise its
priorities and look into focusing the UNMISS mandate
on the protection of civilians, human rights and security
sector reform. We would, however, urge the Council to
continue with some of the other crucial elements aimed
at stabilizing the country, as originally envisaged. As I
have often said, South Sudan was rendered vulnerable
by a war that raged for half a century, and ironically has
now become even more vulnerable owing to the current
crisis. The country is more in need of international
support than ever before.

Finally, let me conclude by reiterating our
appreciation and support for the work of UNMISS, and
the United Nations in general, despite concerns on both
sides, which, I believe, can be addressed and resolved
through constructive dialogue.

