Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you, Madam
President, for your presence here in New York; it is
very nice to see you again. I join others in thanking
Indonesia for focusing this debate on this very important
issue, and I pay tribute to your country's role in United
Nations peacekeeping. I also thank Lieutenant General
Martins Filho and Mr. Holmberg for their briefings.

The United Kingdom is proud to be one of the
first Member States to endorse the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, in support ofthe Secretary-General's Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. Providing peacekeepers
with comprehensive and high-quality training will help
them deliver across all the other pillars of that rightly
ambitious initiative. As other speakers have said, the
better trained the peacekeepers are, the better prepared
they will be to perform to the highest standards. That
will include ensuring their own safety and security.
As has been mentioned, many of us attended that
moving memorial ceremony yesterday, which was
a stark reminder of the dangers that United Nations
peacekeepers face on a daily basis. Better training will
mean that peacekeepers are better equipped to meet the
challenges of unpredictable, complicated and complex
multidimensional mission environments.

I would like to say a few words about performance.
Peacekeepers should all meet required standards in
basic military or policing skills - the so-called green
skills; however, we believe that the best performing
peacekeepers are those who are also well versed in blue
skills, such as the protection of civilians, the prevention
of sexual exploitation and abuse and compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights law.

The United Kingdom recognizes that, like all
troop- and police-contributing countries, we bear the
responsibility for training and equipping our uniformed
personnel. If we fail to prepare them to perform to the
highest standards in the field, we not only fail them,
but we also fail the civilians they have been deployed
to protect. Therefore, if any Member State fails in that
respect, we believe it is right that they should be held
accountable for the failure and learn all the necessary
lessons from it. In that context, my Government reiterates
its support for the Secretary-General's development
of an integrated performance policy framework for
United Nations peacekeeping operations. I would like
to underline the importance of robust predeployment
verification visits to ensure that uniformed personnel
are fully prepared for their missions.

Lieutenant General Martins Filho's briefing
mentioned the important issue of field missions reporting
contingent-performance issues to Headquarters. If
I may, I would like to use this occasion to urge the
Secretariat to provide the Council with regular updates
on such issues and what remedial action is to be taken,
in the interest of transparency and accountability, and
as set out in resolution 2436 (2018).

I would also like to say a word about partnerships.
Each Member State brings invaluable experience and
expertise to peacekeeping; as such, more effective
and efficient sharing of insights, lessons learned and
best practice helps us all. To that end, we support
the Secretary-General's initiative to develop a light
coordination mechanism in concert with the Strategic
Force Generation and Capability Planning Cell and
a range of Member States, which will match training
needs with training offers. That is why we were very
pleased to co-host the preparatory meeting on training
and capacity-building with Uruguay ahead of this
year's Peacekeeping Ministerial. For our part, we will
continue our efforts to better align our training and
capacity-building efforts with the needs of our partners.
The United Kingdom trains some 11,000 peacekeepers
from around the world each year. We were proud to
work with Viet Nam ahead of their first contingent
deployment to South Sudan in 2018. We supported Viet
Nam's efforts to train and prepare its peacekeepers to
take over the level-II field hospital at Bentiu.

In conclusion, the men, women and children who
we ask our peacekeepers to protect should be able to
trust that anyone in a blue helmet or a blue beret is
ready, willing and able to deliver and, as necessary,
defend the mandates set by the Council. Moreover, our
peacekeepers should be able to trust that, before they
are sent into some ofthe world's most difficult conflicts,
they will be trained and equipped to the highest possible
standard. The United Kingdom remains committed to
meeting those standards in our own deployments and
to partnering with other Member States to help them
achieve those goals.

