Mr. Keita (Mali) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this briefing on East
Timor. My thanks go also to Mr. Hedi Annabi for his
detailed introduction of the report of the Secretary-
General. At the same time, I convey the condolences of
the delegation of Mali to the family of the New
Zealand peacekeeper who was killed, as well as to the
people of New Zealand and to the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
We hope that the investigation of this criminal act will
be successful and that the perpetrators will be brought
to justice.

My delegation wishes yet again to commend
UNTAET for its administration work in East Timor.
That work has been marked by constant progress, as
described in the 26 July report of the Secretary-General
(S/2000/738). But a number of matters continue to give
rise to concern, and we have a few brief comments to
make in that regard.

My delegation welcomed the creation on 14 July
of the National Council to replace the National
Consultative Council. Thanks to its broader base, it
will allow greater participation by the Timorese in the
political process. The setting up a few days ago of a
Cabinet with Timorese members will ensure improved
decision-making.

During our consideration of the question of East
Timor last month, we appealed to UNTAET to ensure
that the participation of the Timorese people in the
political process would come about quickly, and in a
calm and transparent manner. We are therefore
concerned to see an increase in political intolerance in
the form of harassment and intimidation. We renew that
appeal, while supporting the steps taken by UNTAET
to bring about the rule of law and expressing our
satisfaction at the continuing normalization of relations
with Indonesia. The creation of a Joint Border
Committee with responsibility for managing all cross-
border matters will give a new impetus to the search
for solutions to important issues such as the return of
refugees and the payment of pensions.
We are pleased by the quality of the humanitarian
assistance mentioned in the Secretary-General's report.
However, the number of refugees still in West Timor is
considerable. We appeal to the Indonesian authorities
to act with greater rigour to halt the actions of the
militias. Militia attacks against humanitarian workers
and associated personnel cannot be tolerated.

Turning to economics, I regard the Tokyo and
Lisbon conferences as important milestones in reviving
the economic sector in East Timor. We therefore urge
donor countries to continue to provide assistance to
UNTAET, working together with the financial
institutions and various specialized United Nations
agencies, as it carries out integrated development
projects. The support of the private sector and the
promotion of investment should be a priority objective
with a view to bringing about a considerable reduction
in unemployment. In this regard, my delegation would
like to thank the Japanese, Australian and American
cooperation agencies and all the countries that have
contributed to the Trust Fund for their considerable
support for the reconstruction of East Timor.

In conclusion, I urge the international community
to continue to support UNTAET so that the progress
achieved over the past nine months can be sustained.

