Mr. Gopinathan (India): We thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this emergency meeting to
discuss the ever-deteriorating situation in the occupied
territories, to which, most regrettably, no immediate
end seems to be in sight.

In the past few weeks, the Council has adopted
three resolutions and one presidential statement, but to
no avail. The crisis continues unabated. In fact, with
each passing day it is worsening. Its reverberations are
being felt in the region and beyond; the consequences
of this could be unimaginable.

The military action of Israel, which continues
notwithstanding the Security Council resolutions and
the calls and appeals by the international community to
cease those operations and withdraw, are a cause of
acute concern to all of us. As recent events have
demonstrated, it has neither enhanced Israel's security
nor served the cause of peace. If anything, it has only
created more impediments to the collective quest for a
lasting peace in the Middle East. The continued
military operations by Israel and its acts of retaliatory
violence serve no purpose except to cause loss of life,
mostly of innocent civilians, including women and
children, and to make the divide between the peoples
of Israel and of Palestine ever wider. Immediate
cessation of military operations and withdrawal by
Israel and a ceasefire are therefore the most urgent
steps. These brook no delay, as the price is being paid
by the innocent on both sides quite needlessly.

Violence witnessed in Israel and Jerusalem
through horrific suicide bombings carried out by
Palestinian militants against civilians cannot be
justified on any ground and should end forthwith. In
this context, we have noted the 13 April statement, in
Arabic, by President Arafat condemning acts of
terrorism in all its manifestations.

From all accounts, some parts of the occupied
territories face a serious humanitarian crisis, over
which Secretary-General Kofi Annan and the entire
international community have expressed their deep
distress and anguish. The Commissioner-General of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, Peter Hansen, and the
Secretary-General's Special Coordinator, Terje Roed-
Larsen, have termed the situation in the Jenin refugee
camp as horrific. We believe that there can be no
justification for causing such an acute crisis, not even
the right of self-defence. Innocent civilian lives are
sacrosanct, no matter where and no matter whose. Due
respect for international humanitarian law should be
the norm of conduct. Humanitarian agencies should be
allowed full access, in compliance with international
humanitarian principles.

With each passing day we are moving inexorably
away from the vision of Israel and Palestine living
peacefully as two States, side by side, within secure
and recognized boundaries. We therefore call for an
immediate end to violence and for the resumption of
dialogue. Peace can be crafted only at the negotiating
table and not on the treads of tanks. Resolutions 1397
(2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) provide the road
map. The required will to move on the path charted in
those resolutions must be demonstrated.

India's support for the Palestinian cause has been
consistent, strong and unwavering. We have stood and
continue to stand by the Palestinian people in their
struggle to achieve their legitimate national rights,
which are the key to peace and stability in the Middle
East. India is in constant contact with several Arab
countries on this issue. We stand ready to do whatever
we can to bring peace to the region.

We support the 10 April Madrid joint statement
by the "quartet". Much hope had been pinned on the
efforts of the "quartet" as well as on those efforts
undertaken bilaterally. But we have yet to see any
meaningful progress on the urgently required steps.
However, the international community cannot give up.
On the contrary, efforts have to be redoubled.

In a recent communication to President Arafat,
Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee reiterated that
India considers President Arafat as a symbol of the
aspirations and the struggle of Palestinian people. As
we have stressed in earlier statements, we are
concerned at the restrictions imposed on President
Arafat, who is the democratically elected leader of the
Palestinian people. For the international community as
well as for the Palestinian people, President Arafat is
the embodiment of Palestinian nationhood. Now, and in
the near future, President Arafat has an important role
to play. We fully share the international community's
concern about his health and well-being. India's
leadership has conveyed to Israel that by isolating
President Arafat, it was compounding difficulties rather
than lessening them, making the task of peace that
much more difficult.

In line with the "quartet" statement of 10 April,
we believe that Israel must immediately halt its
military operations; bring about an immediate and
meaningful ceasefire; withdraw immediately in full,
including from Ramallah and from President Arafat's
headquarters; allow full and unimpeded humanitarian
access; refrain from the excessive use of force; and
ensure the protection of civilians.

A number of ideas have been proposed. We urge
you, Sir, to work closely with the leadership of
Palestine and Israel to craft workable solutions to steer
the region out of the present imbroglio and to realize
our collective vision of a lasting peace in the region.

