Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Special
Representative Jan Kubis for his briefing and commend
him and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for critical support for
Afghanistan's presidential election. I also thank the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury Fedotov, for his
briefing, and Ambassador Tanin, as always, for his able
engagement in the Council's work on Afghanistan.

The conclusion of voting in the Afghan presidential
elections was a vital stage in Afghanistan's transition.
The Afghan people themselves defied attempts by
armed insurgent groups to disrupt the process and have
spoken decisively in favour of democracy. We applaud
their courage and their commitment to a peaceful
Afghanistan. The strong participation of women
reflects the progress Afghanistan has made over the last
10 years. Afghanistan's future will depend on the full
and decisive role women have in its political, economic
and civic evolution.

Today, the Security Council will adopt a presidential
statement on Afghanistan's elections. That will send
a strong message of the international community's
support for Afghanistan's electoral process and will
recognize the importance of those historic elections for
Afghanistan's transition and democratic development.
We recognize the outstanding work of UNAMA in
assisting Afghan institutions in their management ofthe
process. The partnership between the United Nations
and the Government of Afghanistan has been crucial
in successfully managing the many administrative and
logistical challenges of conducting the poll.

We are now at a critical point in the electoral
process. We recognize the importance of the Afghan
electoral institutions, including the Independent
Election Commission and the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission, in ensuring a transparent,
open and credible result, and we call on all parties to
engage with the electoral institutions and processes
patiently and to channel their complaints through the
institutional mechanisms established by Afghanistan's
electoral laws and Constitution. The performance of
Afghanistan's election institutions and processes is
integral to the credibility of the elections themselves.

The months ahead will be crucial. Beyond the
elections, we look forward to the historic milestone
of a peaceful, democratic transfer of leadership in
Afghanistan. Australia is ready, with our partners,
to work with the new Government to finalize the
parameters for the international community's support
for Afghanistan beyond 2014.

The Afghan National Security Forces have
demonstrated their increasing capability in fighting the
insurgency and providing security for the Afghanpeople,
including, vitally, throughout the election process itself.
The Afghan National Security Forces must continue to
build their capabilities across Afghanistan. Australia
will continue to support the Afghan National Security
Forces, including through our sustainment commitment
of $100 million a year, as agreed in Chicago in 2012.
We look forward to concluding the legal frameworks
necessary to enable a post-2014 international mission
to train, advise and assist.

It will be essential for the new Government to
implement the commitments made at the 2012 Tokyo
conference towards achieving sustainable economic
and social development. The people of Afghanistan
will expect to see improvements to governance and
the rule of law, including in the areas of transitional
justice, budget management, combating corruption and
improving accountability.

We encourage Afghan authorities to provide full
support to the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission so that it can fulfil its necessary role as an
effective and independent institution. Australia urges
the full implementation of the law on the elimination
of violence against women and encourages the
Government of Afghanistan to finalize and implement
a national action plan on women and peace and security
that would promote the active participation of women
in the peace and reconciliation process. We welcome
Afghanistan's report on the implementation of its
children and armed conflict plan and emphasize the
need for its full implementation.

We are concerned with the reported increase in
civilian casualties in Afghanistan, the vast majority
of which are attributed to the Taliban. The Secretary-
General's report (S/2014/420) notes that improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) remain the main cause of
civilian casualties. We are concerned by the growing
use and sophistication of IEDs and the terrible toll
they take, particularly on civilians. The Council has
already taken steps to address that trend in resolution
2160 (2014), adopted last week, on the new mandate
of the Taliban sanctions regime, which imposes a new
obligation on States to promote vigilance in industries
involved in the production, trade and storage of
explosives or the raw materials and components that
can be used to manufacture IEDs, such as chemical
components and detonating cord.

It is essential that Member States engage in
establishing good practices, including with industry, and
share information, establish partnerships and develop
national strategies and capabilities to counter the use of
improvised explosive devices. Crucially, we must not
lose sight of Afghanistan's significant humanitarian
challenges, including significant displacement as a
result of conflict and recent natural disasters.

Today, the Council will also adopt a presidential
statement on narcotics, which is an issue of great
concern to many countries, including my own. We thank
UNODC for its continued efforts to build the capacity of
Afghan authorities to counter the very serious narcotics
threat. That role will remain important.

To conclude, Afghanistan stands at the threshold
of transformation. Its people have voted peacefully for
change, respecting and trusting the democratic process
to bring them greater peace and security. We can
ensure them that the United Nations, the international
community and certainly my own country, Australia,
will continue to support them and the Government
of Afghanistan as they work to achieve the stability
and legitimacy that Ambassador Tanin has just so
sharply identified as the motivating principles behind
the commitment of Afghanistan's people to their own
future.

