The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

I thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun, as
well as Ambassadors Apakan and Sajdik for their
respective briefings.

China has been following the situation in eastern
Ukraine closely, and is concerned about the recurring
hostilities. We have taken note that the Normandy
format and the Trilateral Contact Group recently held
multiple consultations on the implementation of the
Minsk agreement. We have also noted that the ceasefire
and other issues were discussed at the meeting of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs in the Normandy format.

Last year, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2202 (2015), endorsing the Minsk
agreement and demonstrating the Council's firm
support for a political solution to the question of
Ukraine. All parties must faithfully enforce the
cessation of hostilities and violence and implement the
Minsk agreement. They must also remain committed
to seeking a comprehensive, lasting, balanced and
long-term solution to the question of Ukraine through
dialogue and consultation. Furthermore, that solution
should address the underlying causes of the issue
and should fully accommodate the legitimate rights,
interests and aspirations of all regions and communities
in Ukraine. It also must give equal importance to
addressing all warranted concerns so as to achieve a
balance of all interests. China calls on all the parties
concerned to exercise restraint and to work relentlessly
towards a political settlement and the realization of
peace, stability and development in Ukraine in order to
promote both intercommunal harmony, as well as the
peaceful coexistence of Ukraine and other countries.

The international community should continue
to support all diplomatic efforts towards seeking a
political solution. Council discussions should contribute
to the easing of tensions on the ground and the proper
resolution of the question of Ukraine.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to Ambassador Apakan to respond
to comments and questions raised.

