Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): I thank you,
Madame President, for convening this important debate
and for inviting us to participate. It has been a busy
year for the Council, but nothing more important than
the subject of this debate has been discussed. We thank
everyone very much for their contributions.

I should also like to thank, as others before me
have done, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, both for his briefing
and, more importantly, for the extraordinary work he is
doing in Afghanistan on behalf of all of us.

I would also like to acknowledge and thank
Ambassador Tanin for his important remarks.

Since the last Security Council debate on
Afghanistan (see S/PV.6395), we have seen a number
of important steps towards our shared goal of a stable
and secure Afghanistan. We welcome the findings of
the recent United States strategy review, and agree with
the assessment that progress is being made. We also
strongly support the review's key themes of ensuring
that the gains of stabilization are irreversible.

In October, Australia held its own full
parliamentary debate on Afghanistan - the first of its
kind, actually. While a range of different perspectives
were aired, the consistent message was one of support
for Australia's continuing civil and military
contribution to international efforts in Afghanistan.
In the past 18 months, Australia has increased its
civilian commitment in Afghanistan by 50 per cent. Our
work continues to be focused on Uruzgan province,
where we are assisting the provincial Government to
improve service delivery and increase its accountability.
This financial year, our development assistance
expenditure there is expected to reach $20 million, and
our total development assistance in Afghanistan this
year will be approximately $106 million. We are
committed to channelling at least 50 per cent of our
development assistance through Afghan Government
systems.

These civilian enhancements build on Australia's
military contribution in Afghanistan, which is
approximately 1,550 troops. Australia will continue to
assign high priority to efforts to building the

capabilities of the Afghan National Security Forces
through both our mentoring and training of the Afghan
National Army's Fourth Brigade in Uruzgan province
and our substantial contribution to the Afghan National
Army Trust Fund. Our military is also involved in
providing force protection for civilian efforts and in
conducting and supporting operations more broadly
across the southern region.

Australia is under no illusions that the decision to
begin transition in 2011 will be an easy task. Transition
will be a gradual process, to be achieved when the
conditions are right, on a province-by-province and
district-by-district basis. We look forward to ongoing
consultations with the Afghan Government and our
partners in the International Security Assistance Force
on the transition process.

Importantly, as you yourself said, Madame,
transition does not mean a withdrawal from
Afghanistan. After transition to Afghan security lead,
we must recognize that Afghanistan will continue to
require support in training, defence cooperation, aid
and development. The Australian Government has
made clear our commitment to continuing supporting
Afghanistan well beyond transition. The United
Nations also, of course, has a key role to play in the
international civilian effort to enabling greater Afghan
capacity and leadership in support of transition.
Australia fully supports the United Nations civilian
mission in Afghanistan, and will continue to do so.

The conflict in Afghanistan will not be won
without a strong political strategy. Australia welcomes
the Afghan-led progress on reconciliation and
reintegration, aimed at winning over supporters of the
insurgency through targeted programmes. The Afghan
national Consultative Peace Jirga, held in June, and the
inaugural session of the High Peace Council in October
were important steps towards this goal. Australia has
committed $25 million to the Peace and Reintegration
Trust Fund. Additionally, we are consulting with the
Afghan Government about providing support for a
deputy chief executive officer of the joint secretariat
for the Afghan peace and reintegration programme.

Australia, like others, welcomes the release of the
final results of the Wolesi Jirga elections. Although the
elections were far from perfect and the extent of fraud
has been well-documented, it is important not to lose
sight of the positives. This was the first Afghan-led
election in the post-Taliban era, and the Afghan
electoral authorities did a good job in very difficult
circumstances. Around 400 women stood for office,
and millions of Afghans voted across the country
despite the risks. This showed how much the Afghan
people value democracy. And while it is true that
Taliban intimidation did affect voter turnout in some
districts, the insurgency clearly failed to make good on
its threat to derail the elections, thanks in part to the
solid performance of the Afghan security forces. Now
that the results are final, it is time for the international
community and the Afghan Government to return their
focus to long-term electoral reforms that will pave the
way for successful elections in the future.

We cannot lose sight of the fact that sustained
progress in Afghanistan depends critically on the
engagement of Afghanistan's neighbours in the region,
from whom we have heard today. All of Afghanistan's
neighbours share critical interests in Afghanistan's
security and long-term stability, and can play a
constructive role in promoting Afghanistan's social and
economic development. In this regard, the efforts of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
to encourage regional countries to cooperate in halting
the narcotics trade and the illegal movement of people
and to support Afghanistan in its efforts to achieve
security and stability are extremely welcome.

As I said at the beginning, this has been a critical
year for Afghanistan, and 2011 will be equally
important. But we have a real opportunity to build on
the progress we have made in Afghanistan over the
past 12 months. This progress could not have occurred
without the dedication of all those involved in
Afghanistan, in both civilian and military roles. We
thank them sincerely for their efforts in 2010 and pay
tribute to those who have paid an extremely high price
in terms of loss of life and limb.

As a final note, I would like to take a moment to
acknowledge the passing of Ambassador Richard
Holbrooke, United States Special Envoy for
Afghanistan and Pakistan. 1 did not know Ambassador
Holbrooke, but I did have the honour of meeting him.
As President Obama said during his remarks to launch
the review on Afghanistan and Pakistan, Ambassador
Holbrooke's memory will be honoured and his legacy
will be long-lived.

