Mr. Grigore (Republic of Moldova): I would like
to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the current month, and for presiding over this
important debate. We are also thankful to
Mr. Nobuyasu Abe, Under-Secretary-General for
Disarmament Affairs, for his comprehensive
presentation.

The Programme of Action adopted at the 2001
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects
emphasized the multidimensional nature of this issue
and the real threat that the illicit trade in these weapons
poses to the security of Member States and entire
regions. We welcome the Security Council's continuing
consideration of the issues related to the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons.

The Republic of Moldova also welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General in document S/2005/69
on the ways and means in which the Security Council
could contribute to dealing with the question of the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. The report
continues the tendency of critical analysis of the
situation, acknowledging the significant progress
achieved in various fields of concern and underscoring
a series of actions that the Council and the General
Assembly may take on the issue of small arms and
light weapons.

My delegation shares the conclusion of the High-
level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change that
much more needs to be done in the area of arms control
and disarmament regimes, particularly in relation to the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. The
Panel's recommendation on the acceleration and
conclusion of legally binding agreements on the
marking and tracing, as well as the brokering and
transfer, of small arms and light weapons is echoed by
Recommendation 1 of the Secretary General's report,
and we hope that upcoming events, such as the meeting
on the Programme of Action and the 2006 Review
Conference, will be marked by tangible results.

The Moldovan Government is strongly
committed to the implementation of the Programme of
Action and is undertaking all the necessary efforts in
this respect. The Republic of Moldova has developed
an export control system that is largely compatible
with European standards, and it has aligned itself with
other efforts made at the regional and subregional level
to establish mechanisms to prevent, combat and
eradicate the illicit trade in small arms.

Small arms, light weapons and landmines were
identified as the primary weapons in most civil wars in
the 1990s, and those arms are still one of the main
causes of human suffering throughout the world. And
while some conflicts - with the active involvement of
the international community, and primarily due to the
efforts of this body - were solved and affected
countries returned to the path of development and
prosperity, others are still making enormous efforts to
resolve difficult situations that are aggravated by the
presence of huge amounts of weapons.

Regretfully, the unresolved conflict in the eastern
regions of Moldova, which are controlled by a
separatist regime, continues to pose a serious threat to
the security, sovereignty and territorial integrity of my
country, as well as to the stability of the whole region.
That region remains an area of illegal production of
different types of light weapons and trafficking in
small arms. Those weapons end up in the possession of
criminals, extremists and terrorists, thereby
exacerbating problems for law-enforcement agencies,
fuelling corruption and cross-border smuggling,
helping to finance criminal networks and diminishing
the international efforts to combat terrorism and
transnational organized crime.

Due to the lack of control by the constitutional
authorities over the Transdniestr segment of the border
between Moldova and Ukraine, there are no guarantees
that the illegally produced or trafficked armaments are
not reaching other conflict zones. Furthermore, small
arms trafficked from this region often lack serial
numbers, which makes them ideal for organized
criminals and terrorist networks. The close cooperation
of the Governments of the Republic of Moldova and
Ukraine, with the assistance of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European
Union, will substantially contribute to the prevention
and elimination of illicit trafficking and will facilitate
the identification of an appropriate solution for this
problem.

The presence of large, unaccounted stockpiles of
foreign weapons and munitions in the eastern part of
the Republic of Moldova complicates the efforts to
solve the political conflict and is particularly risky
because of the constant danger that they may be stolen
for use by the separatist paramilitaries or sold off along
with illegally produced armaments. From this
perspective, the Government of the Republic of
Moldova considers it important that an international
assessment be made to assess the stocks of armaments
of the foreign troops stationed on our territory and of
those belonging to the illegal paramilitary units from
the eastern districts of the Republic of Moldova.
Foreign troops stationed without the consent of the
host State are subject to complete and unconditional
withdrawal, in accordance with international
commitments.

I would like to conclude by mentioning that the
Security Council can provide valuable support to
initiatives aimed at negotiating an international legal
instrument to identify and trace illicit small arms and
light weapons, as well as to national and regional
efforts to curb the proliferation and illicit trafficking of
these weapons, and the Republic of Moldova will fully
support these activities.

