Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement to be made on behalf of the European
Union. In addition, we fully support the statement by
the representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
in the light of our cooperation on the upcoming split
mandate in the Security Council.

I wish to congratulate Senegal on the open-minded
choice of topic for today's debate, with emphaiss on the
linkages between climate and security.

Water scarcity can be a threat - a multiplier of
instability, a driver of migration and confrontation.
That is why international cooperation is an essential
tool for peacebuilding, preventing conflicts related
to resource scarcity and minimizing threats through
preventive diplomacy, mediation and capacity-building.
The International Freshwater Treaties Database lists
more than 400 water agreements, more than a quarter
of which have been concluded in the past 70 years. They
are the alternative to confrontation.

Italy is party to the so-called Water Convention- the
Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary
Watercourses and International Lakes - which has
played a key role in preventing potential conflicts in the
pan-European region following the end of the Soviet
Union. It has also proved instrumental in many post-
conflict situations - for example, after the conflict in
the former Yugoslavia.

The Convention's institutional framework has
promotedcooperationbasedonequityand sustainability,
and thus has promoted peace and economic integration.
The opening of the Convention to all States Members
of the United Nations as of 1 March offers the
opportunity to create the global multilateral framework
for promoting water cooperation, monitoring progress,
identifying hotspots and triggering preventive
responses. It can offer a home in the United Nations
system for multilateral diplomacy on peace, security
and water.

Italy believes that education, research and
cooperation, with the transfer of know-how, in
sustainable water management are key to our efforts in
conflict prevention. For that purpose, Italy has invested
in specialized courses for engineers, agronomists
and water managers, while promoting an integrated
approach within the water-energy-food security
nexus at the Agronomic Institute of Florence, as well
as by promoting postgraduate programmes at the
Mediterranean Agronomic Institute in Bari. Together
with the increasing number of graduate students from
sub-Saharan Africa, the Mediterranean and the Middle
East, who are now addressing the competing uses of
scarce water in their respective countries, Italian
cooperation continues its long-standing engagement in
local projects for conservation and the sustainable use of
water with a focus on rural areas in the Mediterranean,
the Near East, Africa and Latin America.

History reminds us that advanced water
management can contribute to the development and
resilience of societies, as the Roman Empire proved in
the Mediterranean, an area of water stress and climate
variability. Two millenniums later, we cannot fail
to recognize and address the root causes of conflicts
and the challenges that climate change, unprecedented
urbanization, population growth and migration
pose to the stability and security of the world. That
situation, which is particularly evident in Africa,
calls for increased international collaboration. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development offers an
appropriate framework where economic growth, social
sustainability, environmental preservation and peace
and security are connected and mutually beneficial. We
should not miss the opportunity of adopting that new
conceptual paradigm.

