I thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). Last 21 August marked the seventh anniversary of the chemical-weapons attack that took place in the Damascus suburb of Ghouta. That attack remains one of the most horrendous, large-scale atrocities conducted during the Syrian conflict by the Al-Assad regime against its own people. The Syrian Network for Human Rights has documented that during the Ghouta attacks at least 1,144 individuals suffocated to death; 1,119 of them were civilians, including 99 children and 194 women. Despite Syria's accession to the Chemical Weapons Convention in 2013, its Government forces have continued to use sarin gas and chlorine bombs to suppress the opposition and terrorize civilians and punish them for their demand to end the dictatorship. The regime has conducted almost all of the verified chemical-weapons attacks that have taken place in Syria. The Joint Investigative Mechanism and the Investigation and Identification Team have determined that in seven instances altogether the Syrian regime was responsible for using chemical weapons against its people. Since to date Syria has failed to declare and destroy all of its chemical weapons and their production facilities, we have not been assured that new attacks will not happen again. Estonia condemns the use of chemical weapons in the strongest terms. Any use of such weapons 1s a grave violation of international law. The seriousness of such acts is further supported by the Security Council's determination, in its resolution 2118 (2013), that the use of chemical weapons anywhere constitutes a threat to international peace and security. Yet, regrettably, so far chemical-weapons attacks in Syria have largely been committed with impunity. The Council has so far failed to uphold its own decisions or to discuss seriously how to move forward with accountability measures and put an end to such horrific crimes. Instead, we see systematic efforts on the part of the Russian Federation to discredit and undermine the competence and authority of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and question the validity of the reports of its investigative bodies whenever their conclusions do not fit with Russia's political agenda and interests. Those actions have serious consequences. We are allowing the norm against the use of chemical weapons to erode. We are allowing a new normal, where chemical weapons are used to eliminate political rivals and punish the opposition. We have already seen an alarming increase in their use over the past years. Just last week, we learned about the usage of a chemical nerve agent of the Novichok group to poison Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny. We strongly condemn the attack and call for an impartial and international investigation that would include the experts of the OPCW. We urge Russia to cooperate and provide an account of how the nerve agent came to be used in the poisoning of Mr. Navalny. Unfortunately, this is not the first time that Novichok, a military-grade nerve agent, has been used against people who Russia perceives as adversaries. The 2018 attack against Sergei and Yulia Skripal on British soil and the poisoning of Navalny show a pattern. In a similar fashion, in 2017 the North Korean regime used the nerve agent VX to assassinate Kim Jong Un's brother in a Malaysian airport. Estonia is convinced that a robust international response is essential to hold those responsible to account for the use of chemical weapons, seek justice for the victims and prevent such attacks from happening again. The Security Council and all its members have a responsibility to protect the international non-proliferation regime, which underpins our collective security. The use of a weapon of mass destruction anywhere, by anyone and under any circumstances is not and cannot become acceptable.
