Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC).

I would like to express my sincere congratulations
to you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. Please allow me also to express our appreciation
for convening this timely debate to address the situation
in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his important
briefing on the current situation.

We meet again as the occupied Palestinian territory,
in particularly the occupied city of Jerusalem, is
enduring an unprecedented escalation of Israeli military
aggression and terrorist attacks by Israeli settlers
against the defenceless Palestinian people and their
holy places, without political, legal or moral deterrents.
The Security Council is meeting at a time when Israel
is continuing its gross, systematic crimes and breaches

of international law, many tantamount to war crimes.
Israeli arrogance and disrespect for agreements with
the Palestinian side, as well as the total impunity it
enjoys for its violations and crimes, have brought the
situation to a dangerous juncture. Yet, regrettably, the
Council remains silent, disregarding its duty for the
maintenance of international peace and security and its
commitment to protect civilians in armed conflict.

Since the previous debate, in January (see S/PV.7610), Israel, the occupying Power, has continued
killing and injuring Palestinian civilians, especially
youths. Since the current wave of unrest began, in
October 2015, Israel's shoot-to-kill policy has claimed
the lives of more than 204 Palestinian civilians, 48 of
whom were children. Likewise, the Israeli military
aggression and settler terrorism have left 17,000
Palestinians injured. Israel has also continued detaining,
imprisoning, abusing and torturing thousands of
Palestinians in its detention centres; destroying homes
and infrastructure; and forcibly displacing Palestinians.
In addition, Israel has used all other forms of ongoing
collective punishment of Palestinian civilians, the most
egregious of which is its inhumane, illegal blockade
on the Gaza Strip, which amount to systematic human
rights violations and grave breaches of international
humanitarian law.

At the same time, Israel, the occupying Power, has
persisted with its unlawful colonization of Palestinian
land, including through the construction and expansion
of settlements and the separation wall, especially in and
around occupied East Jerusalem. All ofthose violations
blatantly aim at illegally, forcibly and deliberately
altering the character, status and demography of the
occupied Palestinian territory, thereby destroying the
viability of the two-State solution, based on the pre-
1967 borders. In that regard, the OIC reiterates that
all such acts by Israel, including in particular against
the Christian and Islamic holy sites in occupied East
Jerusalem, constitute a flagrant violation of international
law and resolutions of international legitimacy. They
fuel increased extremism, violence and racism, as well
as religious conflict, all of which demand the urgent
attention and action of the Security Council.

It is incomprehensible that Israel continues to
perpetrate violations and crimes without a response
or punishment. We once again call on the Council to
assume its responsibility for providing the Palestinian
people with international protection. The Council and
the Conference of the High Contracting Parties to the
Fourth Geneva Convention have clear responsibilities in
ensuring the protection and security of the Palestinian
people. It must be stressed that the right to security is
not exclusive to Israel. Security is a right that should be
provided to, and enjoyed by, all nations. The victims of
this nearly five-decades-long illegal, foreign occupation
should not be the exception.

At the same time, we should stress that an exit from
the current crisis and the revival of peace prospects
will not be possible without compelling Israel, the
occupying Power, to end its illegal construction and
expansion of its colonial settlements and the wall in
occupied Palestine, including East Jerusalem. That is
an urgent priority in line with the Security Council's
own resolutions, and imperative for saving the two-
State solution from demise.

I should note that the OIC, at its Extraordinary
Summit held in Jakarta last month, called on the
Council to uphold its Charter duties, as well as its legal
and moral obligations to ensure accountability for the
illegal actions perpetrated by the occupying Power, and
to act to protect the Palestinian civilian population and
end the pervasive, systematic and gross violations of
their human rights. The OIC reiterates its call for a draft
resolution that sets a specific timetable and practical
steps to end Israeli occupation in all manifestations,
including the illegal settlement regime, on the basis of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles and the Arab Peace Initiative.

In conclusion, I wish to avail myself of this
opportunity to reaffirm once more the OIC support
for, and solidarity with, the Palestinian people in their
endeavours to regain their inalienable rights, including
their right to self-determination and independence in
their own State on the Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and to
achieve a just solution to the question of Palestinian
refugees, pursuant to the relevant United Nations
resolutions - a solution that is long overdue and that
remains a legal and moral responsibility for the Council
to fulfil.

