Mr. Bonne (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for her briefing. Allow me also,
above all, to welcome the presence among us of
President Ramos-Horta in difficult family
circumstances.

I associate myself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union.

Timor-Leste is entering a delicate electoral phase.
We understand that, and it will be up to the Timorese
themselves to manage this period. However, we have
grounds for optimism. The situation is stable and
everything leads us to believe that the progress noted
in the economic, institutional and social fields will
continue. The transfer of responsibility for security to
the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste is taking place
under good conditions with no increase in crime.

However, history should make us cautious. The
United Nations and other international actors will
therefore help the Timor-Leste authorities in the
preparation of the presidential and legislative elections,
and, of course, stand ready if needed. Timor-Leste is a
United Nations success story that shows the ability of
our Organization to accompany a country towards
peace and stability. Once again, we wish to commend
the remarkable work of the Special Representative and
all staff of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT). We also salute the political
maturity shown by the Timorese political class
throughout that process. We also congratulate President
Ramos-Horta on his country's participation in a United
Nations peacekeeping operation, which promotes
Timor-Leste from the rank of beneficiary of United
Nations peacekeeping assistance to that of contributor
to peacekeeping.

We supported the new deal for engagement in
fragile States, adopted in Busan last December. That
initiative is ambitious in seeking to change the deal
between fragile countries and development partners in
a spirit of mutual responsibility. On that occasion we
were able to assess the dynamic role played by
President Ramos-Horta and the diplomacy of his
country within the Group of Seven Plus, and we
appreciated it.

The departure of UNMIT does not mean that the
United Nations is losing interest in Timor-Leste. On
the contrary, the international community is committed
for the long term. The European Union will therefore
continue its work for the country's development and
stability. French bilateral assistance will also continue
in line with existing bilateral aid and the priorities set
out in the Strategic Development Plan adopted by the
Timorese authorities.

We hope that the weeks following the elections
will be an opportunity for the new Government, in
cooperation with the United Nations and partner
countries, to define the kind of presence that our
Organization will keep in place after UNMIT's
departure. We also hope that the coming months will
make it possible to affirm the recent experience of
Timor-Leste as a good example of peacebuilding
operations.

