Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Egeland
for his briefing and to align myself with the statement
to be made shortly by the Austrian ambassador on
behalf of the European Union.

Efforts to protect civilians from the effect of
armed conflict must be at the heart of our work in this
Council. How many people noticed the number of
occasions when Mr. Egeland said "must", "we have
to", "we should"? The sense of imperative implicit in
the scale of the challenge that we confront and in the
urgency of action is all too obvious. He listed some of
the more obvious blights on human security which
exist in the world. That is why the Council reaffirmed
in resolution 1674 (2006) that we have a shared
responsibility to protect populations from large scale
abuses and, in particular, from crimes against
humanity, including the prospect of genocide. That is
why today's debate is an important opportunity to try
to demonstrate how we can do better at implementing
that key resolution.

I want to set out, if I may, three areas of
discussion. Of primary importance is the need for more
effective efforts to prevent conflict. Secondly, we must
address the action to bring those responsible for abuses
against civilians to justice. Thirdly, we must discuss
the role of peacekeeping missions in providing
protection. Underpinning all of these matters is the
importance of effective coordination.

Preventing the occurrence of armed conflict
should always be a prime consideration for the
Council. That was recognized in the outcome document
of the Summit last September, where we stressed the
obligation of the United Nations to play its part and the
primary responsibility of States to protect their own
citizens. The Security Council has a role in endorsing
and supporting that approach, which is set out in
resolutions 1625 (2005) and 1653 (2006), as well as
resolution 1674 (2006). That activity needs to be
underpinned by a clear analysis and identification of
flashpoints for potential conflict at an early stage. One
of the crucial indicators in that regard is the way in
which civilians are exposed to lawlessness and
Violence. In that regard, these humanitarian briefings,
which have now become established by the Under-
Secretary-General, are quite crucial. Protection of
civilians should be an important element of what is set
out before us on each occasion.

Where conflict does occur, we need to make
certain that the United Nations takes a lead in ensuring
that the perpetrators of abuses against civilians are
brought to justice. That is why the language in
resolution 1674 (2006) about ending impunity was so
important. Such language was essential, not just for
reasons of natural justice, but because ending impunity
is an indispensable part of helping societies to recover
from the scars of conflict. Action against impunity
promotes sustainable peace as well as truth and
reconciliation. The need for the United Nations family
as a whole to provide political and practical support to
efforts to end impunity is very important.

I think it is also important for the Security
Council, in adopting mandates for peacekeeping
operations, to consider the extent to which the mandate
should cover the collection and protection of evidence
and, indeed, any special training necessary to
investigate and prosecute crimes of that nature. That
goes beyond customary mandates, but I think we need
to think seriously about it.

The United Nations system also has a role in
direct provision of protection to civilians where their
own Governments are failing to do so. Humanitarian
agencies' efforts in places like Darfur and Northern
Uganda are essential to provide the basic human
security needs of hundreds of thousands or even
millions of the most vulnerable. Where the Council has
mandated peacekeeping operations, there may also be a
direct security role for the United Nations or for
relevant regional organizations. Resolution 1674
(2006) recognizes that there is more work to be done to
ensure that peacekeeping missions are able to
06-40877
discharge that responsibility as effectively as possible
within resources.

Speaking bluntly, I would say that, politically and
practically, we cannot deploy a United Nations mission
to Darfur, unless we actually tackle and provide
protection for civilians. That is a need identified in the
Darfur peace agreement, but unless we do that, there is
little point, in my View, in deploying a mission to
Darfur.

One area particularly highlighted in resolution
1674 (2006) is the need to ensure effective security in
and around camps for refugees and internally displaced
persons. I will not elaborate on that point, but we all
know exactly why that is essential. Where
peacekeepers have a protection role, there is a need to
ensure that they are appropriately tasked, adequately
equipped and well-trained. The Council's responsibility
is to ensure that we clearly understand the tasks that we
are assigning, including those related to the protection
of civilians, and that we then follow that through in the
mandate and in the resources allocated for those
operations.

I would like to say a few words about the
particular importance of preventing sexual violence as
an element of our work on protection. The scale of this
problem is horrifying. For example, the International
Red Cross has recently estimated that 60 to 70 per cent
of all women in the camps for internally displaced
persons in Darfur have suffered gender-based Violence.
There are many instances of conflict where rape of
civilians has been used as a deliberate weapon by
armed groups. Action to tackle this problem should
form a key part of the agenda on protection of
civilians. However, it requires not just direct action to
protect women and girls and to bring perpetrators to
justice, but also serious efforts to address the cultural
climate in which the use of rape as a weapon of war
can be and often is commonplace.

Ensuring that gender issues have an important
role in United Nations missions is a starting point. But
we have to be quite clear: all of us have to redouble the
aggregate effort to promote women's decision-making
role in society, and in peace and security issues in
particular, as was set out in resolution 1325 (2000) of
this Council. The implementation of that key resolution
has to be at the forefront.

Providing adequate protection is a daunting task.
It is a task that needs the closest possible coordination

to be effective. The United Nations should continue to
strengthen its efforts through partnerships and
throughout its own direct action. However, let us
remember that non-governmental organizations often
play a central role. It is Vital that their knowledge and
contributions are factored into our discussion of
protection issues.

There are, of course, many other areas worthy of
specific mention in a debate such as this one. In the
interests of time, however, let me conclude by saying
that if our efforts are to be successful, we need to
recognize the importance of a coherent, unified
approach by the Council, by the Secretariat and the
agencies of the United Nations, and Within the
Department of Peacekeeping, and in all our
peacekeeping operations. We also need to recognize
that that should come through in individual theatres of
action. The needs - which we have heard set out -
and the imperative nature of the action required
demonstrate why we really must do better.

