Mrs. Boura (Greece): I would like to thank the
French presidency of the Security Council for taking the
initiative to convene this timely and important debate.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights for his comprehensive presentation.

Greece aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union. We would also like
to speak from our national point of View to emphasize
our concern about the unprecedented humanitarian
crisis, the impact on minorities and ethnic and religious
communities of the protracted conflicts in Syria and
Iraq, and the horrendous crimes committed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other
terrorist groups. As those groups display, in the most
brutal way, their determination to erode every trace of
civilization in the region, we are witnessing heinous
persecutions, violence, mass killings and the deliberate
destruction of the historical and cultural heritage of
ethnic and religious communities.

Christian, Yazidi, Kurdish, Shabak and other
Muslim communities that have coexisted for centuries
are now being displaced or forced to flee, while many
others have been kidnapped and executed. Women and
children in ethnic communities have been targeted by
violent extremists through abductions, hostage-taking,
rape, human trafficking and slavery, despite numerous
calls internationally for an immediate end to all sexual
and gender-based violence. Today we have heard
dramatic messages and testimonies about the torture
and suffering of Yazidis, Chaldeans and members of
other Christian communities who have been forced to
flee their homes. It is noteworthy that half of Iraq's
1.4 million Christians have already left their ancestral
land, while 400,000 Yezidis have been violently
persecuted and displaced. In Syria, ISIL and other
terrorist groups have perpetrated all sorts of abuses and
inhuman acts against Christians, while at the same time
Muslim communities and citizens have also been the
Victims of vicious and barbaric abuse.

Greece supports the efforts of the Secretary-
General and those of the United Nations through its
resolutions, as well as the relevant European Union
statements and action, and we condemn the human
rights violations and acts of barbarism perpetrated
against religious and ethnic groups and the denial of
their right to remain in their homeland. We condemn the
deliberate destruction and looting of cultural heritage
assets such as monuments, museums, churches and
religious shrines and sites. Along with our firm stance
in the fight against terrorism and violent extremism,
we believe we should consider arrangements for
closely monitoring the situation of religious and
ethnic communities, as a first step to preventing their
persecution and oppression in the region. The situation
of religious and ethnic groups can serve as an indicator
for measuring the overall political environment in the
Middle East.

Efforts to achieve peace in the region and prevent
violence from spilling over into neighbouring countries
will require a regional consensus on supporting the
historical presence of these communities in their
homeland. In that spirit, the efforts of religious
institutions, including the ancient Churches, and of
civil society, to promote reconciliation and moderation
in the region and preserve peaceful coexistence for all
religious and ethnic communities, merit our attention
and support. In that context, Greece has undertaken an
initiative to convene an international conference with
the aim of contributing to addressing the issue in a
comprehensive way.

On the occasion of the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations, and as we celebrate the fundamental
values and principles of the Organization, we should
make it our duty to prevent the loss of diversity and of
the invaluable cultural heritage of the Middle East, part
of which dates back in time to the very origins of our
civilization.

