The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/169, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in that country.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council recalls its previous
statements on Guinea-Bissau and notes the latest
report of the Secretary-General on developments
in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNOBGIS)(S/2009/169). The
Council reaffirms its support for the continuing
efforts to consolidate peace in that country.

"The Security Council welcomes the
swearing-in as interim President of Guinea-
Bissau of Mr. Raimundo Pereira and notes with
satisfaction the commitment of the new
authorities to maintain the constitutional order,
following the assassinations of the President of
Guinea-Bissau, Joao Bernardo Vieira, and of the
Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, Tagme Na
Waie, and to deepen national consensus on the
transition and the electoral process.

"The Security Council also welcomes the
convening of the presidential election for 28 June
2009 and urges the Government and all political
actors to create the best conditions for the holding
of a free, fair, transparent and credible
presidential election. It welcomes the assistance
already provided by bilateral and multilateral
partners to support the electoral budget, and calls
upon the donors to continue to provide technical
and financial assistance for the electoral process.

"The Security Council takes note of the
final communique of the 26th Meeting of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Mediation and Security Council
expressing the need to deploy military and police
contingents to ensure the protection of the
republican institutions, the authorities, as well as
the electoral process in Guinea-Bissau. In this
regard, the Security Council invites ECOWAS to
work in coordination with the Government of
Guinea-Bissau.

"The Security Council condemns recent
cases of arbitrary detentions, armed attacks and
intimidation, and demands full protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms of the
people of Guinea-Bissau. It urges the Armed
Forces leadership to ensure that its commitment
to abide by the civilian authorities and respect
constitutional order is fully honoured.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of national reconciliation and the
fight against impunity in Guinea-Bissau, and calls
on the international community to support the
Commission of Inquiry established to investigate
the assassinations of the President and of the
Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces.

"The Security Council reiterates the
importance of security sector reform (SSR) in
Guinea-Bissau, and in this regard urges the
international partners to continue to support the
implementation of the quick-impact projects. It
welcomes the convening of a round table on
Guinea-Bissau's Security Sector Reform with a
View to follow up the coordination and the
implementation of the identified projects and
programmes on SSR, to be held in Praia, Cape
Verde, on 20 April 2009.

"The Security Council remains seriously
concerned by the growth in illegal drug
trafficking as well as transnational organized
crime in Guinea-Bissau and in the subregion. It
commends the joint action of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the
Department of Political Affairs/UNOWA, the
09-29863

Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
INTERPOL to help implement the ECOWAS Plan
of Action against drug trafficking. It calls upon
the international community to continue to
support the implementation of the Guinea-Bissau
anti-narcotics operational plan, as well as of the
ECOWAS Plan ofAction.

"The Security Council calls on the
international community to provide timely and
adequate support for the implementation of the
Strategic Peacebuilding Framework adopted by
the Peacebuilding Commission. It looks forward
to a sustainable mobilization of resources for
economic reconstruction and peace consolidation
in Guinea-Bissau.

"The Security Council reiterates the
importance of the regional dimension in the
resolution of the problems faced by Guinea-
Bissau and, in this regard, welcomes the role of
the African Union, ECOWAS, the CPLP and the
European Union in the peacebuilding process.
09-2986}

"The Security Council commends the
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
staff of UNOGBIS, as well as the United Nations
country team and the Peacebuilding Commission
country-specific configuration on Guinea-Bissau
for their contribution to peace, democracy and the
rule of law in Guinea-Bissau. The Security
Council reiterates that it looks forward to
receiving recommendations from the Secretary-
General on how the United Nations presence in
Guinea-Bissau should be reconfigured to support
peacebuilding more effectively."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/6.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.
