Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
would like to thank you, Madam President, and the
Kingdom of the Netherlands for convening today's
meeting, and we congratulate you on your presidency.
We also thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, and Mr. David Beasley, Executive
Director of the World Food Programme, for their
briefings and for the tireless efforts of their agencies to
provide humanitarian assistance, particularly given the
increasing number of violent conflicts around the world
over the past 10 years. That has been evident in the
countries that are facing food insecurity. The data show
that in 2017, 124 million in 51 countries were affected
by acute food insecurity. According to the Global
Report on Food Crises 2018, published by the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and the World Food Programme, that is an increase of
11 million people as compared to the previous year.

More than a year ago, on 21 February 2017, the
Secretary-General sent a letter to Member States in
which he highlighted the world food crisis and the risk
of famine in north-eastern Nigeria, Somalia, South
Sudan and Yemen. He also warned that if decisive
action was not taken, more than 20 million people in
those countries would face the risk of famine within
six months. The Security Council therefore began
paying more attention to the risk of famine in many
countries on its agenda. On 9 August 2017, the Security
Council issued presidential statement S/PRST/2017/ 14,
in which it expressed its grave concern about the risk
of famine and called on Member States to provide
resources and funding to prevent that possibility. The
international community responded rapidly to the
Secretary-General's appeal, donating approximately
70 per cent of the required funds by October 2017,
when the Secretary-General reviewed the most recent
developments related to the risk of famine and a world
food crisis in the Security Council (see S/PV.8069). The
State of Kuwait also responded by donating $15 million
towards addressing the food insecurity crisis in north-
eastern Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen. In
our deliberations today, I would like to underscore three
of the main elements in the link between hunger and
conflict - prevention, compliance and urgent action.

First, on prevention, we believe that the aspect
of morality should be paramount in addressing food
insecurity. There can be no moral justification for
allowing people or groups to die of hunger. The early
warning from the Secretary-General is part of the
interaction between the Security Council and the
Secretary-General and helps us to guard against the
advent of serious humanitarian crises, especially
those driven by conflict. We should take into account
the fact that the effective and speedy implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the Sustainable Development Goals will help to
prevent future conflicts resulting from hunger. We
should also focus on addressing issues such as poverty,
unemployment, climate change and inequality. It is
hardly surprising, therefore, that one of the first of the
Sustainable Development Goals is eradicating hunger,
which is achievable given the abundant resources in the
world today.

Secondly, with regard to compliance, respect
for international law is crucial to breaking the link
between conflict and hunger. We should ensure
respect for international humanitarian law in situations
of conflict. The Security Council has a number
of measures at its disposal to ensure such respect
when Member States fail to fulfil their obligations,
such as encouraging parties to a conflict to comply
with international law and the relevant resolutions,
including civilian protection mandates in peacekeeping
operations and establishing impartial investigations and
accountability mechanisms. Where there are violations
and disregard for such international norms, hunger
and poverty increase people's need for humanitarian
assistance. When peace prevails, there is less need for
humanitarian assistance. Conflicts are man-made and
are a driver of misery. Political settlements, preventive
diplomacy and addressing the root causes are therefore
the best solutions.

Despite our collective efforts to prevent famine in
many countries, the food-insecurity crisis continues.
Many people throughout the world, particularly women
and children, are unable to meet their basic needs.
The risk of famine has highlighted the need for better
coordination and increased early-warning mechanisms.
The State of Kuwait stands ready to work with other
Member States in actively contributing to international
efforts to achieve a comprehensive solution to the
problem of conflict-related hunger around the world.

