Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour and
privilege to speak on behalf of the European Union and
the other countries aligning themselves with this
statement.

The European Union strongly and unreservedly
condemns today's suicide bombing of a restaurant in
Tel Aviv, which resulted in the deaths of at least nine
people and injured many others. We offer our sincere
condolences to the families of the victims and our
sympathy to the injured.

The European Union condemns all acts of terror
and violence. It expresses its grave concern about
recent violent events in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip, in particular rocket attacks against Israel from
Gaza and the escalation of Israeli military operations.
We call on both parties to exercise maximum restraint.
We urge the Palestinian Authority to ensure security in
the areas it controls, as well as the safety of
international personnel. We continue to urge the
Palestinian Authority to take effective measures
against terrorism and violence, notably against suicide
attacks and the launching of rockets, and to reform its
security services. We call upon Israel to stop the
practice of extrajudicial killings, which is contrary to
international law. We remind both parties of their
obligations under the road map and existing
agreements, including the Sharm el-Sheikh
understandings and the Agreement on Movement and
Access.

On 10 April, the External Relations Council of
the European Union discussed the situation of the
Middle East peace process following the swearing-in
of the new Palestinian Government and the result of
general elections in Israel.

The External Relations Council noted with grave
concern that the new Palestinian Government has not
committed itself to the three principles laid out by that
Council and the Quartet in their statements of
30 January: non-violence, recognition of Israel's right
to exist and acceptance of existing agreements. It urged
the new Palestinian Government to meet and
implement those three principles and to commit to
President Abbas's platform of peace. That would
further the Palestinian people's aspirations to peace
and statehood.

Consistent with the Quartet statement of
30 March, the European Union is reviewing its
assistance to the Palestinians against the new
Government's commitment to those principles. The
External Relations Council recalled that the absence of
such a commitment would inevitably have an effect on
direct assistance to that Government. The European
Union, however, will continue to provide necessary
assistance to meet the basic needs of the Palestinian
population. In this context, it also underlined the
importance of improved access and movement, and
called on both parties to implement the Agreement on
Movement and Access of 15 November 2005.

The External Relations Council reiterated its aim
to preserve and pursue the democratic functioning and
development of the institutions of the Palestinian
Authority. In that context, it emphasized the central
role of President Abbas as the highest representative of
the Palestinian Authority and the Palestine Liberation
Organization and reiterated its support for him.

The External Relations Council noted the result
of the Israeli general elections and underlined the
importance of a strong commitment by the new Israeli
Government to work towards a negotiated solution of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on existing
agreements, relevant Security Council resolutions and
the principles laid down in the road map.

On final-status issues, the European Union will

not recognize any change to the pre-1967 borders other
than those arrived at by agreement between the parties.
Our Council called on Israel to desist from any action,
such as settlement activities and the construction of the
separation barrier on Palestinian land, that is contrary
to international law and threatens the viability of an
agreed two-State solution. The Council urged Israel to
take steps to improve the humanitarian and economic
situation of the Palestinians, including by resuming
transfers of the withheld Palestinian tax and customs
revenues.

The External Relations Council welcomed the
recent statement of acting Prime Minister Olmert on
seeking negotiations with the Palestinians and the
positive response to it by President Abbas. In that
context, the Council looks forward to early engagement
between the new Israeli Government and the
Palestinians in order to advance a just, viable and
lasting solution which would bring peace to both the
Israeli and the Palestinian peoples.

In conclusion, the European Union reaffirms the
central role of the Quartet in promoting progress in the
peace process.

