Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and to wish you
every success in fulfilling the tasks entrusted to you. I
would also like to thank the previous president, the
Permanent Representative of China, for the efforts he
had made during his presidency.

I thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Alain Le Roy, and the
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support, Ms. Susana
Malcorra, for their comprehensive and candid briefings
this morning. I also thank their staff and salute all
United Nations colleagues who labour tirelessly in the
field on behalf of the Organization, recognizing their
good work in challenging and hazardous conditions.

The initiative of France to hold today's important
debate is very welcome. It comes at a timely moment
as the United Nations is involved in a systemic
exercise of reviewing peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
While Jordan aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Morocco on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, allow me to make additional
observations on the key aspects underlined in the
concept paper prepared by the French delegation
(S/2010/67).

United Nations peacekeeping is an instrument
important to the maintenance of international peace
and security. It cannot be, however, a substitute for a
permanent solution or for addressing the underlying
causes of conflicts. United Nations peacekeeping
operations should be accompanied by an inclusive
peace process that is well planned, carefully designed
and supported by the consent and adherence of the
parties concerned. The Security Council should also
sustain its political support for the process.

Peacekeeping operations have been mandated to
assist, in many different ways, countries torn by
conflict, to create conditions for sustainable peace.
Peacekeeping operations have also come to take on a
broader and more complex range of important new
tasks. That having been said, it is important to note that
no peacekeeping operation is intended to continue
indefinitely, and that the lifecycle of any peacekeeping
operation must at some point include an exit and, or, a
transitional phase.

We strongly concur with the view that exit and
transition strategies are key elements of the success of
any mission and that they ought to be strengthened.
However, an exit should only be considered the result
of achieving mission objectives and not a departure
from the goals supported by the international
community and set forth in Security Council
resolutions. Exit strategies should come into play when
a comprehensive settlement has been implemented and
sustainable peace achieved. Nevertheless, exit
strategies should also be flexible and adjustable to
deteriorations in any given area.
As many of the previous speakers have
articulated, a good exit strategy is facilitated by a good
entrance strategy. Therefore, peacekeeping operations
must have clear, achievable mandates, realistic goals
and end states that are not linked to artificial deadlines
or based on decisions that are irrelevant to the political
and security realities on the ground. To fully achieve
this task, the special representatives of the Secretary-
General and troop- and police-contributing countries
have to be involved in the decisions of the Security
Council at the various stages of peacekeeping
operations. The expertise and experience of troop- and
police-contributing countries, objective information
provided and the situation on the ground should be
taken into consideration.

Moreover, adequate resources should be provided
at all stages of peacekeeping. Budgetary pressures
should not result in the premature termination of a
mission or in scaling it down in a manner that would
make it incapable of performing its tasks efficiently.

Good integrated planning is at the heart of a
coherent response to the needs of countries emerging
from conflict. An effective transition following the
conclusion of a peacekeeping mission must be factored
into the planning process from the outset as part of a
system-wide approach. Planning must specifically
incorporate a comprehensive peacebuilding approach
that addresses the causes as well as the symptoms of
the conflict. Moreover, there should be a clear idea of
what conditions are necessary for transition at the end
of the peacekeeping phase of a mission. The planners
should also take into consideration the significant
planning demands an actual transition will impose.
Transition into peacebuilding requires an examination
of the political, financial, institutional and bureaucratic
implications for all parties, including the Security
Council.

The achievement of a self-sustaining peace in
countries emerging from conflict requires a unified,
long-term effort involving the relevant parts of the
United Nations system as well as other key external
partners, such as the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and regional organizations.
Multidimensional peacekeeping operations constitute
one piece of a broader puzzle and must always be
deployed as part of a long-term strategy.

The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is
intended to play a key role in fostering greater
coherence at the strategic level between the various
players involved in efforts to assist war-torn countries.
Hence, earlier engagement by the PBC might provide a
means for the Security Council to explore an earlier but
still sustainable exit from the military phase of
peacekeeping.

There are no hard and fast criteria, measures or
indicators that can determine when to close down a
peacekeeping operation. Since each situation is unique
and has specific problems, Council decisions will, of
course, have to be based on evolving realities and
considerations. The objective assessment of a given
situation in both the medium- and the long-term
perspectives is required for both exit and transition.
Such an assessment should take into consideration the
political, military, humanitarian and human rights
aspects, the views of parties, and the regional
dimension.

Although it is the prerogative of the Security
Council to decide when a mission has fulfilled its
mandate, close consultations with the troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat
remain essential to any objective assessment of the
progress made towards laying the foundations of a self-
sustaining peace and the likely consequences of a
significant reduction in or the total withdrawal of the
peacekeeping presence.

Peacekeeping operations must aim at achieving
the earliest possible transfer of responsibility to other
actors - first and foremost, local and national
authorities, but also international actors that will
remain behind to assist with development and other
issues. In this regard, some key benchmarks may be
used in determining at which point the process of
consolidation can be safely handed over to the national
authorities, assisted where necessary by international
actors, including United Nations agencies. These
benchmarks may include, for example, the absence of
violent conflict, the return of displaced persons,
progress made in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, the successful
holding of elections and formation of legitimate
political institutions, and progress made in the
establishment of governance and rule-of-law
mechanisms.

The specific set of benchmarks used will vary
from one situation to another, depending on the
underlying causes of the conflict and the dynamics in
play. Whatever the benchmarks adopted, they should
be regarded as interim objectives in the broader effort
to build a self-sustaining peace.

