Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): All of us
have watched in horror over the past two months as
Liberia has descended from hope into despair. Driven by
 

warlords, Liberia has careened off the road to peace and
national reconciliation.

Only a few months ago, we spoke hopefully of the
Abuja peace Agreement, of the pioneer role of the
Economic Community of West African States Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) as a regional peace-keeping force, and
of the important contribution which the United Nations -
particularly UNOMIL - was making to the peace
process. A transitional Council of State had been
installed, and we looked forward to elections in August.
We expected Liberia's leaders to complete the remaining
steps required under Abuja so that Liberians could finally
enjoy the peace they have sought for six long years of
civil war. And now the Secretary-General tells us in his
report that fighting is seriously jeopardizing the Abuja
peace process and has reversed the gains made over the
past few months.

As Ambassador Albright observed after her Visit to
Monrovia in January, the problem in Liberia is a struggle
among a few elites for power. In April, these faction
leaders demonstrated their commitment to their own
interests rather than the good of their people. They
reignited the violence; they turned Monrovia from a safe
haven into a war zone; they looted the equipment of relief
agencies whose only goal was to help the Liberian people.
Today fighters openly drive convoys of stolen United
Nations and non-governmental organization vehicles
around Monrovia. My Government was forced to conduct
an emergency evacuation of most of the international
community from Liberia. Only a few UNOMIL military
observers remain, and the fighting often precludes them
from any attempt to carry out the most basic tasks of their
mandate. We are outraged by the looting of the United
Nations, the non-governmental organizations, the
churches, the hospitals and the homes of Liberian people.

What can we do? The answer is not to abandon
Liberia. We agree with the views of the Secretary-General
in his report - the international community must remain
engaged in the efforts to provide relief and to bring peace
to the people of Liberia. The regional countries of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
have taken the lead in this respect. The meeting of their
Foreign Ministers in Accra on 7 May developed a plan to
restart the peace process. This Mechanism for Returning
Liberia to the Abuja Agreement provides concrete steps
needed to restart the peace process. These steps include
restoration of the cease-fire, withdrawal of all fighters
from Monrovia, deployment of ECOMOG throughout the
city and restoration of Monrovia as a safe haven.

These steps are necessary if there is to be continued
international involvement. This is the message that my

 

Government delivered to the Liberian parties through high-
level delegations we sent to Monrovia in the past weeks.
We commend the ECOWAS countries for their clarity of
purpose and their dedication in the face of tremendous
difficulties. We believe that the Security Council must
support this important initiative by the countries of the
region.

The Accra meeting has given Liberia yet another
chance to return to the path of peace. Once again Liberian
leaders must decide what course to pursue. We hope they
will implement the recent agreements reached in Accra. The
Liberian warlords must order their forces to disarm and
leave Monrovia in peace. ECOMOG commanders must
reassert their control over Monrovia. And the Council of
State must begin to act like the Transitional Government
that was envisioned in the Abuja Agreement. And by the
end of this week the Security Council must decide on the
future of UNOMIL.

We are heartened by the continuing commitment of
the ECOWAS States and by the steps ECOMOG has taken
to deploy throughout Monrovia. We encourage them to
continue such efforts. Therefore, we support extending
UNOMIL's mandate for three months. We do so because
we have not given up hope for Liberia - hope that
Liberians will take hold of their destiny and recover their
country from the grip of those who only wish to destroy it;
hope that law and order can again be brought to Liberia;
hope that Liberia can be liberated from war.

Over the next three months my Government will be
watching closely to see if any of these hopes are fulfilled.
If not, we and the Security Council will have to re-evaluate
our approach. And so again we urge all those in Liberia,
particularly the faction leaders, to use this time to meet the
conditions ECOWAS has laid out and offer their people the
chance for peace that they so much deserve.

