Mr. Sharma (Nepal): Accept, Sir, our warmest
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of October. I
thank you for convening this timely and important
debate on an issue of common interest.

Terrorism imposes on nations political instability,
economic dislocation and social disharmony, holding
back their development and throwing them into the
abyss of mayhem and anarchy. Prolonged terrorism
frays the very fabric of society. It undermines the rights
and dignity of people, frightens them and disrupts their
normal life.

The scourge of terrorism is not new. It has long
been inflicting unspeakable pain and destruction on
many nations and peoples. Nepal, like many other
countries, has been living through horrible uncertainty
and brutality, in our case caused by the Maoist
terrorists as they wage a bloody war against human
rights and the freedoms of people, and against the
constitutional monarchy, which is the symbol of our
national unity.

However, the world woke up to the
unprecedented horror of terrorism on 11 September last
year, when people from far and wide witnessed
passenger jets flying into the World Trade Center and
the Pentagon, tearing down those monuments of
American wealth and power and killing thousands of
people. It was a nightmare for the United States, as
well as for the entire world community.

It was testimony that terrorism had gone global in
its scope and had become a grave threat to international
peace and security. It was evident that the bull had to
be taken by the horns, and it was critical for the global
community to work in concert to stamp out this menace
and remove it from the face of the earth.

It has been a year since the world community
stood up and swung into action against the menace. In
a rare display of unity and resolve among nations, the
General Assembly unequivocally expressed its outrage,
and the Security Council adopted resolution 1373
(2001) to tackle the threat that undermines our
civilization and which challenges the principles and
values the United Nations upholds.

Thanks to the unwavering commitment of nations
and to the commendable work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, the momentum is alive and well
one year on. The Committee has been able to perform
its rather dry and demanding work in a remarkably
friendly, interactive and constructive manner, fostering
a unique sense of partnership with the nations it works
with.

Nepal strongly supports the work and approach of
the Committee and underlines the need to continue it
vigorously in the days to come. We must succeed in
our collective quest to defeat terrorism because, if we
failed, the consequences could be unimaginably dire.

For instance, last time it was an attack on
commercial and office buildings. The next time,
terrorists could target nuclear installations, spilling
radioactive clouds into the air and into cities and
towns. They may use chemical and biological weapons.
They may some day even use crude nuclear weapons as
well, causing unthinkable devastation to life and
property. Those would be real possibilities, not
fictional imaginings, if terrorists stole, or rogue States
shared, the requisite information and technology to do
those things. To avert such prospects and to eradicate
terrorism, the global community must continue taking
sustained and comprehensive measures to enforce the
existing global treaties and laws.

Nepal, as the Council knows, is a party to five
global anti-terrorism treaties and has enacted a new law
that incorporates the provisions spelled out in those
treaties and which addresses our own specific needs in
dealing with the Maoist violence. Several other
regulatory and administrative steps to give full effect to
the law are also under way.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee's work, we
believe, will help countries to identify the gaps in their
measures and to respond appropriately to bridge them.
However, the Committee must ensure that there is more
specificity and clarity in its questions so that it can get
concrete and factual answers from countries in their
responses.

Once gaps and difficulties have been identified,
the Committee should be able to assist nations that
need its help to evolve and to strengthen their legal and
structural frameworks to implement the anti-terrorism
instruments more effectively.

On a different plane, there is a clear need for a
comprehensive international convention against
terrorism to tie up the loose ends and to bring
coherence and vitality to our shared anti-terrorism
efforts.

Aside from legal measures, concerted endeavours
to reduce poverty and to promote growth and
sustainable development in developing countries are
critical to curb terrorism. The poor must be given hope
and opportunity through education, health services and
employment so that terrorists cannot sell utopian
dreams to exploit the common masses.

As we throw ourselves into the quest of stamping
out terrorism, we should not tolerate political
expediency that may cloud our judgement and make
room for double standards. There is no good terrorism
or friendly terrorists. They are all evil and they seldom
spare their benefactors and protectors, let alone their
sworn enemies.

