Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): This debate is taking place
at an important inflection point in the 17-year history of
the current conflict in Afghanistan. Pakistan strongly
condemns the recent spate of terrorist attacks in
Afghanistan. There is no justification for attacks that
kill or maim innocent children, women and men.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/165)
paints a grim and bleak picture of the situation in
Afghanistan - a continued political impasse that
threatens the country's unity, an economy in stress and
decline, corruption, drug production and trafficking
and a security environment that in 2017 witnessed a
67 per cent spike in airstrikes, an increase in terrorist
attacks and the highest number of civilian casualties
ever recorded in Afghanistan. Moreover, the continuing
presence of large numbers of terrorist groups and
foreign terrorist fighters in Afghanistan pose a threat to
the long-term stability of Afghanistan, its neighbours,
including my country, and the entire region.

Against that troubled backdrop, President Ashraf
Ghani's recent proposal for a dignified process of
talks without preconditions with the Taliban offers an
opportunity to construct and initiate a credible peace
process. For over a decade now, Pakistan has advocated
the restoration of peace in Afghanistan through a
negotiated settlement between Kabul and the Afghan
Taliban. The international community has also endorsed
the goal of a negotiated settlement promoted through an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned reconciliation process
as the best, and indeed only, way to realize lasting
peace, stability and prosperity in Afghanistan.

Pakistan will play its part in encouraging the
initiation of such a dignified negotiation process. We
reiterate and renew our call on the Taliban to renounce
violence and agree to join the peace talks. However,
the task ahead is complex, arduous and delicate. Above
all, seizing the opportunity requires an understanding
that the simultaneous resort to more kinetic actions, the
escalation of military force to shift the battlefield, will
evoke an escalation of attacks by the insurgents and
erode, rather than advance, the prospect of initiating
the envisaged peace process. After 17 years, both the
Afghan Government and its coalition allies, as well
as the Taliban, should have learned that neither can
impose a military victory on the other. The renewed
escalation of force will impose further suffering on the
people of Afghanistan.

Secondly, while the talks would be Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned, other parties involved, including the
United States, would need to engage in and contribute
to the negotiation process.

Thirdly, some regional Powers and Afghan parties
have remained consistently hostile to reconciliation
between the Afghan Government and the Afghan
Taliban. The international community must oppose
their anticipated effort to derail the peace process
outlined by President Ashraf Ghani.

Fourthly, there is growing and widespread concern
regarding the rapid increase in the presence of Da'esh
in Afghanistan. A recent report notes that the Afghan
Government controls only 18 per cent of the country's
districts and has influence in an additional 38 per cent.
The rest, sadly, is ungoverned. It is in the ungoverned
and uncontested spaces in Afghanistan's north and east
that Da'esh and its affiliates are installing themselves
and threatening Afghanistan and its neighbours. The
elimination of Da'esh and its affiliates must be accorded
high priority in the endeavour to achieve lasting peace
in the region.

Fifthly, the power of assorted terrorist groups and
criminal gangs in Afghanistan cannot be broken when
they continue to receive a steady stream of revenue
from drug production and drug trafficking. The Afghan
Government and its international partners must brake
the nexus between drug production and terrorism.

Pakistan, my country, has the highest stake in
a peaceful and stable Afghanistan. My country has
suffered gravely due to the decades ofwar, violence and
terrorism emanating from our neighbouring country.
Over the past four years, Pakistan has successfully
turned the tide against terrorism by conducting the
largest and most sustained anti-terrorism campaign
anywhere in the world, with the deployment of over
200,000 of our troops. That campaign will continue
until all terrorists, without distinction, are eliminated.

Today the threat of terrorism in Pakistan emanates
principally from outside of our borders. As Pakistan's
army chief, General Qamar Bajwa, noted in remarks
to the recent Munich Security Conference, of the 131
terrorist attacks on our territory, 123 were conceived,
planned and executed from Afghanistan. That is
happening despite the presence of the most powerful
military alliance in Afghanistan. We want to see the
elimination of the sanctuaries where those terrorists
operate against my country.

Pakistan also requires effective cooperation from
Kabul and the coalition forces to control and manage
the long border between Pakistan and Afghanistan. My
country has nearly 1,000 border posts, but on the other
side there are only 220. In one stretch of 648 kilometres,
there is not a single Afghan post. Yet the responsibility
for containing regional terrorism and cross-border
movement is placed on my country. Pakistan plans to
fence and electronically monitor the entire border with
Afghanistan. That project should be actively supported
by the international community and Afghanistan.

My country has offered unprecedented hospitality
and support to the Afghan people, our brothers and
sisters, over the past several decades of their travail
and tragedy provoked by internal strife and foreign
military interventions. We continue to host the largest
protracted presence of refugees anywhere in the
world and have delayed sending them back again on
compassionate grounds.

Finally, as Pakistan, the Afghan Government and
the coalition work together to evolve an agreed course
of action for peace and stability in Afghanistan, it is
essential that all parties refrain from campaigns of
vilification and coercion. Pakistan's cooperation cannot
be garnered by pressure or intimidation.

To conclude, allow me to convey a message
from my Government and my people to our sisters in
Afghanistan. We stand with them in support of their
rights and liberty. We regard an assault on their rights
as a threat to our rights, and indeed to the rights of
women everywhere. We are together in the pursuit of
our shared goal to ensure a life of dignity and liberty
for every girl and every woman, wherever they may be.

