Ms. Dominguez Alvarez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We commend the Netherlands on its
presidency in the month of March and wish our
neighbour Peru every success this month. We also wish
to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his briefing,
and Ambassador Denis Regis for his statement.

Chile aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti, and would like to make the following
additional observations.

The United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and the United Nations country
team in Haiti play a fundamental supporting role in
Haiti with regard to its socioeconomic development, the
strengthening of its institutions and respect for human
rights. In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-
General's recommendation for the Security Council
to broaden MINUJUSTH's mandate to reflect the
timetable set by the gradual exit strategy that is clear
and adapted to the realities on the ground. We cannot
afford to lose what we have gained over the past 14
years on the path to stability and development.

We stress that conditions on the ground, coordination
among all actors and, especially, the priorities of the
Haitian Government must always be taken into account.
That is particularly important if the United Nations
is to successfully finalize its transition to a presence
that will continue to support the Government's efforts
towards peacekeeping and peacebuilding without a
peacekeeping mission. We recognize that the Mission
will be able to consolidate its gains over the past 14
years only with the close collaboration of all national
actors and the active commitment of the international
community. As a police-contributing country, we will
continue working with the Organization to provide
MINUJUSTH with adequate human resources to ensure
the fulfilment of its important mandate.

Chile welcomes the significant reduction of cholera
transmission and deaths in Haiti. We also recognize
the progress made in the implementation of the United
Nations new approach to cholera in Haiti through the
recent selection ofprojects to be financed by the United
Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust
Fund, in line with tracks 1 and 2 of the new approach.
We particularly welcome the consultative process with
civil society, local leaders and cholera victims that was
carried out to identify some of these projects with a
view to improving the lives of victims and reducing
the transmission of cholera to zero. We reiterate our
support for the Special Envoy for Haiti, Ms. Josette
Sheeran, in her important task of implementing the new
strategy, and we call upon the international community
and other actors to contribute to the Fund and other
projects that support its strategy. Chile supplemented
its contribution to the Trust Fund in February 2017
through its financial support of other water and
sanitation projects, in keeping with track 1 of the new
approach, and we hope to continue supporting such
projects as long as necessary.

While the humanitarian situation in Haiti has
improved significantly, we also note that there have also
been various setbacks due to the increased intensity
and frequency of natural disasters in the region. The
context makes it even more important to address the
underlying causes of vulnerability and to bolster the
resilience of the country through preparation before
disasters and rapid recovery after them.

In that connection, we welcome the 2017-2021
humanitarian response plan of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), as
the plan has integrated a broader perspective of the
needs of the country with a view to breaking the cycle
of humanitarian crises, while promoting investment
in advance and the humanitarian development nexus.
We urge all Member States to support OCHA and the
United Nations country team in the implementation of
the humanitarian response plan, including contributing
to the four areas of cooperation that OCHA has
identified as the most beneficial to the consolidation of
development in Haiti.

Chile hopes it can continue to contribute bilaterally,
inter alia, to the management of natural disasters, the
building of earthquake-resistant construction and the
strengthening of the judicial system through the training
of firefighters, community emergency response teams
and judges, in line with Haiti's priorities.

In conclusion, we reiterate Chile's commitment to
Haiti and its people, while reaffirming the importance
of continuing to stand with this beautiful and sisterly
nation, which is responsible for its own development.

