Mr. Cevik (Turkey): Let me begin by thanking the
Chinese presidency for organizing this debate.

The globe is experiencing challenging times.
The number and intensity of violent conflicts are on
the rise. Xenophobia, discrimination, attacks against
migrants and intolerance threaten the very nature
of peaceful coexistence, while epidemics, terrorism
and cybercrime add to those challenges. However,
budgetary and administrative constraints, coupled
with the increased divisions within the Council and
the United Nations, impede the effectiveness of our
response capabilities. One tragic example is Syria.
In the words of the Spokesperson for the Secretary-
General on Syria the other day,

"The last four years of war have led to the deaths
of over 200,000 civilians, the greatest refugee crisis
of modern times and created an environment in
which extremist groups and terrorist organizations
such as ISIL/Daesh flourish".

Any failure of the United Nations to react to critical
issues threatening international peace and security
undermines the credibility of this Organization.
Therefore, rethinking how to enable a more effective
United Nations response to emerging threats is
particularly critical. There is no doubt that the Charter
must be the guiding light in our endeavours. However,
we must also adapt our response to present-day realities,
which are different than those of 70 years ago. We must
build upon the lessons we have learned since the end
of the Second World War, always bearing in mind the
very first Article of the Charter, which emphasizes that
the purpose of this Organization is to take effective
collective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to peace.

I would like to highlight some of our priorities in
making the United Nations system more responsive,
efficient, effective and transparent. First, the quest
for a more democratic, representative, transparent,
effective and accountable Security Council must be
prioritized. The interconnectedness of the different
aspects ofthe reform agenda also requires a holistic and
comprehensive attitude to reform.

Secondly, we also support the review processes this
year on peace operations, peacebuilding and gender.
When combined, those processes aim to provide
comprehensive answers regarding the United Nations
response to the interconnected nature of current global
threats and to preventing relapses into conflict. They
should also address the increasing complexity of
peacekeeping environments, where unconventional
threats are increasingly affecting the work and security
of United Nations personnel.

Thirdly, the effective use of Chapter VI tools to
promote conflict prevention should be prioritized.
The guiding principles of mediation, such as the
consent of local parties, the impartiality of mediators,
the inclusivity of the mediation process and national
ownership all have a solid foundation in the Charter.
The Group of Friends ofMediation, which is co-chaired
by Turkey and Finland, strives to increase the role of
mediation in the United Nations system.

The fourth element is the nexus between security,
development and human rights. The priorities stated
in the synthesis report of the Secretary-General
(A/69/700) - dignity, people, justice, partnership and
prosperity - should guide our peace and development
work ahead, so that no one is left behind. Encouraging
policies that lead to increased participation,
inclusiveness and the economic empowerment of all
segments of society while promoting good governance,
human rights and the rule of law are key to sustainable
peace and development.

Fifthly, the sovereign equality, territorial integrity
and political independence of Member States are clearly
stipulated in the Charter. Cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations is another prerequisite
for promoting local ownership. In addition, successful
partnerships with local Governments, civil society, the
private sector and academia will not only foster local
ownership, but prove useful in terms of efficient and
effective resource mobilization.

Finally, there is a need for serious international
debate to narrow the gaps between diverging views on
issues such as stigmatization, stereotyping, intolerance,
racism, discrimination, freedom of expression, religion
and belief. The Alliance of Civilizations, launched
by Turkey and Spain, provides a vital framework for
overcoming artificial divides and building bridges
across cultures and religions.

We believe that we have the necessary toolbox to
improve the United Nations response to the challenges
and threats the world faces. The Charter provides the
most important tool in that respect. If there is sufficient
political will, there is no reason for us not to succeed.

In relation to the crisis in Syria, we categorically
deny the baseless allegations raised by a certain
delegation just a little while ago. The recent operation
conducted by the Turkish armed forces was for the
evacuation of the Suleiman Shah Memorial Outpost, a
10-acre plot of land of Turkish territory inside Syria,
which was facing an imminent threat from Daesh. The
operation, which lasted nine hours, was conducted
on the basis of Turkey's rights, which emanate from
international agreements and international law. The
President of the Security Council, the Secretary-
General and others were informed of the operation the
very same day.

