Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): First, allow me to extend my warmest congratulations to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this month. Our thanks also go to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, for his insightful briefing. We express our support for the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), which continues to make valuable contributions to conflict prevention, peacebuilding, sustainable development and cooperation § in the subregion. My country takes this opportunity to commend some of the positive advances witnessed in the subregion, particularly the commitment made by members of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), along with Chad and Mauritania, to enhancing their engagement and cooperation in responding to terrorism. We also welcome the political dialogues in Liberia and Senegal, the progress made by Gambia on constitutional reform and transitional justice, and the successful electoral processes in Mauritania and Guinea-Bissau. Notwithstanding this progress, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is troubled by the terrorist threat, the insecurity and the humanitarian and development concerns that persist in the subregion. In our opinion, UNOWAS is strategically placed to ensure synergy and complementarity among the security plans of various countries, thereby guaranteeing that a comprehensive vision exists to tackle the festering cells of violent extremism and organized criminal activities. Additionally, we recognize the work of the Peacebuilding Commission, as well as the Economic and Social Council, which adopted a resolution last year on the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. We would like to encourage this coordination among United Nations organs. One of the main objectives of pursuing a lasting and sustainable peace in the subregion is to enhance people’s lives. Unfortunately, we have learned from the reports of the Secretary-General, for example, his most recent report (S/2019/1005), and the briefing by Special Representative Chambas, that millions of people continue to be negatively affected by instability in the region in the form of displacement, food insecurity, the risk of acute malnutrition and a lack of basic services. We commend the entities and people who continue to engage on the humanitarian front despite the challenges and risks involved. We further encourage the support of the international community to take the necessary measures to sustain their noble work. Any solution to the instability that plagues various areas across West Africa and the Sahel region must meaningfully recognize and target the root causes of those conflicts. Strategies must therefore be comprehensive, incorporating elements of sustainable development, climate adaptation and_ resilience measures, along with human rights protection and promotion in line with national laws. We welcome the continued analysis of the link between climate and security made in the report of the Secretary-General, as well as any future further collaboration similar to that being pursued by ECOWAS and various United Nations offices on this issue of critical importance. The report of the Secretary-General contained in document S/2019/1005 makes reference to the adverse consequences of climate change in the Lake Chad basin and parts of the Sahel. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is gravely concerned about the impact of climate change in West Africa and the Sahel. In the immediate term, we need to mobilize to support climate adaptation in the region. Member States must do all that we can to lessen this threat multiplier by supporting adaptation measures as a matter of urgency and by realizing our collective responsibility to reduce our carbon emissions for the sake of future generations and a lasting and sustainable peace. In that vein, it is important to note that young people comprise 65 per cent of the population of West Africa and the Sahel. The words of the late Vincentian poet, Daniel Williams, are apt in this context: “[O]nly the future is ours to desecrate. The present is the past, and the past our fathers’ mischief”. These words remind us of the weight we collectively bear in our quest to secure a bright and prosperous future for succeeding generations. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is committed to this goal and looks forward to engaging constructively to this end.
