Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to begin my statement in
explanation of vote with words of support for Haiti and
our hopes that we will see it sustainably stabilized as
soon as possible. I am not going to repeat what I said a
week ago on the subject (see S/PV.8220), but will recall
only that almost all the speakers on 3 April noted the
encouraging developments in the situation in Haiti and
mentioned the possibility of the peacekeeping mission's
gradual withdrawal and transfer of authority to the
Government of Haiti. The latest report (S/2018/241)
of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) contained similar sentiments that
were affirmed by the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
after his visit to Haiti.

Nevertheless, during the work on the draft of
resolution 2410 (2018) extending the mandate of the
Mission, we were surprised to find that the authors had
decided to toughen a key provision of the document
that had remained unchanged since the peacekeeping
presence in Haiti began in 2004, which is the reference
to the procedure for the application of Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, which provides for
the use of sanctions and military force. For the past 14
years, the peacekeeping presence in the country operated
under Chapter VII year after year, but its application
was carefully limited to the specific tasks of ensuring
the physical security of the civilian population and the
peacekeepers themselves. It has been done that way
in other cases as well, for example in resolution 2386
(2017), on Abyei, which, by the way, was also initiated
by our American colleagues. The new Mission in Haiti
is focused on helping the Government to strengthen its
own capacity and to monitor human rights.

This year, despite all the discussions about the
speedy transfer of the Mission's functions to the host
Government, several Council members decided to
up the pressure and did so in an inexplicable hurry,
presenting the draft in blue more than a week before the
expiry of the Mission's mandate. Why did the authors
not use that time to hold a thorough discussion and
find an acceptable consensus? I would like to ask those
who supported this approach what has changed in the
human rights situation, in a country where for a long
time there has been no armed conflict, so that it has
suddenly become a threat to international peace and
security. Or is this another attempt to use the Security
Council to put pressure on a sovereign State? It looks
very like yet another effort to speculate on the subject
of human rights in one of the world's most important
international forums, established exclusively to discuss
the most dangerous threats to international peace. There
can be no question that the situation in Haiti bears no
relation to that.

I would like to remind the Council that a week ago,
most of those States advocated strengthening Haitians'
sense of national responsibility and the importance
of the Mission's cooperation with the Government.
But in fact the resolution ignores the position of Port-
au-Prince on this crucial issue, which is well known,
since the Security Council visited Haiti very recently.
We also cannot help noticing the increasingly critical
attitude to the United Nations Mission on the part of
the people of Haiti. That is an extremely worrying fact
that should be attended to as a matter of priority. We
believe that such approaches will not contribute to the
effectiveness of the Mission's work. We are already
seeing corresponding signs that are cause for concern.
It is good that Under-Secretary-General Lacroix knows
about the misunderstandings between the Head of
the Mission and the host country, as he alluded to in
his statement.

There is one other worrying issue. A number of
delegations that regularly and publicly express their full
support for the United Nations zero-tolerance policy for
sexual crimes have refused to help to implement it. The
result is that the resolution overlooks crimes in which
representatives of non-governmental organizations
accredited to the United Nations are involved, despite
the fact that Haitian society has desperately urged the
international community to focus on the problem. We
have heard no intelligible explanations for such double
standards. In this regard, we appeal to the Mission
leadership and the Secretariat to inform the Council
of known flagrant cases, for which the necessary
tools exist.

Since we believe that international support is
critical to Haiti at this very important stage, we did
not decide to block the resolution in its current form.
The Mission will continue, in strict accordance with its
mandate, to provide assistance to the host country in
upholding the rule of law and strengthening the capacity
of its law-enforcement bodies. However, for the reasons
I have stated, we cannot support the resolution as it
is written. We insist that invoking Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, if it is even applicable to
the situation in Haiti, should be contemplated only as a
last resort for issues of physical safety.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that we are
unfortunately witnesses to the fact that in their attempts
to put pressure on everyone involved for no reason,
some well-known Council members have once again
ruined another consensus vote, despite the fact that
there are already too few topics on which the Council
has a united position. This time, colleagues decided to
toughen their position on a country where the situation
is evolving more or less positively, the United Nations
Mission is functioning and there are hopes that it can be
gradually drawn down. There is no way we can agree
with that approach. As a result, the significance of
today's decision is seriously undermined. Was it worth
it? It might have been better to agree on a consensus-
based resolution rather than moving it up by a week.
But regardless ofthat, we want to express our support to
Port-au-Prince and affirm that Russia will continue to
work to ensure that the results of the Security Council's
efforts will help to truly normalize the situation in Haiti
and strengthen its sovereignty and self-sufficiency.

