Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): While it did not block
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2015/ 15
and joined in the consensus, the delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela does not subscribe
to paragraphs 8 and 10 of the statement because we
believe that they violate the sovereignty and the right to
self-determination of the Syrian people by promoting
its political transition, including the establishment of
a transitional Government, without its consent, and
thereby contravenes the Charter of the United Nations.

The legitimacy of a Government is reflected in
respect for its Constitution and the support ofits people,
expressed through the vote, within the framework of the
sovereign determination of its own political, economic
and social systems. Venezuela believes that, to that end,
the establishment of a transitional Government in Syria
with full executive powers would violate the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations with respect to
equality among States, as well as respect for the self-
determination of peoples, which would represent a
very dangerous precedent for international peace and
security.

The Council must be impartial and objective in
addressing the Syrian crisis. Disregarding from the
outset the legitimacy of the Government of President
Bashar Al-Assad violates the sovereignty of the Syrian
people, contrary to the presidential statement that we
have adopted. The Council could make serious mistakes
in managing this crisis if it were motivated by the
national interests of some of its members by disregarding
the weighty and important role that the Government of
Syria will continue to play in resolving the conflict.
We are concerned by the fact that some members of
the Council resort to a double standard with respect
to assessing a given Government's legitimacy or lack
thereof. We must therefore question the legitimacy of
other Governments that are in situations similar to that
of Syria yet enjoy the political support of those Council
members on the basis of national considerations.

We have repeatedly stressed that a peaceful solution
to the armed conflict in that brotherly country cannot be
found without the participation of the Syrian authorities
representing their own people. The Government of that
country is waging a stubborn campaign against the
terrorism, carried out by Violent non-State actors, of
which it has been a victim through the violent actions
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS),
the Al-Nusra Front and the Jaish Al-Fateh, among
others. The fight against these terrorist organizations
requires the wholehearted support of the international
community to defeat the extremism feeding on chaos,
hatred and intolerance.

A bloody and terrible struggle against terrorism is
being fought on the front lines of Syria. If the Syrian
Government of President Bashar Al-Assad were
defeated by force of arms and the black flag of ISIS
were to fly over Damascus, culminating in the greatest
and most terrible tragedy for the Syrian people - even
worse than the current situation - its devastating and
destabilizing effects would be felt in neighbouring
countries, the Mediterranean and throughout Europe.
We exercise our responsibility by sounding the alarm
against this situation today, before it is too late.

Venezuela has insisted on the need to avoid the
repetition of the serious political mistakes committed in
Iraq and Libya, where with false evidence and under the
pretext of protecting civilians a change of Government
was promoted through military intervention, resulting
in an institutional collapse of those States that was
subsequently exploited by terrorist organizations to
promote, with the support of foreign actors, their
criminal agenda at the expense of their peoples'
aspirations to peace, social justice and development.

We consider it important to stress that institutional
collapse in those countries has exacerbated the Violence
in the Middle East and Africa emanating from the
presence and actions of Al-Qaida and ISIS terrorists.
The weapons that were supplied to non-State actors to
overthrow those Governments are the very ones that
terrorist groups are now using to shed the blood of
the peoples of those countries. We therefore demand
an end to the financial and military assistance being
provided to these criminal groups, in accordance with
the resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly.

We have heard the notorious complaints about the
use of chemical weapons by ISIS, which is clearly a war
crime and a crime against humanity that we condemn
unequivocally. Those responsible must be brought to
justice in response to such heinous acts.

The procedure applied by some members of
the Council in drafting the presidential statement
adopted today lacked the inclusiveness required in any
negotiation process. The elected members of this body
we again not invited to participate in the preparation of
that document. It was presented in its final form by the
permanent members for adoption by the other members
of this body. Such practices affect the transparency and
working methods of the Security Council, which acts
on behalf of the States Members, as provided for in the
Charter of the United Nations. Council unity requires
the full participation of its members in building
decisions concerning international peace and security
that are mandatory on all States of the international
community. We reiterate our call for an end to this
practice undemocratic because it erodes the credibility
and legitimacy of this organ.

Venezuela, as an elected member of the Security
Council, will always raise its voice and lay out
its reasons to the conscience of the international
community and the General Assembly as the organ that
embodies the legitimacy of the United Nations. Despite
disassociating itself from paragraphs 8 and 10 of the
presidential statement for the reasons I have just given,
Venezuela reaffirms its own constructive spirit in not
preventing the adoption of this document because we
sincerely believe that it offers an opportunity for peace
and political negotiations.

In conclusion, our country reaffirms its full support
for the diplomatic efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
whom we trust for his recognized human qualities
and diplomatic skills, which will help him to bring
all parties, including the Syrian Government, into the
negotiation process and the promotion of a negotiated,
peaceful and political solution to the conflict. We
reiterate our commitment to the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of the Syrian Arab
Republic, in line with international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations.

The meeting rose at 3.25 pm.
