Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing.

With increasing globalization, the links and
exchanges among countries have grown ever closer as
the global movement of materials and people
accelerates. At the same time, the problem of illicit
cross-border trafficking and movement, exemplified by
arms proliferation, drug trafficking and the spread of
terrorism, is ever more serious. Lately, arms
proliferation in West Africa and the Sahel region and
the turbulence in Mali have raised widespread concern.
Granted, arms proliferation in the region has its own
history, but recent regional conflicts have aggravated it.

I wish to take this opportunity to emphasize three
points related to strengthening international
cooperation in fighting illicit cross-border trafficking
and movement.

First, border management falls within the
sovereignty of Member States. National Governments
shoulder the primary responsibility for strengthening
their border and customs control and for preventing
and fighting all types of illicit cross-border trafficking
and movement. We hope that countries, in accordance
with relevant United Nations and Security Council
resolutions, will fulfil their obligations under relevant
international conventions and international law,
improve domestic legislation, strengthen
interdepartmental coordination and cooperation,
increase law enforcement capabilities and take
practical steps to strengthen border management.

Secondly, we support international cooperation in
fighting illicit cross-border trafficking and movement.
Such cooperation should focus on assisting countries in
need of capacity-building. In the meantime, countries
differ from one another in their border management
practices. While providing assistance, the international
community should fully respect the national
circumstances, desires and choices of countries
receiving aid, adhere to the principles and purposes of
the United Nations Charter, and respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Member States.

Thirdly, it is essential to bring into full play the
advantages of the various United Nations agencies so
as to create synergy. In assisting Member States to

strengthen their border management capacities, it is
advisable to fully take advantage of existing United
Nations agencies, including, for instance, by
formulating best practices. The various United Nations
agencies should, in accordance with their respective
terms of reference and specialties, properly allocate
tasks and strengthen their coordination. The Security
Council has the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. It should therefore
focus its attention on illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement that threaten international peace and
security, and avoid duplication of labour and disrupting
the functions of other United Nations bodies.

