Mr. Vaz Patto (Portugal): I would like to
begin by thanking the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and Mr. Spoerri for
their respective briefings. I also wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this important
open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, an issue to which Portugal attaches great
importance. We welcome the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/2) that was adopted earlier today and in
particular the establishment of systematic reporting on
this issue every 18 months.

Portugal, naturally, shares the views that will be
expressed by the European Union later on, but let me
underline some aspects of particular significance to my
country.

As emphasized today by our briefers, civilians have
in recent months continued to represent the majority of
the victims of conflicts. Too often, men, women and
children are not spared the effects of hostilities and are
still frequently deliberately targeted by various parties.
Despite international efforts, sexual violence continues
to be used as a tactic of war, and the recruitment and use
ofchildren in armed conflicts are still a reality in several
countries. Such flagrant violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law fuel further instability,
violence and conflict. Attacks against civilians are
unacceptable wherever they take place - in Syria, in
Mali, in Somalia, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or in the areas affected by the Lord's Resistance
Army - and should be vigorously condemned, as
they were condemned in the past, in Libya or in C6te
d'Ivoire.

It is clear that in today's world, when civilians
are under threat, the United Nations and the Security
Council in particular must respond promptly. It is
therefore even more frustrating that, in the case of Syria,
the Council has not responded to the expectations of the
international community and to the hopes of civilians
on the ground.
Learning from past situations such as those in
Rwanda and Srebrenica, the Security Council has
developed a normative framework and concrete
instruments to conduct its action in this area in an
effective and accountable manner. Resolution 1894
(2009) provides a solid normative framework for United
Nations peacekeeping operations to protect civilians.
Eight peacekeeping missions on three continents are
endowed with strong protection mandates; we welcome
the consistent baseline guidance and predeployment
and in-mission training being developed by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to enhance the
understanding - and improve the implementation - of
the concept of protection of civilians. Local strategies
and improved engagement with communities have been
devised, and all of those tools have had a significant
impact on enhancing the protection of civilian
populations. But more can and should be done regarding
the prevention of conflicts. Peacekeeping missions
are a remarkable tool but a limited one that cannot be
multiplied ad infinitum.

Furthermore, the prevention of conflict is always
the most effective way to protect civilians, and the
Council can use very efficiently its existing tools,
including presidential statements, resolutions, briefings
and consultations, to convey robust political messages
when the situation demands it or the protection of
civilians is at stake. It can also be proactive, and
develop new tools to increase its role in the protection
of civilians by addressing more situations of concern.

The work of the Security Council in promoting
accountability for violations of humanitarian and
human rights law represents another important aspect
ofits efforts to protect civilians. The role ofthe Council
in this area has been central to progress, since it has
established significant precedents by requesting that
fact-finding mechanisms be created to investigate
alleged violation and that reparations be provided
for victims, and by promoting individual criminal
responsibility. At a workshop that Portugal organized
with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs in November 2011, this practice of the Council
aimed at ensuring accountability for violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law
was reviewed. Some interesting ideas on promoting
consistency and avoiding the perception of selectivity
in the Council's actions were put forward and would, in
our view, merit further discussion.

Countering impunity, whether through national
institutions or the International Criminal Court (ICC),
does indeed have a deterrent effect at the domestic,
regional and international level, and is a fundamental
tool for preventing further violations. In that regard,
Portugal would once again like to stress the important
role ofthe ICC in fighting impunity for the most serious
crimes. We would also like to highlight the crucial
role that the Human Rights Council is playing in the
fight against impunity; the international commissions
of inquiry on Cote d'Ivoire, Libya and Syria have
investigated human rights violations, established the
facts and circumstances of those violations and have
made recommendations on accountability measures.
The Council has certainly benefited from the work of
the commissions, which will, it is to be hoped, not only
contribute to enhancing accountability but also help
to promote peaceful and durable solutions to existing
crises.

There is no question that the international
community, as a whole, and the Security Council, in
particular, is dealing with a growing responsibility to
protect civilians, especially women and children, in
the context of armed conflicts. Here I would like to
recall the concept of responsibility while protecting put
forward by Brazil in November 2011 (see S/PV.6650),
which merits thorough consideration in the context
of the responsibility to protect, specifically of how to
improve its implementation when the use of force is
authorized by the Security Council.

When the Council has had at its disposal the tools
necessary to protect civilians under attack and has
received sufficient, credible and timely information
regarding situations of concern, it has found the
political will to take effective action in many dire
situations. But not always. Either through preventive
diplomacy aimed at influencing the parties to conflict
to comply with international law, or by acting under
Chapter VII of the Charter, it is fundamental for the
Security Council's credibility that it act consistently
and with resolve to protect all civilians - women, men
and children - whether directly targeted or accidental
victims of conflicts.

