The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Maurer for his briefing this morning.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Development of France.

In this special year for the United Nations, I
wanted to invite representatives to take stock of the
progress made in protecting civilians in peacekeeping
operations. I welcome the Secretary-General, who has
made such a big contribution to the progress achieved,
and the President of the Central African Republic,
whom I thank for having accepted my invitation and
who has reminded us of what the United Nations has
done for his country. Finally, I thank the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, who
unfortunately could not join us, but who wanted to
share with us his recommendations for ensuring better
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

As we have just heard, a transformation of
peacekeeping is under way. We all remember the
failures of Srebrenica and Rwanda. We have taken
note with concern of the latest report of the Secretary-
General on the protection of civilians (S/2016/447),
which indicates that international humanitarian law is
increasingly being disregarded by parties to conflict.
And it is always civilians that pay the price. However,
the United Nations has taken stock of those challenges
and has won decisive battles and saved thousands of
lives. I am thinking, of course, of the Central African
Republic, but also of Cote d'Ivoire where the United
Nations has prevented mass atrocities from being
committed. I am also thinking about northern Mali,
where the United Nations protects the citizens and
supports the implementation of a political solution.

To those who doubt the value of the United Nations,
those successes show that it can successfully protect
civilians, as long as three conditions are met. The
first condition is that of setting an example. Violence
committed by United Nations-mandated forces against
populations must be combated with absolute firmness
and in full respect of the rule of law. As troop-
contributing countries, it is our duty to immediately
refer to justice any substantiated allegation brought
to our knowledge and to take the necessary protective
measures, while respecting the presumption of
innocence. It has to do with the dignity of the victims,
as well as the honour of the United Nations and of all
the military who fight tirelessly for peace.

The second condition is effectiveness. Effectiveness
means setting a clear mandate for the protection of
civilians, if need be by planning all the necessary
measures for their defence. However, a clear mandate
will be effective only if it is fully implemented by
those - civilian and military - who should ensure
that it is respected. We have seen progress in that areas
as well, thanks to the regular dialogue between the
Security Council and the troop-contributing countries,
which has become the norm. Investment in favour of
peace is also better distributed with the arrival of new
countries. But we also need modern means - drones,
intelligence, forecasting. While there has also been
progress in that area, we must do more, especially for
missions operating in a dangerous security environment.
Let us together draw lessons from history. In the face
of difficulties, withdrawal is not an option. Rather, we
must ask ourselves how to strengthen and better ensure
the security of our Blue Helmets.

In addition to military action, effectively
protecting civilians implies an integrated policy. That
means the deployment of legal experts and human
rights experts; a visible United Nations presence on
the ground, including in remote areas; cooperation
with non-governmental organizations to develop an
early-warning network; and partnership with judicial
authorities so that the criminals arrested by Blue
Helmets are brought to justice.

The third condition is the necessary political will
of the countries concerned and of the international
community to resolve the root causes of conflicts and
to ensure inclusive and lasting political solutions. The
violence in the Kivus will not cease as long as the armed
groups responsible for it benefit from support in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in neighbouring
countries. Crimes in South Sudan will continue if we do
not put pressure on the belligerents. The Blue Helmets
in the Sudan will not be able to assist civilians as long
as the Government continues to obstruct their work.

In this collective effort, France has played, and
will continue to play, its part. Our main commitment
is to continue to tirelessly push for early action by
the Security Council whenever there is a risk of mass
atrocities. That is the whole meaning of our initiative
with Mexico, but also with that of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, to which we
have subscribed, on restricting the use of the veto
whenever civilians face crimes that shock the universal
conscience. When States no longer play their role,
the United Nations has the responsibility to protect
civilians, and it must fully assume that responsibility.
We must therefore act collectively.

That is why we will continue to seek stronger action

by the Security Council to end the horrific war waged
by the Syrian regime against its own people. That is why
we will continue to work for the deployment of a credible
police presence in Burundi. All that is with one thing
in mind: we must not repeat the mistakes of the past.
As announced by the President of the French Republic
from the podium of the General Assembly in September
(see A/70/PV.13), the use of the veto must be suspended
in cases of mass atrocities. It is our responsibility as
a permanent member of the Council. More than half
of Member States have already given their support to
that initiative and, as far as we are concerned, we will
implement it unilaterally. In February 2017 in Paris, a
ministerial conference on the protection of children in
armed conflict will be organized. Finally, Violations
of international humanitarian law in Syria, Yemen,
South Sudan, the Sudan and elsewhere must always be
condemned. The fight against impunity is essential and
must include unwavering support to the International
Criminal Court so that the perpetrators of those crimes
are held accountable.

Our second commitment is to defend a robust
stance in peacekeeping in the service of people. The
Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians are
guidelines and provide a useful direction. France
has decided to apply them, in compliance with its
international obligations, including the Charter of the
United Nations.

Our third commitment is to give the United Nations
the means to achieve its ambitious objectives in the
protection of civilians. France is one of the principal
contributors to the budget of peacekeeping operations.
With nearly 900 Blue Helmets deployed around the
world, it is the second-largest troop contributor among
the permanent members of the Security Council. In
addition, several thousand French soldiers are deployed
in a national capacity and provide daily support to
peacekeeping operations. France, through me, is
committed to maintaining its participation. It is our
duty as a permanent member.

We also support the modernization of operations
equipment, particularly in the area of intelligence. We
encourage our partners to commit to peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, I welcome the fact that,
beyond the usual troop-contributing countries, Europe
is back in full force, as is Canada.

We are committed to training 20,000 African
soldiers a year. I wish to announce that, in Paris this
autumn, we will organize a ministerial meeting on
peacekeeping in francophone countries. Our goal is to
secure concrete pledges for the provision and training of
personnel serving in francophone countries. Training is
fundamental before the deployment of troops. It is the
best way to prevent conduct that is contrary to the noble
mission of Blue Helmets.

Our fourth commitment is to work for zero
tolerance in United Nations-mandated operations.
Whenever necessary, we must refer to justice systems
allegations of violence committed by soldiers engaged
in peacekeeping operations. We will apply that rule
to our own forces, as we already do. Our soldiers
also receive systematic training on respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law prior to any
deployment in the field.

Finally, we provide support to the Special
Coordinator on Improving United Nations Response
to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, through a financial
contribution and the provision of a senior officer.

The example of the Central African Republic shows
us how the United Nations can promote the prevention of
mass atrocities when the Security Council stands united.
We must pursue this path, while also strengthening the
existing peacekeeping operations and making every
effort to ensure that civilians are no longer by far the
largest group of war victims throughout the world.

To denounce and to act; to denounce for acting - that
is our collective responsibility so as to live up to the
ideals that have inspired the Charter of the United
Nations. That is what we owe to the soldiers who, on the
ground and at peril to their lives, keep these ideals alive
wherever tragedy forces them to intervene. The Council
can count on France to fully assume its responsibilities.

I now resume my functions as President of the Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and of Senegalese Abroad of the Republic of Senegal.

