Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) (interpretation from Arabic): It is an honour for me, on behalf of the
United Arab Emirates and in my capacity as Chairman of
the Arab Group for this month, to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. There is no doubt that your experience and
diplomatic skill will help the Council achieve positive
results.

We would also like to express our appreciation to
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Botswana, for the effective and able manner in which he
guided the work of the Council last month.

The Security Council is meeting today at the request
of the Arab Group, which has always emphasized its
support for the peace process in accordance with
legitimate international resolutions, in particular Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
425 (1978), to discuss the situation in the occupied Arab
and Palestinian territories, including Holy Jerusalem. This
marks clear international recognition of the seriousness of
the humanitarian, security, economic and social situation
the Palestinian people are undergoing as a result of
continuing Israeli Government acts of oppression,
displacement, occupation, starvation and confiscation of
land. These acts are carried out without regard to the
seriousness of this policy or to international commitments
stemming from the series of peace agreements concluded
with the Palestinian Authority over the last three years.
This policy heightens our doubts and those of the
international community regarding Israel's expressed
intentions with respect to the peace process as a whole. It
also runs counter to the new world effort to put an end to
occupation and wars and to achieve the peaceful
settlement of disputes on the basis of the United Nations
Charter and the norms of international law.

 

Since late February, the Israeli occupation forces have
forged a tight chain of siege and closure around the areas
and cities of the West Bank and the Gaza sector, which are
regarded as a single unit under the 1993 Declaration of
Principles and have paralysed the movements of the Arab
population to and from their cities and places of work,
including holy Jerusalem. This has led to worsening hunger,
poverty and unemployment, and to disease and despair.

This also runs counter to the most basic norms of
international humanitarian law. Our disappointment is
increased by the Israeli Government's recent reimposition
of military occupation in certain areas from which it had
already withdrawn. It has also failed to observe its
commitments to withdraw from the Arab city of Hebron.
This is in addition to freezing the Syrian and Lebanese
tracks of negotiations and its deliberate attempts to obstruct
the final stage of negotiations on the Palestinian track, by
which it reneged on its pledges regarding the peace process.

These illegal Israeli practices in the occupied
Palestinian territories and Israel's recent acts of aggression
against Lebanon - the bombing of villages and cities,
including Beirut, and threats to the civilian population -
represent a clear violation of all agreements and pacts on
the international level. They also lead to a situation of
instability and lack of security, which threatens the peace
process and the Middle East as a whole.

The current situation requires the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations and immediately respond by bringing pressure to
bear on the Israeli Government in order to prompt it to
observe and respect the resolutions of international
legitimacy and to implement fully its commitment to the
peace process. This is a pressing need and a prerequisite
not only for the countries and peoples of the region but for
the countries and peoples of the world at large.

Israel's behaviour in taking measures of collective
punishment against the Palestinian people threatens the
continuation of the peace process. It does not contribute to
the creation of an atmosphere conducive to peace and
coexistence between the countries of the region. It reverts
to the atmosphere of war and conflict, the most recent
examples of which are the acts of aggression by Israel
against the Lebanese territories, which we reject. These
confirmed once again the need to resume negotiations in
order to avoid wasting vast financial and human resources,
that could be used to achieve social and economic
development in the region.

Israel must deal with the new regional and
international realities, which call for the withdrawal of its
forces from all occupied Arab and Palestinian territories,
including the city of Jerusalem, the Golan Heights and
southern Lebanon, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978). This
would represent genuine support for a confidence-building
process between the countries of the region, in order to
achieve the aspirations of its peoples to a comprehensive,
durable and just peace.

The question of security is the real concern of all the
countries of the region, not only of Israel. The region is
threatened not only by the manifestations of violence and
tension but also by the accumulation of weapons of mass
destruction, especially nuclear weapons, because of the
seriousness of these weapons and their potential threat to
the environment and to health. Israel's remaining outside
the framework of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and its refusal so far to subject
its nuclear weapons to the inspection and safeguard
system of the International Atomic Energy Agency
represents a continued challenge to peace and
international and regional security and detracts from the
credibility and universality of the NPT. The international
community, represented by the Security Council, must
call on the Israeli Government to accede to the Treaty in
a way that is in consonance with the peace process. We
also reiterate our call to declare the Middle East a zone
free from all weapons of mass destruction, including
nuclear weapons.

In the face of these serious challenges to the peace
process, we call upon the Security Council to take
effective and practical measures that would ensure the
realization of the inalienable national rights of the
Palestinian people; the cessation of the policy of
aggression, settlement and Judaization of Jerusalem; the
preservation of its cultural, religious and material heritage,
and demographic composition; and the lifting of the siege
against the Palestinian Villages and cities.

At the same time, we call upon the Security Council
to adopt a resolution calling upon Israel to desist from all
these practices and to return to peaceful negotiations on
all tracks, based on the relevant decisions of international
legitimacy - particularly to the beginning of the
negotiations on the final stage of the Palestinian track, in
order to agree on the questions of Jerusalem, refugees,
borders and settlements, and to enable the Palestinian
people to exercise its legitimate rights, the foremost of

 

which are their rights to self-determination and to the
establishment of an independent capital in Jerusalem.

I would also call upon the international community,
especially donor countries, to provide economic support and
humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people to improve
their living conditions and to develop a comprehensive
infrastructure, in order to realize its aspiration to a decent
life, like all other peoples of the world.

