Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Let me start by
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his
briefing on the situation in East Timor and for
introducing the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET). We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for the important statement he made
earlier this morning.

We are very pleased to welcome once again Mr.
Xanana Gusmao - this time as the first President-elect
of East Timor - and Chief Minister Mari Alkatari to
the Security Council. We thank them for their
statements outlining the policies that they will be
following to address the immediate needs of their
country. Let me also seize this opportunity to
congratulate them on their election and to express our
best wishes to them and to the entire population that
they are going to be leading. The election held this
month shows once again the political maturity of the
people, their love of peace and democracy and their
undivided commitment to East Timor's future.

We are very happy to see the positive
developments in almost all sectors in East Timor. This
is a sure and steady path in the process to
independence. The success registered so far in the
making of East Timor as a nation State is the outcome
of the indomitable and undying spirit of sacrifice and
dedication of its people and that of the international
community, particularly the Security Council, which
has engaged itself fully in the whole process from the
very beginning.

The progress achieved should now be
consolidated and the international community should
continue to accompany East Timor in its efforts. East
Timor will require a sustained and high level of
development assistance, as mentioned in paragraph 100
of the Secretary-General's report. Top priority should
be given to external security, law and order and the
establishment of a solid and representative
administrative service. We must therefore ensure that
the needed help is given, especially in order to
maintain the high level of security and to build a
sustainable administrative and economic base.

In this context, we fully support the proposal of
the Secretary-General on the establishment of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), with the responsibilities outlined in
paragraph 64 of the report. We particularly appreciate
the idea of a gradual devolution of responsibilities and
powers to the people of East Timor in all sectors. This
is the most pragmatic and realizable objective in the
particular situation.

The significant role played by Indonesia in the
peace process and its continued support for all United
Nations activities in East Timor must be highly
commended. We are confident that both Indonesia and
East Timor will continue to consult each other in
addressing the outstanding issues. We encourage both
countries to develop close, friendly and good-
neighbourly relations that will permit regional stability
and the optimal utilization of resources for the benefit
of their respective peoples.

We look forward to East Timor's joining the
family of the United Nations after acceding to formal
independence on 20 May, a celebration which the
whole world will be watching with great interest, joy
and emotion. Let me say that Mauritius will be
represented at that special and historic event.

Before I conclude, allow me to express my
appreciation to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, who is not
among us today, for the outstanding work
accomplished by him in East Timor as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the Transitional Administration. His contribution in
bringing peace to East Timor will become part of the
history of the country. He and the entire staff of
UNTAET deserve our heartiest appreciation for their
laudable work in East Timor. We wish him plenty of
success in his future undertakings.

I also take this opportunity to convey my
congratulations to Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, Permanent
Representative of India, who will now head UNMISET
and who, no doubt, has a gigantic task ahead. We are
confident, however, that, with his experience and great
leadership qualities, he will be able to meet the
challenges. Mauritius, as ever, will continue to lend its
support to him and to the people of East Timor in
building a viable and peace-loving State.

