Over the past year, the international community has been facing a two-pronged assault from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and from new attacks and tactics by terrorist groups, including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida and their affiliates, especially in conflict areas. Terrorists use every opportunity to exacerbate the harsh socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic and sow discord and radicalization. Proliferation and advances in digital technologies are prone to exploitation by malicious non-State actors. The risks of terrorists developing, acquiring, using and trafficking in weapons of mass destruction threaten to cause unprecedented consequences. These are strong reminders that terrorism in all its forms and manifestations continues to pose a serious threat to international peace and security. In that regard, I thank Ambassador Tarek Ladeb of Tunisia and Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani of Indonesia for their statements and for their important work in the respective committees. At today's meeting, allow me to share the following three points. First, the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities; the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism; and the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) are among the most important tools available to the Security Council in countering terrorism and proliferation. We commend the three Committees, as well as their respective expert bodies, namely, the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Expert Group of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for the good work and cooperation during the reporting period. That includes joint visits to Member States, joint open briefings, the development of guidelines and outreach to regional organizations. Their rich expertise and close cooperation have been instrumental in achieving the successes and in assessing and responding to the threat of terrorism in a timely and proactive manner. In times of the COVID-19 pandemic, we count on the Committees' and expert bodies' adaptation and innovation to ensure business continuity and maintain communication with Member States and relevant partners. Secondly, the full implementation of the Security Council resolutions on counter-terrorism and non-proliferation is a key component in our joint efforts and a central task in the mandate of the Committees. We are pleased to note significant progress in their implementation by Member States. We warmly welcome the constructive engagement by Member States with the 1267 Committee and the Monitoring Team, including in the 2019 annual review of its sanctions list, which is crucial to keeping its listing and delisting work up to date and achieving the effective implementation of sanctions measures. We further encourage the three Committees, in particular the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, to continue to closely monitor and assist States in the full and effective implementation of the Security Council resolutions through dialogue, the sharing of information and good practices, developing implementation guidelines and other technical assistance activities. Our strategies and policies to counter terrorism and proliferation must be responsive to the evolving threats of terrorism. In that connection, we believe that the challenge of foreign terrorist fighters and their family members returning to their home countries must be tackled in unity and cohesion if we are to preserve and sustain our gains over terrorism. We look forward to the comprehensive review of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which will provide an important opportunity to strengthen the global non-proliferation architecture, including preventing terrorists from obtaining weapons of mass destruction. Last but not least, my delegation continues to stress the importance of international and regional cooperation, as no country is safe until all are safe. The multidimensional threat of terrorism requires a comprehensive and holistic approach, which includes addressing the root causes of, and the conditions conducive to, terrorism. We must remain firmly committed to preventing and resolving conflicts, sustaining peace, promoting development, ensuring respect for international humanitarian law and international human rights law and building strong societies that are resilient to terrorism and radicalization. In conclusion, Viet Nam will continue its steadfast implementation of the Security Council resolutions on counter-terrorism and non-proliferation and work closely together with bodies of the Organization and all relevant partners in advancing our common fight against terrorism on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
