Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would first like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2010/200) and
Special Representative Edmond Mulet for the
comprehensive briefing he has just provided. To
Mr. Mulet, let me also add our sincere gratitude for the
strong leadership he displays at the helm of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Indeed, Mr. Mulet assumed his duties at Haiti's most
difficult hour, and he and his staff have done a most
commendable job in support of the Haitian people and
Government since then.

I would also like to extend a warm welcome to
Prime Minister Bellerive and to thank him for his
insightful presentation. His views and comments
provide most valuable guidance to our collective
efforts to help Haiti recover and rebuild.

It has been more than three months since Haiti
was struck by one of the worst natural disasters of its
history, but the enormous suffering there is still vividly
present in our minds and hearts. Indeed, the magnitude
of the earthquake, and the loss of human life and
infrastructural damage it has yielded, are neither
forgettable nor easily surmounted. The pictures we
have been shown today speak volumes about the
tragedy in a way that no words can better describe. In
fact, an earthquake of that magnitude would have
caused serious problems for any nation, but given
Haiti's long-standing struggle for development and
stability, it had an even bigger impact.

As such, the resilience of the Haitian people in
the face of this terrible event is all the more
praiseworthy. As Mr. Mulet confirmed, Haitians have
proved to be much stronger and braver than anyone
could have imagined. In particular, it is quite admirable
that the security situation has remained relatively calm,
although most of the people have lost the little they had
in the way of savings and belongings. At this point, let
me praise once again the excellent job done by
MINUSTAH police and troops. In fact, the
international community in its broadest sense has
responded quickly and quite effectively to the
emergency situation in Haiti. Many countries
participated in the donors' conference held last month
in New York and made generous offers for the
reconstruction of Haiti. On our part, Turkey has also
contributed to this process.

That said, draconian tasks remain in Haiti and the
international community should continue to assist the
Haitian people in the relief efforts and to support the
Haitian Government in the reconstruction phase. The
pledges made at the donors' conference should be made
readily available whenever and wherever they are
needed, particularly in view of the upcoming hurricane
season and the critical importance of the next 12 to 18
months to relief and reconstruction efforts.

It is equally important to be able to translate the
generosity of the international community into
concrete peace and projects that will make the most
needed difference in the daily lives of Haitians and
return them to normalcy. In this context, the holding at
the earliest possible stage of the elections that were
scheduled for February is also of vital importance to
the future of Haiti and to the consolidation of the
institutions that are required for sustainable
development and the reconstruction effort.

The United Nations is at the heart of our
collective efforts in Haiti. We support the approach of
the Secretary-General, articulated around the five key
areas mentioned in his report. Within this vision,
MINUSTAH has a crucial role to play, as it has in Haiti
thus far. Indeed, despite the fact that the Mission itself
was badly impacted by the earthquake and lost many
valuable members, it continues to serve the Haitians
with great professionalism and dedication.
MINUSTAH should continue to implement its mandate
in all relevant areas, in particular in ensuring a secure
and safe environment, coordinating humanitarian
assistance and providing support to institutions. In this
regard, we endorse the recommendations of the
Secretary-General concerning the future role of
MINUSTAH and his call for a surge in its capabilities
and the scaling up of its activities within its mandate.

Crises often come with opportunities for new
beginnings. In Haiti, too, we have an opportunity to
emerge even stronger from the catastrophe that has
befallen the Haitians and to turn this dark moment into
a bright prospect. In this respect, we firmly support the
endeavours of the Haitian Government.

In this respect, I have to say that the Action Plan
proposed by the Haitian Government is a valuable tool
in the long-term reconstruction efforts and has to be
thoroughly examined. After all, there is no doubt that
the Haitian people and Government are and should be
in the driving seat in this endeavour. Our responsibility
is to help them advance in the right direction without
any further setbacks.

