Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ambassador Arias for his excellent
briefing and for his efforts to enable the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) to fully carry out its
mission. I would also like to thank him, as well as the
other members of the CTC, for the reports of 14
November 2003 and 19 February 2004 (S/2004/70 and S/2004/ 124) on the revitalization of the CTC.

I would like to point out that in the report of 14
November 2003 the Chairman of the CTC clearly
identified both the difficulties encountered by States in
implementing Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)
and those linked to the operation of that body. The
difficulties have become so serious that if they are not
quickly remedied, they could compromise the
operation of the CTC in the long term. That is why my
delegation cannot but provide its support to any effort
to instil a new dynamic in the work of the CTC. After
more than two years of existence and having made
convincing progress, the Committee seems to have
reached it limits and to be running out of steam. That
can be overcome only if we renew our political will
and our collective determination to combat the scourge
of terrorism.

My delegation therefore reaffirms its firm
commitment to combat terrorism and to support the
proposals to revitalize the CTC, in particular through
rationalizing its work and setting up new
administrative and budgetary arrangements. In fact, we
believe it is urgent to "debureaucratize" the
Committee's structure in order to give it more
flexibility in carrying out its work, by means of an
executive body that would take care of the daily tasks,
including procedural matters, in order to enable the
plenary body to devote itself efficiently to strategic and
policy matters. The establishment and operation of
such a body must be done, as much as possible, with
full respect for the rules and procedures of our
Organization and in accordance with the spirit and
letter of the Charter.

In supporting the efforts underway to revitalize
the CTC, we would like to stress that since terrorism is
now recognized as a threat to international peace and
security, the struggle against it warrants special
treatment. In that respect, besides not sparing any effort
to fully implement resolution 1373 (2001), on the basis
of possible subsequent developments, we must also
begin a thorough discussion aimed at the extension of
the CTC mandate beyond what was conferred upon it
by resolution 1373 (2001).

I would like to take the opportunity offered by this
debate on the revitalization of the CTC to recall three
proposals submitted by my Government to the Security
Council bodies charged with the fight against terrorism.

The first proposal addresses the right of asylum.
In that respect, we believe that countries that have a
strong tradition of granting asylum, where terrorist
networks have developed that now threaten their own
security, should urgently review their procedures for
granting asylum and should inquire, in particular, of
the countries of origin of the asylum seekers
concerning their status.

The second proposal addresses the monitoring of
funds belonging to individuals, entities or organizations
that are suspected of being sources of funding for
terrorist groups, which monitoring should be done in a
more rigorous manner. Here I stress the particular
responsibility of financial institutions and banks, with a
view to more strictly controlling movements of capital
that are suspected of being linked to acts of terrorism. I
would like to recall that, besides its legal and regulatory
arsenal for fighting violations in the area of currency
exchange and capital movements, Algeria has set up a
unit on handling financial information, an independent
structure under the Ministry of Finance, whose primary
mission is to combat the financing of terrorism and
money-laundering

Lastly, with respect to international cooperation
against terrorism, my delegation, would like to call for
the fulfilment of a proposal that we consider extremely
important, that of setting up an international fund to
support the fight against terrorism. It would provide
multifaceted aid to developing countries to help them
adapt and harmonize their national legislation and help
with technical assistance and with the acquisition of
necessary equipment for an effective global response to
terrorism. We are especially convinced of the relevance
of that proposal since, of the 58 countries that were
indicated by the CTC Chairman in October 2003 as
being late in submitting their reports the great majority
belong to the developing world.

The threats that terrorism poses to international
peace and security are not limited or isolated, but are
increasingly interconnected and transnational in nature.
Hence, we need to adopt an integrated and global
approach that would take into account the political,
diplomatic and operational dimensions, including
international judicial cooperation and cooperation in
the exchange of information and the acquisition of
specific equipment for the fight against terrorism. We
believe that the CTC must evolve in order to take
control of that package of multifaceted relations.

Furthermore, the fight against terrorism must be
part of a coordinated scheme for establishing a new
system of collective security based on the principle of
the indivisibility of security and on the now well-
established link between development and security.

Lastly, I would like to conclude by congratulating
Ambassador Arias, as well as the other members of the
CTC, for their satisfactory performance in carrying out
the work programme of the last three months and to
support them in implementing the work programme for
the current three months. We hope the Security Council
can very soon adopt a resolution that sanctions the
main points of the CTC report on revitalization.

