I wish to thank the German presidency of the Security Council, working in collaboration with the Dominican Republic as joint Chairs of the Chairs of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, for convening today's important meeting. This statement complements that of the representative of the European Union (EU) (see annex 25). Nearly 20 years after the unanimous adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) by the Security Council, protecting women from sexual violence in armed conflict remains the most undervalued aspect of the protection of civilians in conflict situations. The call stipulated in resolution 1325 (2000) on all belligerents to take special measures to protect women and girls from gender-based violence has not curtailed rape and other forms of sexual abuse as a weapon of war and humiliation. Not only do we have a long way to go in order to ensure more safety for women in situations of armed conflict, but we also have to expand the scope of protective measures from sexual violence in armed conflict to include men and boys and to account for factors, such as displacement, that might make certain civilians even more vulnerable. The fact that sexual violence has taken place in every conflict since the dawn of history is a testament to just how deeply rooted exploitation of vulnerability is and how easily beastly instincts take the upper hand or are used as weapons. Furthermore, the sheer scale of such violence in our times and a persisting attitude of quasi-normalization of rape in armed conflict remain an insult to human civilization. They expose a profound failure of national Governments and the international community, given the prohibition of rape and other forms of sexual violence by customary international law, in both international and non-international armed conflicts, as well as the wide recognition of such acts as war crimes since the first codification of the laws of war in early military manuals and as crimes against humanity in current international legal practice. As a State whose civilian population was subjected to rape and sexual violence during the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in July and August 1974, with Turkey acting with complete impunity and zero accountability, my country is painfully aware that perpetrators often get away with crime and that victims have little chance of getting justice, are alone in their agony, stigmatized, deprived of proper access to sexual health care following abuse, and without adequate psychological support. We also know that the readiness of a conflict State to respect international law may not amount to much in the chaos that prevails during conflict. We therefore need to be conscious that the adoption of declarations and legal texts should not blur the focus on perpetrators, be they States or other actors that are taking advantage of the gaps and lawlessness created by conflict, and the increased vulnerability of women and girls. Accordingly, in addition to the accession of States to all relevant instruments of international law and transposing their rules into robust national legislation and enforcing both, and, in addition, naturally, to sustained efforts around the world to inculcate respect for the sanctity and inviolability of women and girls and of course all non-combatants, as well as the rules of war in armed conflict, Cyprus considers the following steps as indispensable to making progress. Increased accountability of military commanders so as to ensure that the combatants under their command are trained in and comply with international law, including criminal liability for commanders themselves for lack of compliance, is the most direct way of stemming sexual violence in armed conflict at the source. However, the elimination of impunity is perhaps the more powerful deterrent. This entails criminal prosecution and not just accountability, for example, within the framework of a truth commission, if the armed forces and/or the national criminal justice system cannot prosecute, which is why the International Criminal Court, with its complementary jurisdiction, was created. Both civilian and military authorities should collect evidence and interview victims and witnesses in the wake of fighting, focusing on war crimes, crimes against humanity, and missing persons. Humanitarian actors should be able to assist upon request. Like other war crimes and crimes against humanity, sexual violence, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, and enforced sterilization should not be pardoned in any amnesty that may be granted as part of a peace agreement. Furthermore, victims and their suffering must be acknowledged. Victims must be treated as such and not as an inconvenient statistic shrouded in taboo. Victims should be entitled to reparations and remedy, even where criminal prosecution is absent, as well as the lifelong support and counselling they are likely to need. They should also be helped with reintegration if they are marginalized by society. Lastly, we should continue to enrich the body of collective commitments we have, not only in creating additional directly relevant survivor-centred, human rights-based obligations and in enhancing accountability in complying with these obligations, but in situating such obligations within the broader framework of achieving gender parity. We need to treat the disease, not just alleviate symptoms. In this context, Cyprus' third national action plan on gender equality, covering the period from 2019 to 2023, incorporates a holistic approach to gender equality, addressing seven priority areas - violence, gender stereotypes, decision-making, social rights, legislative reform, employment and education - and draws on policy recommendations by treaty bodies and United Nations norms, as well as EU policy frameworks. Cyprus is also close to finalizing its first national action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
