Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I

would like to thank President Mbeki and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Menkerios,
for their briefings. We also listened attentively to the
statements made by Ambassador Osman and
Mr. Gatkuoth.

I wish to emphasize several points. First, we
welcome the agreement signed between the North and
the South on interim administrative and security
arrangements in Abyei, which demonstrates goodwill
on the part of both North and South with respect to
maintaining peace and stability in the region of the

Sudan. We greatly appreciate the efforts and the role of
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel,
led by President Mbeki, and of Mr. Menkerios and the
Government of Ethiopia. We hope that both parties,
with the assistance of the African Union and the United
Nations, can ensure practical implementation of the
agreements. For its part, the Security Council should
provide the necessary assistance and support,
particularly for ensuring the early deployment of the
Ethiopian peacekeeping forces.

Secondly, the Security Council should encourage
both North and South to insist on taking the path of
peace and on maintaining calm and restraint so as to
put an immediate end to hostilities in Southern
Kordofan, Blue Nile and other areas; to refrain from
any actions and words that could lead to an escalation
of the situation; and to fully implement the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). We hope that
both North and South will capitalize on the existing
positive momentum and reach a comprehensive
solution to the problems in Southern Kordofan and
Blue Nile.

Thirdly, we welcome the recent meeting in Addis
Ababa between President Al-Bashir and First Vice-
President Salva Kiir Mayardit. Direct meetings
between leaders are extremely important to ensuring
the avoidance of misunderstandings, increasing mutual
confidence and maintaining peace and stability
between the North and the South. The Security Council
should encourage the institutionalization of such
meetings, which should be held as soon as problems
arise.

Fourthly, we support the efforts of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel, led by
President Mbeki, as well as the efforts of Special
Representative Menkerios, to promote mutual
accommodation between North and South aimed at
achieving compliance with the CPA, and to arrive at a
comprehensive solution to such problems as that of
Abyei and other outstanding CPA-related issues, as
well as on post-referendum arrangements.

