Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I want to
thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her
briefing today.

We should be crystal-clear about why we are
here today. The United States entered into the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty with
the Soviet Union in the late 19805, but more than a decade
ago, the Russian Federation decided that it would break
its Treaty obligations and pursue a missile system with
a range expressly prohibited by the Treaty. Over the
last several years, Russia developed, produced, flight-
tested and now has fielded multiple battalions of its
INF-non-compliant 9M729 missile system. In response,
earlier this month and after six years of United States
diplomacy to return Russia to compliance and preserve
the Treaty, our Secretary of State affirmed the United
States withdrawal from the INF Treaty.

As the Secretary said in his statement, the United
States will not remain a party to a Treaty that is being
deliberately violated by Russia. The other NATO allies
also concluded that Russia had materially breached
the INF Treaty. Let me repeat: Russia had materially

breached the INF Treaty, and the NATO allies fully
supported the United States withdrawal due to
Russia's intransigence.

We are here today because the Russian Federation
preferred a world in which the United States continued
to fulfil its INF Treaty obligations while the Russian
Federation did not. Indeed, the Russian Federation and
China would still like a world where the United States
exercises self-restraint while they continue their arms
build-ups, unabated and unabashed.

Russia now threatens to reciprocate if the United
States positions intermediate-range missiles in Europe,
but Russia had already fielded such missiles in Europe
while the INF Treaty was still in effect. What we and
our NATO allies know is that Russia has produced and
fielded multiple battalions of 9M729 ground-launched
cruise missiles throughout Russia, in violation of the
now-terminated INF Treaty, including in western
Russia, with the ability to strike critical European
targets. Likewise, China threatens to target United
States allies that host any United States missiles,
even though China has already deployed thousands of
intermediate-range missiles with the purpose ofholding
the United States and our allies and partners at risk.

Now that the INF Treaty no longer exists due to
the Russian Federation, the United States is taking
the steps necessary to address the threat posed by
the intermediate-range missile forces being deployed
in ever-larger numbers by Russia and China, which
the INF Treaty failed to hinder. Today there are no
United States ground-launched intermediate-range
missiles - zero. In contrast, Russia has developed and
deployed multiple battalions of such missiles. China
possesses approximately 2,000 missiles that would
have been prohibited under the INF Treaty had China
been a party to it.

Furthermore, United States flight tests to
develop a ground-launched conventional capability
are neither provocative nor destabilizing. They are a
prudent response to ensure that the United States has
the capabilities to defend our interests in the post-
INF-Treaty world that Russia created and are the
culmination of Treaty-compliant United States research
and development efforts dating back to December 2017.
Those efforts were never a secret, and, again, they were
not prohibited by the Treaty.

We have heard a narrative today that the United
States had itself been in violation of the INF Treaty
because of our recent flight test, which used the MK
41 launcher, which is also found in our Aegis Ashore
missile defence system. This is categorically false. The
Aegis Ashore system does not have an offensive ground-
launched ballistic- or cruise-missile capability, although
it utilizes some of the same structural components as
the sea-based MK 41 vertical launch system installed
on ships. The Aegis Ashore vertical launching system is
not the same launcher as the sea-based MK 41 vertical
launch system, and the Aegis Ashore system did not
violate our INF Treaty obligations.

A more relevant discussion today about threats to
international peace and security would focus on the
fact that, while the United States works to reduce the
number and salience of nuclear weapons, the Russian
Federation and China did not follow the United States
lead in this regard. To the contrary, they have moved in
the opposite direction by developing and fielding new
nuclear and missile capabilities over the last decade.

The Russian Federation is upgrading and
diversifying its nuclear-weapons capabilities, and its
total nuclear stockpile is likely to grow significantly
over the next decade. That growth will be driven
primarily by a projected increase in the Russian
Federation's non-strategic nuclear weapons.

The INF Treaty-violating 9M729 missile system
is only one in a series of ground-, sea- and air-based
Russian systems being modernized and developed
with greater accuracy, longer ranges and lower nuclear
yields in order to enable Russian nuclear strategy
and doctrine, including limited first use of nuclear
weapons. We believe the Russian Federation has up to
2,000 non-strategic nuclear warheads of various types.
In comparison, the United States currently has a single
non-strategic nuclear weapon: the B61 gravity bomb.

The Russian Federation is also pursuing novel
strategic nuclear weapons. Those include a nuclear-
armed and powered underwater drone designed
to destroy adversary coastal cities and ports in a
radioactive tidal wave; a nuclear-armed and powered,
ground-launched, intercontinental-range cruise missile;
and a nuclear-armed, air-launched ballistic missile.

Perhaps a better use of the Council's time would

be to ask the Russian Federation to address the threats
it poses to international peace and security. How many
9M729 missiles has it produced, and where are they?
What exactly happened on 8 August in Russia? What
caused the explosion? What system was it? And what
purpose does that system serve?

Meanwhile, China continues to rapidly increase the
size of its nuclear stockpile through a rapid expansion
and diversification of its nuclear arsenal. That includes
new delivery systems as China works to establish a new
nuclear triad. China is also examining how hypersonic
systems, air-launched ballistic missiles and low-yield
nuclear weapons fit into its expanding nuclear arsenal.
Those developments by the Russian Federation
and China, coupled with their aggressive and coercive
behaviours, are key drivers behind a deteriorating
security environment. The United States will not and
cannot ignore that reality. We will not stand idle. We
will take the necessary steps to ensure our security and
that of our allies and partners, and that includes testing
and developing systems to respond to the challenges
that we face, as well as being prepared to engage in
what our President has described as a new era of
arms control.

The United States remains open to effective
and verifiable arms control. Contrary to our Russian
colleagues' outrageous assertions, we have made clear
our interest in serious arms control that includes the
Russian Federation and China, and it goes beyond
treaties focused on limited types of nuclear weapons or
missile ranges. We think that would be a more effective
approach to addressing threats to international peace
and security.

