Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome Foreign Minister Jeremie of
Serbia and Acting Foreign Minister Citaku of Kosovo
to the Council and to thank them for their comments.
Let me also thank Special Representative Zannier for
his briefing and his service.

I have three points to make today. First, as
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton recently said in
Pristina, the advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice turned the page on questions of Kosovo's
status. In the words of the Court, "the declaration of
independence of 17 February 2008 did not violate
general international law". The International Court of
Justice opinion also stated that the declaration was not
in violation of resolution 1244 (1999). It is now time to
move ahead.

For this reason, the United States welcomed the
consensus General Assembly resolution 64/298, adopted
on 9 September, which points to a new era of pragmatic,
neighbourly relations between Serbia and Kosovo as
they embark on their respective paths towards a Euro-
Atlantic future. We welcome and support the European
Union-facilitated dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade. It will help both countries improve the
quality of life for their citizens and increase security
and stability in the region.

Let us be clear. This dialogue is not about
Kosovo's status or territorial integrity. Kosovo is a
sovereign, independent State and its borders are
inviolable. Seventy-one countries have now recognized
Kosovo. We call upon States that have not already done
so to help contribute to stability in the region by
welcoming Kosovo into the international community
through formal recognition.

Secondly, we must support the Government of
Kosovo in its efforts to build a multi-ethnic and unified
democratic State governed by the rule of law,
accountable to all of its citizens and fully integrated
into the international community. Kosovo has already
made strides in increasing overall security, building a
culture of inclusive democracy and strengthening the
rule of law, but a great deal more remains to be done.
The United States looks forward to free, fair and
peaceful general elections in December as Kosovo
builds on its encouraging track record in developing a
vibrant multiparty democracy.

We stand ready to support Kosovo's efforts to
administer the elections in a manner that lets all of the
people of Kosovo exercise their right to vote. Now is
the time for all citizens of Kosovo, regardless of their
ethnic background, to make their voices heard in the
democratic process. We regret that the Government of
Serbia has missed the opportunity to play a
constructive role in the process and has not encouraged
Kosovo Serb participation. The Kosovo Serb community
can only be disadvantaged by this decision.

Strong economic growth rooted in the rule of law
is key to ensuring the long-term prosperity and security
of the Balkans. We encourage Kosovo to create the
conditions needed for sustainable, private sector-led
growth by aggressively pursuing judicial reforms and
tackling crime and corruption. Kosovo's continued

cooperation with the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) is critical here. Kosovo's
entry into the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank last year and, we hope, its eventual entry
into other regional and multilateral institutions, such as
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development,
will help promote reforms that ultimately benefit the
people of Kosovo. We encourage all of our fellow
Member States to support Kosovo's full participation
in international forums, including the Central European
Free Trade Agreement.

We also support the Government of Kosovo's
efforts to responsibly enforce its laws, including recent
measures taken by the Kosovo Telecommunications
Regulatory Authority. Authorities in Kosovo and Serbia
must work together to promote commercial activity in
the telecommunications and energy sectors while
respecting Kosovo law to meet the genuine needs of
Kosovo's communities.

Further, the North Atlantic Council's recent
decision to continue downsizing the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) reflects improvements in the security situation
and the professionalism of Kosovo's security forces.
The two Governments' cooperative approach to the
installation of the Patriarch of the Serbian Orthodox
Church last month in Peje further contributed to
security and stability, in keeping with the shared
responsibility to protect and preserve the vital role of
the Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo.

That brings me to my third and final point. As the
report (S/2010/562) makes clear, many challenges
remain in northern Kosovo. We strongly condemn acts
and threats of violence, including those reported against
ethnic Serbs in northern Kosovo that are intended to
intimidate those who would engage with Kosovo's
legitimate institutions. Such attacks exacerbate divisions
and undermine security. We welcome the support by
EULEX of the Kosovo police's efforts to improve
respect for the rule of law in northern Kosovo and we
call on authorities in Pristina and Belgrade to support
and contribute to those efforts.

The United States will continue to support
Kosovo as it works to build a stable, prosperous and
democratic country that is at peace with its neighbours
and more and more integrated into the Euro-Atlantic
community. Similarly, we will continue to support the
aspirations of Serbia and all the countries of the

Western Balkans to achieve their goals for European
and Euro-Atlantic integration.

