Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Central African Republic,
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for his briefing. We also
thank Mr. Andrew Gilmour and the representative of
the Community of Sant'Egidio.

We share the concerns about the continuing
instability in the Central African Republic, especially
in the area of security. As we can see, intercommunal
strife continues in the country. Criminality and
banditry are widespread. There are bloody clashes
taking place on religious and ethnic grounds. Intense
skirmishes between armed groups continue as they
fight over territory, key trade routes and resources. The
situation is further complicated by the fact that State
administration and security bodies are either paralysed
or simply absent in many parts of the country. As
was the case before, Bangui is the only island of
tranquillity in the country. Clashes between non-State
armed groups in the central and eastern regions of
the country and insurgents' attacks on civilians and
humanitarian personnel and peacekeepers not only
undermine the security situation, but also impede
national reconciliation.

Clearly, given such a complex military and political
situation in the Central African Republic, the stabilizing
role of the United Nations peacekeeping Mission cannot
be overemphasized. Blue Helmets, who put their own
lives at risk, are trying to put out the flames engulfing
the country. We pay tribute to their heroism and their
determination to help the people of the Central African
Republic and to achieve peace.

At the same time, we must acknowledge that, in
confronting the challenges facing the country, the
Administration of President Touadera has so far not
been able to count on its own armed forces, which in
fact exist on paper only. Two battalions made up of
1,500 troops will conclude their training at the end of
2017. It will take years for reliable armed forces to form
in the country. The international community must pay
attention to the need to strengthen the capability of
the Central African army in order to achieve lasting
security in the country.

In addition, we would like to point out the need to
balance the due diligence policy in the area of human
rights with supporting the security sector of the Central
African Republic. The task of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic is to help stabilize the
country. However, without urgent reforms, the Blue
Helmets will not be able to transfer responsibility to
the armed forces of the country. The peacekeepers in
the Central African Republic will not be there forever.
We must remember that.

We are concerned about the further deterioration in
the social, economic and humanitarian situation in the
country and the continuing severe lack of financing for
humanitarian needs. Today, the country faces another
problem in the humanitarian sphere, namely, illegal
armed groups who continue to attack humanitarian
workers. Last year, 31 per cent of such attacks
throughout the world took place in the Central African
Republic. We call on all parties to the conflict to ensure
unimpeded humanitarian access on the ground. On their
part, the authorities should create conditions conducive
to the voluntary, safe return of refugees and internally
displaced persons to their homes.

The Central African Republic authorities have the
overarching task of getting the country's judicial bodies
to function. In the circumstances it will be essential
to focus on restoring national capacity. The use by
peacekeepers of temporary emergency measures and
the protracted process of establishing a special criminal
court do not constitute a panacea for the country's
problems where combating impunity is concerned.
After almost two years this institution is still not
functioning, and there have been serious problems with
its financing. On top of that, the global experience has
been that various types of courts involving international
participation have generally been relatively ineffective
and very costly.

We would also like to draw attention to the fact
that one of the demands of the armed groups regarding
a general amnesty is meeting with hostility not
only from the Government - thereby delaying the
national dialogue - but also from many international
stakeholders. In that regard, we urge Bangui not to
rush into a final decision. After all, amnesty does not
imply impunity, and a promise to grant it does not
devalue the achievements of the Bangui Forum on
National Reconciliation in 2015. If we are to advance
the process ofreconciliation and the healing ofwounds,
it is essential to ensure that all the parties are motivated
to participate. If not, we run the risk of the conflict
continuing for years.

The Central African Republic needs major reforms
and modernization in every area of life. The process
of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation must receive extra impetus, which can
be achieved only with international assistance and,
most important, regional and subregional mediation.
In that connection, we note the mediation efforts of
the African Union and the Economic Community of
Central African States. However, it is clear that the
potential for stronger regional support for the country's
national dialogue is far from being fulfilled. As we
have seen from other examples of successful conflict
management in Africa, it is regional mediation that to a
great degree has a defining role to play in encouraging
the parties to conflicts to undertake direct dialogue.

