Mr. Mantovani (Italy): First, I wish to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jean
Arnault, for his instructive briefing and his unwavering
commitment to the successful fulfilment of the United
Nations mandate in Afghanistan.

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the United Kingdom on behalf of the
European Union. I also wish to associate myself and
my country with the condolences expressed by all
delegations on the loss of lives recently suffered by
several countries, namely Spain and the United States,
as well as among United Nations staff.

We are not used to adding our voice to that of the
European Union presidency, but under the current
circumstances we feel, in a way, bound to make a few
complementary remarks of our own. Actually, Italy's
efforts for the stabilization and the reconstruction of
Afghanistan, in this particular phase, are not of a
"business as usual" kind. They are, indeed,
unprecedented for us, as they were recently scaled up
exponentially as a response to the latest developments.

The worrying notes contained in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2005/525) reflect the difficult
reality on the ground. But that should not frighten us.
On the contrary, the daunting challenges lying ahead
should strengthen our commitment. Those challenges are
related to the three vital and intertwined pillars of
security, institution-building and economic development.
No effort should be spared in tackling those three
pillars in an integrated perspective. In that regard,
thanks to the multifaceted responsibilities it has assumed
in Afghanistan, Italy is in a privileged position to appraise
the benefits that the complementarity of endeavours in
the different sectors can bring. As lead country, we are
intensifying our efforts to support the plans of the
Afghan authorities to reform the justice sector. We
remain among the top development partners in terms of
financial contributions to priority sectors such as
infrastructure, health, education, culture, media,
refugee repatriation, demining, counter-narcotics and
women's empowerment. We will hold the rotating
command of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) for the next nine months, while
maintaining command of ISAF Regional Command
West and the Herat Provincial Reconstruction Team,
which entails, as I speak, the presence of
approximately 2,000 Italian soldiers in Afghanistan.

Those commitments have in recent months
further stimulated the political dialogue between
Afghan and Italian leaders. To mention just the latest
occasion, the Italian Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs visited Kabul on 4 August
on the occasion of the ISAF command takeover,
following President Karzai's visit last month to Italy,
when a joint declaration was signed on justice sector
reform, in which the two countries agreed on its
prioritization in the post-electoral agenda.

In his report, the Secretary-General expresses his
deep concern at the funding shortfall for the electoral
process. As a further sign of our commitment to its
success, in response to the urgent appeal for new
financial contributions for the parliamentary and local
elections, and in spite of our serious budgetary
constraints, Italy swiftly decided to allocate a further
€1 million, in addition to the €4 million previously
disbursed. We urge other potential donors to join in
that important endeavour.

On the other hand, we are glad to learn from the
report of the Secretary-General that consultations with
the Afghan Government on the post-electoral agenda
are already under way. We agree on the basic principles
of the renewed partnership between Afghanistan and
the international community outlined in the report, and
we stand ready to contribute further to consultations on
the future United Nations mandate. We are convinced
that the United Nations cannot but maintain a strong
role of leadership and overall coordination of the
efforts deployed by the international community.

Finally, let me stress that our strenuous efforts are
inspired by nothing but our deep-rooted friendship - I
should say brotherhood - with the Afghan people and
by our sense of admiration for the courage and resolve
of their democratically elected leadership. At the same
time, I cannot overemphasize the tremendous relevance
of the democratic renaissance of Afghanistan for
international peace and security and as a model for
peacebuilding policies and actions. We are proud to be
part of this historic process, which is now at a crucial
crossroads. Let us help the Afghan people to take the
correct turn.

