The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Cote d'Ivoire.

I would like to thank Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw, Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General for the Sahel, for his
briefing on developments in the Sahel and the current
initiatives to promote peace, stability and development.
I also thank Mr. Remy Rioux, Director-General of the
French Development Agency, and Mr. Hafez Ghanem,
Vice President of the World Bank for Africa, for their
informative presentations on the need for enhanced
cooperation among all actors in order to meet the
multiple challenges facing the Sahel. I also thank
Ambassador Ion Jinga for his briefing.

The Sahel today acts as a summary of the many
challenges facing the West African subregion. The
region has vast natural resources and significant
human capital, comprising 65 per cent of young people,
which should logically allow it to achieve sustainable
economic and social development as a guarantee of
peace and stability. Unfortunately, security clashes,
climate change, structural vulnerabilities and the lack
of basic social services hamper development efforts in
the region. The Sahel therefore reflects the false image
of a vast arid and poor area, where State authority is
barely evident, thereby fostering the proliferation of
networks of drug traffickers and armed terrorist groups.

At the high-level debate on 5 December (see S/PV.8413), it was underlined that peace and security are
inextricably linked to economic and social development.
That challenge therefore reinforces the need to find
lasting solutions to the current situation of instability
in the Sahel and the entire West African region.

In that regard, cote d'Ivoire welcomes the
recalibrated United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel with a view to ensuring coordinated and coherent
efforts to address the underlying causes of instability in
the Sahel. We would also like to express our support for
the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel for the
period 2018-2030. The Plan seeks to strengthen efforts
to accelerate shared prosperity and sustainable peace in
the region through the implementation of the priorities
identified to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Agenda 2063 of the African Union.
My country welcomes the fact that the Sahel Support
Plan is an instrument to promote coherence and
coordination for greater effectiveness and to achieve
results in the context of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel.

My country believes that it is necessary for
the United Nations to improve its coordination and
strengthen its collaboration with all partners in the
region, in particular national and regional institutions,
bilateral and multilateral organizations such as the
World Bank and the Sahel Alliance, and civil society
organizations. That is an essential condition for the
implementation of the Security Council resolutions on
the Sahel.

As the challenges in the Sahel are numerous and
multifaceted, the security initiatives undertaken by
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and
the other forces present in the region do not represent
sufficient and sustainable responses. They should
necessarily be supported by the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the Sahel Support
Plan. In that regard, it is important to highlight the
crucial role of the World Bank and the Sahel Alliance,
as well as other development partners, in funding
development projects that generate employment and
opportunities for the empowerment of women, who
play a key role in promoting and strengthening peace
in the region.

In addition, the impacts of climate change on
resource and land management, conflicts, population
displacement and migration flows are considerable and
require a concerted approach on our part to address the
root causes of the instability in the Sahel. Given the
numerous challenges, Cote d'Ivoire calls for a paradigm
shift in the region. We must make our actions part of a
long-term forward-looking vision, based on a relevant
analysis of the aspirations ofthe populations concerned
and development strategies, taking into account the
socioeconomic environment of the countries of the
Sahel region.

My country would like to commend the international
community's concern over the Sahel. We call on the
States of the region to take ownership of their collective
security and economic and social development by
implementing the United Nations Support Plan for
the Sahel.

In conclusion, my country believes that the
implementation of the Sahel Support Plan, which
is based on the principle of mutual accountability,
deserves the utmost attention of the Council and all
development partners.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 5pm.
