Mr. Jeremie (Serbia): Mr. President, thank you
for convening this meeting of the Security Council
pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999).

At the outset, I would like to greet the new
members of the Council and to appeal to them to
continue to refrain from recognizing any solution to the
Kosovo problem that is not the product of an
agreement between the parties. I would also like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations Edmond Mulet for his statement and
acknowledge Special Representative Farid Zarif, who
joins us today Via a video link. We look forward to his
return to this Chamber for our next meeting.

The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is a crucial pillar of
peace and stability in the province. We concur with the
Secretary-General's call on the Council to "support [...]
its role, especially in facilitating engagement between
all stakeholders and containing tensions and
confrontations on the ground" (S/2012/72, para. 56). In
this context, the Secretary-General adds,

"it remains crucial that initiatives undertaken by
the international actors operating within the
framework of the United Nations and resolution
1244 (1999) are strategically aligned and closely
coordinated" (ibid.).

The Secretary-General's overall assessment of
developments in the last quarter of 2011 is that "risks
to peace and stability from the Kosovo issue continue
to confront the people on the ground and the
international community" (ibid., para. 52). His report
goes on to emphasize that the situation remains
volatile, and "carries a continued risk of... an
escalation of inter-ethnic tensions" (ibid.).

After a series of incidents in late November,
conditions in northern Kosovo began to slowly
improve, and "tensions in the area subsided by the end
of the reporting period" (ibid.). For the Serbian
community in the south, the situation unfortunately did
not get significantly better, as the trend of violent
incidents continued apace and the number of returnees
remained very low. The Christmas visit of President
Tadie to the Visoki Decani monastery, during which he
made an appeal for a comprehensive peace between
Serbs and Albanians, was met with organized protests
throughout Kosovo, including attacks on his convoy.

In its executive capacity, EULEX made some
positive contributions to the administration of justice in
Kosovo. It brought to trial a number of high-profile
cases in the areas of organized crime and corruption,
targeting a number of senior officials and controversial
public figures in Kosovo.

In the second half of the reporting period the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina resumed. Some
breakthroughs were made, despite what the report
called, in reference to this process, "challenging
circumstances".

North Kosovo remains volatile as a result of
attempts to unilaterally alter the reality on the ground,
in violation of resolution 1244 (1999) and against the
will of the majority Serb population. The unfolding
consequences of attempts to impose outcomes through
the use of force continued to dominate the political
climate during the first half of the reporting period.
This resulted in the setting up of road blocks,
demonstrations and clashes. We swiftly and
unequivocally condemned the violence. We also called
on all the stakeholders to resolve problems through
peaceful negotiations and to refrain from any action
detrimental to the establishment of a safe and secure
environment. In early December the situation began to
de-escalate, in part thanks to the efforts of UNMIK,
which facilitated what the report terms "a new security
coordination forum" that involves local Serb leaders,
KFOR, EULEX and the OSCE.

As in the previous reporting period, a number of
incidents directed against ethnic Serbs in South
Kosovo
12-22578
"continue to affect negatively the perception of
security. This is particularly the case when the
incidents are not followed up by effective
action on the part of law enforcement bodies."
(S/2012/72, para. 29)

The report notes several categories of crimes
committed against Serbs in South Kosovo, including
murder, assault, home invasion, burglary, stoning of
vehicles, arson, theft of farm equipment and attacks on
pilgrims and returnees. The gravest crime took place in
Dobrusa, an isolated Albanian-majority village in the
South Kosovo municipality of Istok. A family of
Kosovo Serb internally displaced persons (IDPs) had
gone to visit their abandoned property for the first time
in many years. They were greeted by an ethnic
Albanian neighbour, who then went back into his
home. Soon thereafter, the report informs us, he opened
fire on the Kosovo Serb returnees with an automatic
rifle, killing one and injuring the other two.

The report also indicates that acts of desecration
and vandalism against the Serbian Orthodox church,
holy sites and cemeteries continue to take place. Such
hate crimes severely hamper reconciliation efforts.
They also keep the rate of IDP returns at very low
levels; according to the report, they are down 51 per
cent in comparison to the same period the year before.

Serbia agrees with the Secretary-General's
assessment that recent developments regarding
privatization are cause for great concern.

In 2002, UNMIK established the Kosovo Trust
Agency (KTA) for the purpose of facilitating the
implementation of economic reconstruction and
development of Kosovo. As it privatized a number of
Kosovo-based Serbian companies, funds were held to
provide compensation to rightful owners. A reduction
in the Agency's powers and responsibilities was never
endorsed by this Council, and its jurisdiction remained
beyond the scope of the process of UNMIK's
reconfiguration, which took place over the course of
2008. During that period, the authorities in Pristina
established an institution called the Kosovo
Privatization Agency, forcibly taking over many of the
KTA's functions.

As paragraph 26 of the report informs us, over
the past few months, we have seen a significant
weakening of the protection of privatization funds. The
report notes: "international involvement in and
oversight of the privatization and liquidation processes

. is being acutely curtailed". Only a limited appellate
process will have majority international supervision,
and even that is understood to be temporary. The
Secretary-General's conclusion is unequivocal: "This
constitutes a departure from the privatization
framework established by UNMIK".

Approximately a quarter of a billion euros are
being held in banks of various United Nations Member
States. It is likely that the so-called Kosovo
Privatization Agency will try to gain access to these
funds. The financial institutions that hold those
deposits must not release them until an agreement is
reached among the stakeholders. This is a very serious
liability issue, and we shall not refrain from using all
juridical mechanisms at our disposal to protect our
property rights.

We believe this is a matter that requires the
attention of the Security Council. The actions by the
Kosovo Privatization Agency amount to usurpation of
the authority and jurisdiction of the United Nations.
This could set a precedent with serious consequences
for all United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Annex I of today's report makes reference to
what is commonly known as the Medicus case. It
involves an organized criminal conspiracy to source
human organs for illicit transplant in a Pristina clinic.
While EULEX has been able to bring to trial a number
of ethnic Albanians on various charges, two of the
prime suspects - both foreigners - fled Kosovo and
cannot be extradited. Some of those who are suspected
of involvement in this affair, starting with its
ringleader, are also mentioned in a deeply disturbing
report released by the Council of Europe more than a
year ago, entitled "Inhuman treatment of people and
illicit trafficking in human organs in Kosovo". It
contains allegations of harvesting and smuggling of
human organs before, during and after the 1999
conflict. If proven true, it would constitute an entirely
new category of war crime.

This past October, Mr. Clint Williamson became
Lead Prosecutor for the EULEX Special Investigative
Task Force. During his first visit to Belgrade, we
assured him and his team that we will assist them in
any way that we can, for we believe they can make an
important contribution to uncovering what occurred
inside Kosovo itself. But this remains insufficient, for
much of what is alleged took place beyond that
territory.
Since EULEX cannot operate at full capacity
anywhere outside Kosovo, at the moment it has neither
an adequate mandate nor sufficient temporal and
territorial jurisdiction to carry out an investigation that
would be comprehensive in scope. Only an
investigation conducted under the auspices of the
Security Council can ensure that. Otherwise, any
number of alleged participants in this war crime could
remain beyond the reach of justice.

When it comes to such matters in the Balkan
context, a mandate to investigate has always been
bestowed by the Security Council. It should happen
again, not only for the sake of consistency, but to
ensure the investigation becomes transparent and
accountable to the whole world. We appreciate
previous efforts to reach a consensus in the Council on
how these allegations can be decisively addressed. We
must not yield on this, on both moral and human rights
grounds. Serbia will therefore seek another round of
Security Council consultations on the issue.

As indicated in the report, progress has been
made in the technical dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. To quote from it, "positive results were
achieved during the intensive sessions held in
November and early December, and there is now
visible progress in the implementation of previously
reached agreements" (ibid., para. 53). Serbia remains
committed to this process. It is the only legitimate
mechanism with which to overcome differences on
practical considerations.

The problem of Pristina's participation in
regional meetings will be addressed in the next round
of dialogue. We have never sought to prevent any voice
in our part of the world from being heard, including
that of Pristina. However, this must stay in unequivocal
and explicit accord with resolution 1244 (1999). We
ask the Security Council to support the centrality of its
resolutions in the context of the dialogue.

Close to four years ago today, the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo unilaterally
declared independence from Serbia. Our measured
reaction to the blatant violation of our Constitution
ensured that the peace was kept. That was the first time
in the history of the Balkans that a development of
such gravity did not result in armed hostilities.
However, a comprehensive settlement to the
underlying dispute between the parties has not yet been
found. President Tadie has repeatedly said that it must

provide for ironclad, internationally guaranteed
assurances that safeguard our interests inside the
province by securing a realistic solution for North
Kosovo, protecting our enclaves in South Kosovo,
preserving Serbian identity and religious heritage
throughout the province and settling private and
commercial property claims.

In coming to the end of my remarks, I wish to
emphasize that the pursuit of outcomes outside the
framework of negotiations is both futile and
counterproductive. This include seeking new
recognitions for the Unilateral Declaration of
Independence, divisive attempts to force one's way
into international organizations and any number of
other plans to achieve narrowly conceived objectives.
The only way to produce a viable, sustainable and
lasting solution to the problem of Kosovo is for the
parties to negotiate with each other in good faith, on all
outstanding issues. We are ready.

