Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presence, as well as for his valuable contributions
to today's discussion. I would also like to thank the
Nigerian presidency for organizing today's debate and
for its cohesive approach to the three debates that have
been scheduled for this week to address new challenges
such as Ebola, crucial solutions such as security sector
reform and the work to be undertaken by regional
organizations. Those are three issues that affect us all
and whose consideration by the Council is essential.
Our thanks for that.

I am going to divide my statement into two parts.
First, I would like to refer to those aspects that, in the
View of Spain, have greater added value for the role of
regional organizations in the face of new challenges to
international peace and security. Second, I will address
the challenges those regional organizations face in

conducting their work.

First of all, with respect to the added value of
these bodies, I will paraphrase the Secretary-General,
who acknowledged that this is a time of partnership
peacekeeping. Of course, this is a reality, and the main
aspect to which I will refer is the importance of the
work of regional organizations in peacekeeping as well
as the repercussions of current conflicts in terms of
violence, with indiscriminate attacks against civilians,
and in humanitarian terms, causing refugees crises,
just to give a few examples.

It is now more than ever necessary that regional
and subregional structures become involved in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding in the States of
their region. They have a greater knowledge of local
realities and can make the best contributions. The case
of Africa is a paradigmatic in that respect. The crucial
role played by the African Union (AU) in crises such as
those in Somalia and the Central African Republic with
the support and the assistance of the United Nations is
a very good example.

But it is not only regional organizations of a
continental nature but also subregional organizations
that have important added value. In the case of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, for
instance, we saw yesterday how it was able to shape
the beginnings of an agreement in the case of South
Sudan that we trust will be able to be developed later.
Also, the Economic Community of West African
States plays a very important role in supporting and
playing a preventive role with respect to resolving the
institutional and political crisis in Guinea-Bissau. Let
me mention also the East African Community, which
also supported the Arusha agreements in Burundi and
which today could play a very important role in helping
to achieve stability in that country, and, of course, we
encourage them to do so.

Another area where regional organizations also
have important added value is attention to new threats,
and here I should to refer in particular to the fight
against terrorism. Undoubtedly the rise of terrorism
and radicalism is a global problem that we all face and
that requires that we be united in the fight against this
barbaric phenomenon. Tackling the problem from a
global perspective is key, but we must do it also from a
regional perspective.

Regional organizations are increasingly aware
of that fact, and a very clear example of this was the

participation of many of these organizations - the
European Union, the African Union, the League ofArab
States, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the Council of Europe - in the ministerial
meeting on foreign terrorist fighters held in Madrid on
28 July, along with the special meeting of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate chaired
by the Ambassador of Lithuania. That was a very clear
example of their involvement in this area.

There are other aspects and other new threats that
also require efforts on the part ofregional organizations.
Here I refer to the fight against transnational organized
crime, mitigating environmental threats and the
fight against illicit trafficking, including human
trafficking, which is something we see every day on
the Mediterranean coast.

Another aspect that my delegation would like to
stress in connection with the importance of regional
organizations is preventive diplomacy and, more
specifically, mediation. We in Spain firmly believe in
the value of mediation as an instrument of preventive
diplomacy. Regional organizations have a great deal to
say in this area, as they have deeper knowledge of the
local culture and realities, and they have the capacity
to influence regional actors, with broad leeway for
the participation of civil society, including women, in
mediation initiatives.

Any initiative promoting the training and
involvement of regional organizations in mediation
efforts seems particularly interesting to us. I would
like to give an example of this. In March, within the
framework of the Spanish-Moroccan initiative on the
promotion of mediation in the Mediterranean region,
a seminar was held in Madrid on the role of regional
and subregional organizations in mediation in the
Mediterranean region. The seminar helped to promote
and develop General Assembly resolution 68/303,
of 2014, on mediation and regional organizations.
We were joined in Madrid not only by the United
Nations but also by the European Union, the Union
for the Mediterranean, the League of Arab States,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the Arab Maghreb Union. These types of
meetings will continue and soon, as I said earlier, the
representative of Jordan will hold another meeting in
Amman along these same lines.

Having said that, we have to acknowledge that
obstacles exist to the work of regional and subregional
organizations, obstacles that we must jointly try
to overcome. Among them I would mention very
briefly the need to guarantee and sustainability and
predictability of financial resources, the need to
promote capacity-building in regional and subregional
bodies, and the need to enhance cooperation between
regional bodies and the United Nations. The African
Union is once again a very good example of the efforts
that have been made in recent years, with its increasing
contribution to the maintenance of peace and security.
As a member of the European Union, I must of course
mention the importance that Spain attaches to the
cooperation that the European Union has with those
regional organizations.

While aligning myself with the statement to be
made later by the representative of the European Union,
I wish to to stress the important role of triangulation
among the European Union, the United Nations and
other organizations, specifically the African Union.

I should like to conclude by raising a series ofissues
that the Council itself could reflect on and consider as
a means of deepening the existing relationship between
the United Nations and these regional organizations.
There are annual meetings between the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union or the Political and Security Committee
of the European Union. These types of meetings are
a very good starting point, and my delegation fully
supports them. There are other things we could take
into account, for example, the statements made by
Security Council members before the organs of regional
bodies. Spain had the honour to participate this year, on
four different occasions, in the work of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union, and we believe
that that was a very positive experience for all involved.
Other ideas could involve greater coordination
among the agendas or presidencies of the Councils,
joint annual meetings of the Secretaries-General of
the regional organizations with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, and so there is a whole set of
different aspects on which I believe the Security
Council should reflect so as to determine if we could
put them into practice.

