Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Allow me to express
my delegation's deep appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate in order for us to share
views on the situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine.

Mydelegationwishesto alignitselfwiththe statement
delivered by delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

At the outset, let me take this opportunity to express
our deep concern at the escalating tension and violent
clashes that took place in and around the old city of
Jerusalem this weekend. We join others in strongly
condemning these acts of terror on innocent people and
regret the loss of innocent lives and hope for a speedy
recovery to those who are wounded.As the tension in
occupied East Jerusalem continues to escalate and the
people of Palestine continue living in the face of an
unrelenting human tragedy of multiple conflicts and
rising tension 50 years on, my Government wishes to
reiterate the urgent need for the international community
to swiftly address this rapidly deteriorating situation.

We regret that over the half century since Israel's
occupation of the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and East
Jerusalem, there has been little progress achieved to
bring about a viable solution to the Palestinian quest
for control of the occupied territories. It is sad that the
lack of progress in the dialogue between the parties,
continued illegal settlement activities, violence and
increased radicalization still engulf the Middle East to
this day. In this regard, Botswana condemns the ongoing
violence and continued documented settlement-related
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, which
regrettably undermine all international efforts towards
the achievement of a lasting solution.

We believe that previous actions ofthe Council since
1967, including the adoption of resolution 242 (1967),
resolution 338 (1973) and most recently resolution 2334
(2016) are positive steps in the right direction on the
path towards delegitimizing the Israeli settlements and
reiterating the call for the achievement of a two-State
solution. In our view, this is the only viable solution
to a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We therefore call for the
immediate and complete halt of any settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, which are in violation of these resolutions
and also a breach of international law.

If achieving a negotiated two-State outcome
is indeed the only way to lay the foundation for an
enduring peace in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, all
stakeholders must take responsibility to ensure that this
cause is achieved. In this respect, we welcome continued
efforts of the United Nations, the United States, Russia,
the European Union and regional partners who continue
to work tirelessly for progress in the quest for solutions
in the peace process in the Middle East so as to achieve
a peaceful, fair, negotiated and lasting solution in line
with international law.

Botswana's long-standing position on the Middle
East peace process remains unequivocal. We support
a negotiated solution that embraces the coexistence of
Israel and Palestine as sovereign States, living side by
side, that share not only a border, but also a common
desire for peace, security and prosperity. We continue
to call on both parties to resume dialogue as soon as
possible without preconditions as an essential step
towards achieving peace and a two-State solution.

In conclusion, Botswana reiterates that a stable
and peaceful Middle East, free of violence with the
two States living side by side in harmony, is not only
good for peace and security in the region, which has
enormous potential, but will also provide a conducive
environment for a prosperous and peaceful Middle
East. It is therefore pertinent for all of us to create the
conditions for a return to negotiations to solve all final
status issues on the basis of relevant United Nations
resolutions, mutual agreements and international law.

My delegation wishes to reaffirm our Government's
solidarity with the Palestinian people and reiterates our
resolve to find a lasting solution that will shape the

Middle East landscape in order to improve the quality
of life of the innocent people in that country.

