Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I deliver this statement on
behalf of the three co-penholders, namely, Belgium,
Germany and Kuwait.

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock and Ms. Susannah Sirkin for their
briefings, as well as to express our gratitude, deep
respect and appreciation to all humanitarian and
medical workers throughout Syria, especially those in
the very challenging and dangerous environment of
north-western Syria.

We heard once again today from the United Nations
about the horrors that civilians are facing in north-
western Syria - an area that has faced an ongoing
military campaign for the past three months. According
to the United Nations, hundreds of people have been
killed as a result of the latest air strikes. Other reports
also state that more children have been killed in the
past four weeks in Idlib than in all of 2018.

Hospitals, schools and markets have been
deliberately targeted and destroyed by air strikes. Much
of that civilian infrastructure was deconflicted, which
means that their coordinates were known to the parties.
They knew, and they know, what they are doing. Such
attacks on deconflicted civilian infrastructure are
simply unacceptable and have to stop immediately.

The recent attacks on health-care facilities and
markets in Maarat Al-Numan resulting in the death
of many civilians are alarming. As co-penholders,
we strongly condemn those air strikes deliberately
targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure and
consequently severely impacting civilians' lives and
the humanitarian response in north-western Syria.

We reaffirm that all parties must take all necessary

measures to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure,
as well as humanitarian workers, who were also
directly targeted in the recent attacks, in accordance
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We also call on
the parties to the conflict to respect Security Council
resolutions pertaining to civilian infrastructure, in
particular resolutions 2286 (2016) and 2427 (2018), on
the protection of hospitals and schools, respectively.

We remind all parties that counter-terrorism
efforts cannot absolve them of their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including the
protection of civilians and the principles of distinction,
precaution and proportionality. We reiterate our call
for the sustained implementation of the ceasefire
arrangements of the Russia-Turkey memorandum of
understanding of September 2018. We also reiterate
our call for a nationwide cessation of hostilities, in
accordance with resolution 2401 (2018). Once again, we
reaffirm that there is no military solution to the conflict
in Syria.

We, the penholders, believe that the Council has a
responsibility towards the people of Syria, particularly
those living in and around Idlib. We call for the
protection of the 3 million civilians living in that area,
1 million of whom are children. That is why, time and
time again over the past three months, we have called
for meeting after meeting on the situation in north-
western Syria, and initiated several draft statements on
this military escalation and its humanitarian impact.
Unfortunately, the Council has not been able to unite
around such initiatives. Nevertheless, we will not tire.

We recall that the number of displaced persons in
north-western Syria has almost tripled since we, the
penholders, first called for a meeting in early May on
the impact of this military escalation. The number of
people displaced has risen from 176,000 people at that
time to 440,000 today. One cannot help but ponder
whether the inaction of the Council is partly to blame
for the dramatic increase in the number of displaced and
what, if anything, we could have done differently. That
is also why we will continue to draw attention to the
events unfolding in north-western Syria. The Council
cannot continue to stand by and watch Idlib turn into
the worst humanitarian catastrophe of the twenty-first
century, as Mr. Lowcock has warned us several times.
It is time we heard his call and acted upon it.

The situation in the Rukban camp is desperate. The

United Nations and its partners must be able to provide
assistance to those remaining in the camp. Inhabitants
should be able to make an informed choice on whether or
not to leave the camp in a voluntary, safe and dignified
manner. For those who are willing to leave the camp,
key protection standards must be in place. In the Al-Hol
camp, the situation remains deeply concerning for the
70,000 people there, 90 per cent of whom are women
and children facing protection concerns. Improved
humanitarian access is needed for the population of
the camp.

Syria and its people have witnessed some of the
most serious crimes defined under international law.
We echo the Secretary-General's call in his statement
of 11 July that the perpetrators of serious violations
of international humanitarian law must be held
accountable. There can be no lasting peace in Syria
without justice and accountability. We stand firm in
our commitment to fighting impunity. In this context,
we renew our support for the work of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International
Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011.

With regard to the return of refugees, our position
remains unchanged. All returns must be safe, voluntary
and dignified.

Tens of thousands of Syrians remain detained,
missing or unaccounted for. Last month, the Council
adopted resolution 2474 (2019), the first resolution
of the Council on missing persons in armed conflict.
This resolution is particularly relevant to the situation
in Syria today. The families of those The situation in
the Middle East detained or missing deserve to know
the fate of their loved ones, and we call for tangible
progress on this issue.

As for humanitarian access, we would like to
emphasize that it must be provided in an unconditional,
safe, timely, unhindered and sustained manner. We
remind all parties to the conflict of resolution 2449
(2018), on humanitarian access and cross-border
assistance, which calls upon all parties to ensure
principled, sustained and improved humanitarian
assistance to Syria in 2019. It is high time for all parties
to the conflict to live up to this obligation and to do
more to ensure sustained quality access to all in need
throughout Syria.

Finally, we reiterate our full support for Special
Envoy Pedersen in his efforts to reach an inclusive
and credible political solution in Syria on the basis
of resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex). It will also be
conducive to a sustainable, long-term improvement of
the humanitarian situation in Syria.

