Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Sir, for convening this important debate
on peace and security in Africa, and in particular on
drug trafficking in the Sahel region and West Africa.
As your presidency comes to an end, Rwanda thanks
France for the attention it has paid this month, in Paris
and New York, to the issue of peace and security on our
continent.

We welcome the statement made by Mr. Fernando
Carrera, Minister for Foreign Affairs Minister of
Guatemala, including on the Council's working
methods. We take the opportunity of this last official
meeting of the Council for December to congratulate
Guatemala, Azerbaijan, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo
for their dedication and achievements over the past two
years in support of peace and security in Africa and
throughout the world. Rwanda has been privileged to
cooperate with them during the past year.

I would like to thank Secretary-General Mr. Ban
Ki-moon for his introductory statement, as well as
Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crimes (UNODC),
and Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa, for their respective
briefings. Our delegation endorses the statement to be
delivered by Mr. Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.

As previous speakers have noted, drug trafficking
and consumption pose an ongoing threat to peace and
security in Africa. The 33 tons of cocaine that transited
through West Africa in 2010, with a market value of
about $1.25 billion, represent a terrifying quantity. That
disturbing growth in drug trafficking on the continent
has created new challenges for a security situation that is
already fragile, especially in West Africa and the Sahel
region. In that regard, the link between drug cartels and
corrupt politicians and military personnel, as well as
terrorist organizations, is in and of itself an explosive
cocktail for the continent. Although today's discussion
is focused on the Sahel region and West Africa, it has
been emphasized that the countries of those region
serve principally as transit points for drugs coming
from South America and Asia on their way to Europe or
even North America, where they are mainly consumed.
Some of these transitting drugs remain on the continent
as payments to mediators or for local consumption,
with a primary impact on unemployed youth.

Combating drug trafficking should therefore be a
global war involving all continents - unfortunately,
with Africa as the axis. Moreover, at present a number
of West African and Sahel countries are encountering
problems with governance and security that create an
ideal situation for drug traffickers and all types of
criminals. Indeed, a vulnerable political environment
involving civil wars, insurrections and military
coups has destabilized an entire region and led to the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons, armed
groups, smugglers, crime syndicates and terrorist
organizations, all operating in a geographical region
that hampers the effective fight against drug trafficking.

With regard to drug trafficking, Guinea-Bissau
is the example that comes immediately to mind and
may be deemed symptomatic of what could happen
in many countries of the subregion - namely, a
power grab by those criminal networks ~ if nothing
is done to eradicate that plague. Sustained efforts
must be undertaken, especially by adressing the root
causes of instability in the region, first and foremost
governance, security sector reform, development and
youth unemployment. The countries of the region,
together with their international partners, must come
up with specific development solutions, especially
quick-impact projects, while laying solid foundations
for long-term development.

Rwanda acknowledges the considerable efforts
of the subregional organizations in combating drug
trafficking. We welcome the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) strategy to comply
with international drug control norms, especially
the 2008 Political Declaration on drug trafficking
and other organized crimes, as well as the Regional
Action Plan to Address the Growing Problem of
Illicit Drug Trafficking, Organized Crime and Drug
Abuse in West Africa. We also welcome the work of
the Inter-Governmental Action Group against Money
Laundering in West Africa, which is involved in
actions to fight money-laundering through training and
capacity-building programmes. In that regard, we call
on the international community to support ECOWAS in
reinvigorating the activities of the Group.

Mindful of the challenges linked to drug
trafficking on the continent, especially in West Africa
and the Sahel, the African Union also adopted a Plan
of Action on Drug Control 2013-2017. The Plan takes
a comprehensive approach to drugs by linking them
to organized crime, political corruption and terrorism,
which are all obstacles to development. Synergy and
the strengthening of continental and international
cooperation are the key to fighting drug trafficking.

All of those regional and subregional initiatives
demonstrate that the African Union, ECOWAS, other
subregional organizations and their Member States
are awarte of the scope of drug trafficking in West
Africa and in the Sahel. Therefore they deserve the
international community's sustained support because
the transnational and even transcontinental nature of
the threat indicates that no country and no region can
deal with the problem alone.

To conclude, we emphasize the need to combat
impunity and to launch operations against drug cartels
and corrupt politicians and soldiers, especially in
Guinea-Bissau. We are convinced that such operations
can send a strong message to drug traffickers and
politicians who use the region as a transit zone for
drugs. The international community cannot accept
that the Sahel and West Africa, or even Africa as a
whole, should remain an international platform for drug
trafficking.

