Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's meeting, which reflects the
urgency of the matter before us. My delegation also
commends the Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation
Council in coming up with a resolution on Yemen, as
well as the efforts by Jordan and the United Kingdom to
facilitate discussions on resolution 2201 (2015).

This month marks the fourth anniversary of the
revolution in Yemen that sparked the democratic
transition in the country on the basis of the aspirations
of its people. Yemen was a success model for the
region, being the only country with a negotiated
political transition arising from the Arab Spring in
2011, which included a clear road map and timeline for
for an inclusive democratic transition. Unfortunately,
Yemen is currently in real danger of backsliding into
civil war and sectarian conflict. Malaysia is deeply
alarmed at the unravelling situation in the country
with the unilateral takeover of the Government by the
Houthis, the increasing threat of terrorism, the looming
secession in the south and the dire humanitarian crisis.

We hope that the resolution adopted today, of
which Malaysia was a sponsor, will send a clear and
unmistakable signal to all parties in Yemen that any
efforts to derail the political transition in the country,
whether directly or indirectly, are unacceptable. We also
call on the Houthis to immediately release the Yemeni
President, Prime Minister and Cabinet Ministers from
house arrest.

We highly appreciate the tireless efforts by
Mr. Jamal Benomar, Special Adviser of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, to salvage the dialogue among all
parties. We reiterate our strong backing for his work.
His optimism and perseverance to resolve the current
situation through inclusive dialogue and negotiations in
a difficult situation is highly admirable. However, in the
end, the success of the negotiations will depend upon
the political will of the parties in Yemen themselves.
Malaysia therefore urges all parties, in particular the
Houthis, to uphold their earlier commitments to the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism, the outcomes of the National Dialogue
Conference and the Peace and National Partnership
Agreement. We share the View of the international
community that this remains the only legitimate path
towards a democratic, stable and inclusive Yemen. We
will continue to support Yemen in that endeavour.

