Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The way certain Security Council members
address the situation in Syria reminds me ofa quote that
some say is from Shakespeare - "There is an elephant
in the room" - meaning that there is a huge, visible
problem that cannot be overlooked. Certain members
in this Chamber pretend that the problem does not
exist, and they choose not address it or seek a solution
to it. That is precisely how certain Security Council
members addressed the situation in Syria when their
decision-makers ignored the main scourge destabilizing
Syria, the region and the entire world. That scourge is
the main reason for the humanitarian tragedy besetting
several areas in Syria and for the suffering of Syrian
women and children and for the transformation of
entire segments of the Syrian population into internally
displaced persons and refugees. That scourge is the
transborder Takfiri terrorism funded by well-known
States, chief among which is Saudi Arabia, which is the
bloodline that provides the source of life to terrorism.
The scourge of terrorism was unleashed from its
Wahhabi nest. It has savagely and indiscriminately
struck at Damascus, Baghdad, Beirut, Kuwait, the
Sinai, Abuja, Mali, Tunisia, Libya, Algeria, Sydney,
Boston, Paris and other locations.

While we condemn in the strongest terms the
terrorist acts in Paris and express our condolences to
the families of the victims, we recall that in this very
Chamber there are members who prevented the Security
Council nine times from issuing a mere press statement
condemning similar attacks that targeted innocent
civilians in Damascus, Aleppo and other Syrian cities.
It stands to reason that what we have seen in those cities
did not arise in a vacuum or happen by chance. It is the
predictable outcome of an attempt by certain parties to
ignore this issue and of the failure to address it with
the seriousness it deserves. It is a certain outcome of
the exploitation by certain parties who blackmail the
Syrian Government.

We have said from the beginning that those who
exploit andjustify terrorism or remain silent will suffer
it themselves, because it is a transborder phenomenon.
But our words fell on deaf ears. Certain States succeeded
in drawing terrorism into the political arena through
the front door, using rhetorical manoeuvres, dividing
terrorists into "acceptable" and "unacceptable" groups
and referring to certain terrorists as a "moderate
opposition", all the while disregarding the consequences
of such a course. People do not realize that a political
problem with the Syrian Government is a negotiable
issue. But by resorting to sanctions, by financing
terrorism and by refusing to take these issues up with
the Syrian Government and army in order to combat
this transborder crime, they are committing a crime as
much against their own people as against the Syrian
people.

In Syria we are fighting filthy terrorist groups on
behalf of the whole world. Every time the Syrian army
kills a foreign terrorist, dozens of innocent potential
victims are protected. Otherwise, that terrorist returns
home and does the same thing. Those who distort that
reality are accomplices in the scourge of terrorism and
partners in the bloodshed of the victims.

We would recall that among the perpetrators
of many attacks in several cities around the world,
including the recent bloody attacks in Paris, were
thousands of Europeans whose entry to Syria was
facilitated as jihadists after they were brainwashed by
fatwahs funded by well-known Gulf States. There is a
late awakening to the seriousness of terrorism that led
the President ofa permanent Security Council member
to amend the Constitution of his country to face the
Takfiri terrorism.

Acts should accompany words with regard to
combating terrorism in Syria, which is funded by
40 States and by the illegal trade in oil, along with the
illegal trade in artefacts across our borders with Turkey.
That requires serious political will to implement the
relevant Security Council resolutions on combating
terrorism, chief among them resolutions 2170 (2014),
2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015), which are underscored
in the second Vienna communique. It also requires
collective efforts under a single front against terrorism,
excluding political opportunists or amateurs.

Time and again, we have expressed our readiness to
cooperate with any State that is serious about combating
terrorism. That is precisely what has happened through
the joint Syrian-Russian military anti-terrorist action,
as well as the intelligence cooperation among Syria,
Iran, Iraq and Russia. That has led to practical results
in the field, namely, a retreat by terrorist groups from
many areas, which led to the secure, safe, voluntary
return of 1 million Syrian internally displaced persons
to their homes.

Seriously and effectively combating terrorism will
contribute to the success of a political solution to the
crisis in Syria. From the outset, the Syrian Government
has expressed its readiness to contribute to any serious
efforts to achieve a political solution. That is why
we cooperated with Mr. Kofi Annan and accepted
his six-point plan. We have also cooperated with
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi. We contributed to the second
Geneva Conference on Syria. And we cooperated with
Mr. De Mistura and accepted his proposal on Aleppo
and agreed to participate in his suggested four working
groups.

Our political message today, following the
conclusion of the meeting in Vienna, is that the Syrian
Government stands ready to contribute to any sincere
effort to achieve a political solution in which Syrians
decide their own future and choices through dialogue
among Syrians under Syrian leadership, without external
intervention, in a manner that ensures the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria, as has
been asserted by the several resolutions adopted by the
Council and the two Vienna communiques.

Unfortunately, the recent report (S/2015/862) of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) is politicized
and biased and includes many gaps and much erroneous

information. We have addressed two identical letters to
the President of the Security Council and the Secretary-
General on that issue. But I would like here to address
a serious issue in that report: it is based on unreliable
sources whose connections are well known, which
misleads Council members.

With regard to the allegation that the Syrian
Government is using indiscriminate weapons, I assert
that the Syrian army does not, has not and will not
use any indiscriminate weapons. It acts in accordance
with international law, within the context of combating
terrorism. Those who are killing civilians are those who
are using them as human shields in many areas of Syria.

Our deliberations and ongoing statementss on the
dangers of terrorism and the importance of combating
it should not be misunderstood as indicating that we
do not recognize the seriousness of the humanitarian
situation in Syria, in particular the situation of our
children and women. But that should not come at the
expense of the crux of the problem and should not be
politicized or subjected to double standards. We are
in discussion with Mr. O'Brien, Ms. Zerroughi and
Ms. Bangura. We have organized field missions to Syria
in order to address any outstanding issues. I welcome
Mr. O'Brien's visit to Syria next month.

We stand ready to cooperate with well-intentioned
members of the Security Council in order to improve
the situation in Syria.

The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.
