Mr. Bonne (France) (spoke in French): I too wish
to thank Ambassador Muburi-Muita for his
presentation.

As other speakers before me have said, the
African Union is one of the regional bodies that has

most developed its dialogue and cooperation with the
United Nations. The relationship is solid, especially
between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union, as was again
recently demonstrated by the meeting between our two
Councils at Addis Ababa on 21 May. It is also a rich
relationship, particularly between the Secretariat of our
Organization and the Commission of the African
Union, which is a good thing, because our partnership
is justified on several fronts, especially when it comes
to ways of working together to improve our
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations on the
continent.

The African Union supports the United Nations
on the ground and with regard to knowledge of the
regional environment. This shows that the continent is
fully involved in its own security. For its part, the
United Nations provides the African Union with
competencies and resources and shares experiences
that are useful in supporting the African Union in its
missions to prevent and manage crises on the
continent.

Today, our efforts should ensure that this original
partnership continues and improves in the spirit of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. In
that connection, we believe that the establishment of
the United Nations Office to the African Union in
Addis Ababa is a good thing. We believe that the
Office should contribute to strengthening the
partnership between our two organizations by
integrating greater United Nations activities and
strengthening our forecasting, planning and
coordination abilities on the ground.

I wish to congratulate Mr. Zachary Muburi-Muita
for his work and, again, for the briefing he has given
us. Thanks to this work, there is a greater visibility for
the United Nations in Addis Ababa as well as greater
visibility of the institutional cooperation between our
two organizations, which is important. I wish to
reiterate our support for Mr. Muburi-Muita and to
express our interest in his first report on the Office's
activities when it becomes available.

