Mrs. Craft (United States ofAmerica): The present
issue is one of the more complex issues that the Council
has to navigate. I therefore wish to thank the Special
Coordinator for his good-faith efforts and for the even-
handed perspective he brings to these briefings.

Before discussing today's topic, I want to make
brief mention of the important event that occurred over
the weekend. As President Trump stated, the world is a
much safer place following the operation by American
special operations forces that resulted in the death
of Al-Baghdadi. I want to thank Americans, fearless
women and men in uniform, our intelligence community
and our partners, who executed this mission flawlessly,
for their efforts in bringing the leader of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant to justice.

In my remarks on the issue last month (see S/PV.8625), I largely focused on Israel, which receives
a disproportionate amount of the United Nations
attention when it comes to the discussion of peace and
security in the Middle East. This attention is unfairly
negative and one-sided. In the past two years, there
have been some 20 resolutions in the General Assembly
either implicitly or explicitly criticizing Israel.

Today, I want to use my remarks to shed light on
an actor that somehow receives far less criticism than
Israel and whose behaviour has never been seriously
scrutinized by the Council or by the General Assembly:
Hamas, a terrorist organization that oppresses the
Palestinian people in Gaza through intimidation and
outright violence while inciting violence against Israel.

Hamas is one of the largest obstacles to real peace
and prosperity for Palestinians and to the resolution of
this conflict. If this institution is genuinely concerned
with peace, we should be eager to examine Hamas'
behaviour more closely. To begin, Hamas exhibits
a blatant lack of respect for democratic principles.
In recent months, as frustrated residents of Gaza
have voiced their opposition to the intolerable living
conditions created by Hamas' rule, Hamas has brutally
beaten peaceful protesters, raided homes and detained
organizers and journalists advocating for better living
standards. I condemn this behaviour. We all should.

The disregard Hamas shows for the will and
rights of the Palestinian people is matched only by the
disregard for innocent human life. We all know that
Hamas blindly fires rockets into Israel, as they have
done hundreds of times in 2019. But it is important for
us to understand what that means at a human level. The
vast majority of rockets fired by Hamas are unguided,
which means that a lethal munition is just as likely
to hit a classroom full of children as it is to strike a
military asset. We cannot imagine the fears of Israeli
mothers who know their children may spend recess
running from the playground to the bomb shelter, or the
Palestinian fathers who know that unguided rockets fly
over their roofs while their children sleep. I condemn
these indiscriminate attacks. We all should.

If there is anything more despicable than Hamas'
attacks on civilian areas, it is the way they treat their
own children as pawns in a political game. Every
Friday, Hamas encourages minors to join riots at the
security fence, hoping that violence will erupt and that
the children will be injured or even killed as a result,
thereby feeding their propaganda machine. A more
cynical and shameful approach could not be devised.
This is child abuse, plain and simple, and I condemn it.
We all should.

We have a responsibility to say what is plainly true
about Hamas, as well as the Palestinian Islamic Jihad
and other militant actors in Gaza, just as we have an
obligation to say what is plainly true of human rights
abusers around the world. To remain silent in this
instance would be an act against principle and an insult
to the Palestinian people. It is therefore my genuine
hope that this Chamber and, indeed, the halls of the
United Nations will one day resound with the truth
that we have spoken about Hamas. Lasting peace in
the Middle East and a better future for all Palestinians
depends on it.

