Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me begin by expressing
our gratitude to the United States presidency for
organizing this important debate. We also appreciate
the insights provided by the briefers.

Blue Helmets are recognized and respected all
over the world. They symbolize the United Nations
commitment to regional and international peace,
security and stability. They are emblematic of the
collective will and endeavour of all Member States to
make the world a peaceful and stable one. Enduring
conflicts mean lives lost, families broken, people in
camps and women and children left to languish in
extreme vulnerability. United Nations peacekeeping
has saved and protected millions of lives. It helps
shattered communities and neighbourhoods rebuild
themselves. It replaces strife with harmony and turns
despair into hope.

Peacekeeping, as we would all surely agree, has
been the United Nations most successful enterprise.
The recent closure of missions in Liberia, Sierra Leone
and Cote d'Ivoire is evidence of that success. It is a
humbling for us that Pakistani peacekeepers were
deployed in three of those missions ,They accomplished
their tasks, fulfilled their mandates and, above all, they
were able to win hearts and minds. Since the 1960s,
my country has contributed over 200,000 troops to
48 missions. Our contribution to peacekeeping has not,
however, been without cost - 156 of our bravest made
the ultimate sacrifice while serving the cause of peace.
Performance has also been the focus of our
discussions in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations this year. As a major troop-contributing
country (TCC), with a proud history of professionalism,
competence and honour, we welcome the focus on
performance. Improved performance would lead to
better results and improve the safety and security
of peacekeepers, which is of prime importance to
my country. Let me make six key observations on
performance. They may be useful to consider in
setting up the new mechanisms that the Secretariat
is developing.

First, at the time of creating and updating the
mandates of missions, the Security Council must base
its decisions on practical analysis by the Secretariat
of resource requirements. Mandates must be precise,
unambiguous and appropriately resourced. When
mandates and capabilities are out of sync, efficiency
and effectiveness inevitably suffer.

Secondly, there is a need for the rationalization and
prioritization of mandated tasks. The United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, for instance, is burdened with
209 tasks.

Thirdly, professionalism in peacekeeping ensures
excellence in service delivery. Pre-deployment
training, including common and standardized training,
is vital for all mission components. We have developed
peacekeeping training modules that form part of the
curriculums of our mandatory courses. We are willing
to share this expertise with other TCCs and with
the Secretariat.

Fourthly, transparency, especially between the
TCCs concerned and the Secretariat, to improve
delivery will provide better results than a publicized
name-and-shame approach.

Fifthly, the application of the Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System must extend to routine
deployments rather than being limited to emergent
deployments alone. If trained peacekeepers are
in readiness, there should not be any hesitation in
using them.

And sixthly, national caveats hinder performance.
They provide one TCC leverage to refuse to perform in
a given situation while expecting another that does not
hide behind such caveats to perform in the very same
situation. This creates a disproportionate set of both
responsibilities and expectations. A level playing field
is a prerequisite for a fair assessment of performance.

As one of the top performers, Pakistan will never
shy away from any discussion on performance or from
supporting the establishment of an effective system
to enhance it. We believe that we are all stakeholders
in this endeavour and have a shared responsibility.
Responsiveness to the realities on the ground and
feedback from TCCs, as well as meaningful triangular
cooperation, is the key to developing synergies vital to
the success of peacekeeping operations.

