Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank Ambassador
Borges and Special Representative Haq for their
presentations, and the Secretary-General for his
encouraging but balanced report (S/2010/522) on the
situation in Timor-Leste.

I also wish to convey New Zealand's condolences
to the Government and people of Japan and to the
family of former Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Kawakami on his untimely passing.

On this occasion, I am accompanied by His
Excellency Mr. Tim McIvor, New Zealand's
Ambassador to Timor-Leste.

Timor-Leste faces a critical period of transition
from a situation of fragility and instability to one
focused on long-term development and the challenges
of the future. The choices and investments that are
made over the next 18 months will determine whether
the nation-building of recent years will be sustained
and have an impact on Timor-Leste's future political,
economic and international outlook. In short, the
coming 18 months present a challenge to which we
must collectively respond, and an opportunity that
must not be squandered.

The Secretary-General's report evidences the
considerable progress of the past six months across all
areas of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). The security
situation has remained calm, enabling a drawdown in
the International Stabilisation Force. There has been
real progress towards the full transfer of executive
policing authority to the Policia Nacional de Timor-
Leste (PNTL). Double-digit growth has continued,
enabling progress in addressing poverty, and there have
been further advances in building the capacity and
effectiveness of core State institutions. We now see an
increasingly confident country determined to chart its
own future course. That is nowhere more evident than
in the drafting of the National Strategic Development
Plan, which includes a programme of nation-wide
consultations personally led by the Prime Minister.

All of that is cause for optimism, but over the
next 18 months we must preserve those gains and
deliver further progress in key areas. We must ensure
that the coming election consolidates the stable
democratic political culture that has emerged in recent
years, and that the institutions established to support
effective public management and guard against
corruption have sufficient resources and political
support to execute their duties effectively and
impartially. Timor-Leste will increasingly take the lead
in addressing those challenges, with support from the
international community. We need to give careful
thought as to how best we can support those efforts.

Planning for a post-UNMIT Timor-Leste must
begin now, because UNMIT's mandate for 2011 must
reflect key aspects of the transition. We are therefore
pleased that discussions have begun with the
Government for the joint management of that
transition, including the establishment of a high-level
steering group. We stress the importance of drawing in
other international partners, in due course, to ensure
the effective coordination of international support in
this critical period.

Transition management will be particularly
crucial in the security sector. Over the past year,
considerable progress has been made in building the
capacity of the Falintil-Forcas de Defesa de Timor-
Leste (F-FDTL) and the PNTL, and in establishing the
legislative, policy and operational frameworks for
defence and security.

We can now with some confidence envisage a
time when Timor-Leste will be able to provide for its
own security without a United Nations police or
international security forces presence. We do not know
exactly when that will be, but we do know that UNMIT
and the International Stabilisation Force will be there
to provide support through to the 2012 elections.
Whether they have a role beyond that must be decided
by the Government in consultation with the
international community. It is vital that serious
planning begin now to ensure a smooth transition and a
withdrawal that does not negatively affect the security
or economic situation. In this regard, completion of the
transfer of executive policing authority to the PNTL
will be crucial. Impressive progress has been made
over the past year, with district-by-district handovers
moving much more smoothly than was expected, but
challenges remain, particularly in Dili.

Significant issues remain to be resolved. In
particular, we urge an early resolution to the status of
uncertified officers who have been accused of serious
crimes. New Zealand fully shares the Secretary-
General's concerns in that regard. It is important that
this be resolved, not only for transferring police
authority, but also for maintaining the longer-term
integrity, reputation and effectiveness of the PNTL.

The requirement to build the operational
capabilities of the PNTL in key areas is also important.
This needs enhanced investment by the PNTL in
developing those capabilities, and careful planning to
ensure they are sustainable. The United Nations can
make an important contribution here, particularly in
deciding how to dispose of its assets during the
drawdown process. Its planning must be carefully
coordinated with the PNTL and the donor community,
and provision must be made for the long-term
maintenance and use of transferred equipment.

One practical contribution the United Nations
could consider would be to train mechanics to maintain
and repair motor vehicles. In fact, the United Nations
should consider transferring the UNMIT transport and
workshop facility in Dili to the PNTL.

With the transfer of executive policing authority,
the role, size and composition of United Nations police
must also change, as must its relationship with the
PNTL. Deploying experts will be crucial, so we urge
the early deployment of the 19 additional civilian
advisers who were approved in the most recent budget.
As this transition unfolds, it will be important that
Mission planners retain flexibility to ensure that
UNMIT adapts to the changing environment and that,
once policing has been transferred, the PNTL is seen to
be exercising the authority it has received with support
and assistance from the Mission.

New Zealand is playing its part in supporting the
development of the PNTL. For some years, our police
have successfully worked with their PNTL counterparts
to build an understanding of community policing.
Integrating police into their communities and building
trust between communities and police are essential to
building an effective modern police force - so much
so that the Timorese Government has highlighted
assistance on community policing as a priority on a
bilateral basis.

Over the past year, there has been significant
progress with key security sector reforms. The
Government has approved new defence and security
laws; a draft national security policy is now with the
Council of Ministers; and there are signs of clearer
demarcation of the roles of the PNTL and F-FDTL.

With the Government having articulated its vision
for the security sector, the focus of the Mission and
other international partners should now shift to
capacity-building, assistance and support. The United
Nations is providing advisers in the defence and
security administrations - assistance that will remain
necessary for some time yet. But international
personnel, in our View, should be working to make
their presence unnecessary, rather than becoming
entrenched in line positions.

Bilateral partners will also have a role to play in
the next phase of international assistance to Timor-
Leste, and we urge those partners to work closely with
the Timorese Government in that regard. As assistance
shifts from security to other priorities, New Zealand is
committed to aligning its support with Timor-Leste's
national development priorities, including the
Millennium Development Goals.

New Zealand believes that the United Nations
can be rightly proud of its contribution to Timor-Leste,
but must now look to manage the transition in a
manner that honours that contribution, and must plan
for a post-UNMIT future where its support is focused
on Timor-Leste's priorities and where the United
Nations can best add value.

New Zealand again assures the Council of its
ongoing commitment to Timor-Leste, its people and its
leaders, as well as to Ameerah Haq and to UNMIT, as
they face this exciting and challenging transition. They
all have our support.

