Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): My delegation
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Council for convening this open debate
on a matter of utmost importance. We are also most
grateful for the presence of the Secretary-General and
for the comments that he offered this morning.

As a strong supporter of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Liechtenstein took the floor last
year in the debate preceding the adoption of resolution
1422 (2002) and expressed its concerns regarding the
implications and indeed the legality of that resolution.
A renewal of the resolution for a further year has been
proposed to the Council, and we understand that the
Council will take action on this matter shortly. We thus
wish to reiterate our principal points of concern
regarding resolution 1422 (2002) and to emphasize
that, to our mind, there must be no automaticity of
renewal of a resolution that we consider deeply flawed.

Resolution 1422 (2002) invokes Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations without making a
determination of a threat to international peace and
security. That implies the notion that the ICC
constitutes such a threat. Further, the resolution
purports to be consistent with article 16 of the Rome
Statute while in fact violating both the letter and the
spirit of that provision. Article 16 was never intended
as a tool to grant a priori immunity to a whole category
of persons. This latter point also leads to the broader
question of the undermining of the international treaty-
making system. The Security Council does not have the
competence to adopt and interpret international
treaties, and by attempting to do so, it weakens the
system established by the Charter.

Those arguments, which have been presented in
this Chamber and elsewhere since last summer, are still
valid, of course, but the Council should also take into
account the developments that have taken place since
the adoption of resolution 1422 (2002). Most
important, the General Assembly has elected an
excellent and diverse bench of Judges and has
entrusted the post of Prosecutor to an internationally
renowned jurist. If the numerous and carefully drafted
safeguards provided for under the Statute against
frivolous and politically motivated prosecutions were
not convincing enough to some, the competence and
integrity of those senior officials should be. The Court
will not make politics, but it will deliver justice.

The adoption of resolution 1422 (2002) has raised
very serious questions concerning the role of the
Security Council that the simple renewal of the
resolution does not address. The greatest risk, however,
lies in the possibility - unlikely as it is - of the
relevance of such a renewed resolution to a concrete
case that might arise under the Court's jurisdiction. In
such an event, the Court would have to deal with the
legality of the decision by the Council as an incidental
question - an unfortunate but inevitable consequence
of the questionable legal underpinning of the request
made by the Council. Such a situation would
necessarily upset the relationship between the Court
and the Council, one of the most carefully balanced
aspects of the Rome Statute.

Concerned as we are about the integrity of the
Rome Statute, we nevertheless believe that resolution
1422 (2002) is more damaging to the Security Council
itself than it is to the Court. Many of the comments
offered a year ago and since make it clear that the
resolution effectively raises questions about the
credibility of the Council's action. At a time when the
relevance of the Council - and thus of the
Organization as a whole - is openly questioned by
many critics, the Council would do itself a disservice
by automatically or indefinitely renewing the
provisions of resolution 1422 (2002).

