Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Senegalese delegation
convening this morning's debate.

(spoke in English)

It is also my pleasure and honour to welcome
today's briefers and thank them for their
comprehensive presentations.

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later on behalf of the European Union.

Nowadays most of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations are deployed on the African continent.
Almost 50 per cent of the uniformed personnel in those
missions are also provided by African States. That
clearly demonstrates that United Nations peacekeeping
efforts must closely cooperate with African States.
At the same time, the United Nations is often slow in
reacting to situations that can evolve into full-scale
conflicts or situations where the civilian population
is endangered and requires rapid protection action
from the international community. In that regard, my
delegation commends the African Union (AU) for
having often acted as a first responder to crises even
before the deployment of United Nations peacekeepers.
Nevertheless, we have to admit that challenges remain
and that more should be done to strengthen further the
relationship between the United Nations and the AU to
effectively address collective security concerns on the
African continent.

In our view, financing is one of the priority areas
in which further action could bring about tangible,
positive results. The predictability, sustainability and
flexibility of financing for AU-led peace operations
has been a long-standing issue. In that regard, the AU's
decision to raise the continent's contribution to the costs
of its peace-support operations to 25 per cent by 2020
is a highly commendable step. It will enhance African
ownership and agenda-setting ofpeace initiatives ofthe
African Union. In addition, I would like to flag other
areas of particular importance.

First, it is imperative to eliminate a frequently
occurring flaw in many AU peace-support operations,
namely, a capability gap with regard to uniformed
personnel. We believe that ensuring deployment
readiness and improved performance require collective
and coordinated actions by the United Nations and
the AU. As one of the leading European troop- and
police- contributing countries to the United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa, Ukraine knows at
first-hand how difficult and unpredictable situations
in the areas of missions' responsibility can sometimes
be due to the existing climate or security conditions.
Cooperation on strengthening the capabilities of African
Union units prior to their deployment therefore could
include, but not be limited to, sharing of best practices
and providing special training. For instance, the United
Nations has already introduced the Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System, which has proved to be a
useful tool for United Nations peacekeeping operations.
In our view, it could be emulated by the African Union.

Secondly, recently the Security Council, along
with other United Nations States Members, discussed
the issue of asymmetrical threats that United Nations
operations face nowadays (see S/PV.7802). It was clear
from those deliberations, as well as from the relevant
reports on peacekeeping operations, that United Nations
peacekeeping missions are not a proper tool to combat
terrorism. Many hold a View that military measures
to counter terrorism and violent extremism are the
responsibility of national Governments and the relevant
regional organizations. Therefore, we see a great merit
in the United Nations providing advice and expertise in
support of respective African Union endeavours.

Thirdly, after recent peacekeeping and
peacebuilding reviews at the United Nations, we
consider a people-centred approach to such activities
of the Organization to be axiomatic. In that respect,
we believe that the protection of civilians is a decisive
factor not only for the success of United Nations
operations, but also those of the AU endorsed by the
Security Council. It is therefore worth considering
establishing an effective framework for the Human
Rights Due Diligence Policy in African Union peace
operations. From the peacekeeping experience of the
United Nations, it is clear that there is no peace without
human rights.

Last but not least, in the light of the recent resolutions
of the Council and General Assembly on peacebuilding
architecture, it is important to look back at the 2015
joint communique between the African Union and
the Security Council, which envisaged a conduct of
joint United Nations-AU field missions to areas of
conflict in Africa. We should consider implementing
that commitment while organizing field missions of
the Security Council, which we see as an important
conflict-prevention tool. Inviting representatives
of Peacebuilding Commision country-specific
configurations to such missions could also improve the
efficiency and effectiveness of the Council's visits.

In conclusion, Ukraine would like to reiterate its
position that, as an elected member of the Council
and an observer State to the AU, we stand ready to
engage constructively on each and every initiative
aimed at enhancing United Nations-AU cooperation
on issues related to peacekeeping, peace support
and peacebuilding on the African continent. People
have suffered for too long in many parts of that great
continent, and the international community has a moral
responsibility to make every effort to achieve lasting
peace and stability wherever that might be needed.

