Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I can hardly find
the words to express my frustration over the voting
outcome. We did not have any illusions about it, but
some hope remained until the very last moment. It
vanished very quickly, however. Ukraine voted in
favour of draft resolution S/20l7/970, fully realizing its
crucial importance, not only for the existence of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM),
but, ultimately, for the entire non-proliferation regime.

I wish to recall that Ukraine was among those
States that supported the technical rollover of the JIM's
mandate for one year as the best option. We were trying
hard to avoid a repetition of last year, when mandate
negotiations in 2016 put a strain on the Mechanism's
activities. This year, the world is witnessing an even
more dramatic situation. The obstruction by one
Security Council member deprived the JIM. of any
chance of continuing its important work. Yesterday's
and today's meetings have clearly demonstrated that
the Russian Federation will never allow an independent
investigation of the horrible crimes in Syria to take
place, regardless of the document proposed.

Despite numerous attempts and the faithful efforts
ofthe Council's majority to secure the JIM, Russia is the
only country that preferred to do its utmost to protect
both the Al-Assad regime and the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant from being held accountable. It did so
intentionally and in an extremely cynical way. Given
the fact that the vast majority of incidents in which
chemical weapons were probably used have not yet
been investigated, we do not exclude the possibility that
the Russian side might also be interested in preventing
the JIM. from uncovering the truth about those cases.
Such desperate efforts to shut down the JIM. at all costs
actually raise a serious question regarding the identity
of those who possibly directly sponsored such crimes.

The Russian delegation continues to recall
that, together with the United States, it initiated the
establishment of the JIM. It should now take full
responsibility for unilaterally killing it. It is our strong
belief that, notwithstanding the current situation,
we have to continue to spare no effort to avert the
increasing risk of the further use of chemical weapons,
while bearing in mind the innocent victims who have
already paid the ultimate price. Preventing such crimes
in the future is vital and necessary.

In conclusion, the Russian delegation sees no
problem in interrupting the JIM's mandate. Let us not
fool ourselves. Once the JIM's mandate ends tonight,
there will be nothing to roll over. In their statements,
many delegations committed to continuing to work on
the JIM. We should realize that, as of tomorrow, we
will have to begin those efforts from scratch.

