Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Ukraine fully aligns
itself with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union.

We welcome today's debate as a logical
continuation of a number of discussions held by the
Security Council over the past several years on
subjects related to peacebuilding. We also recognize
the additional relevance and value of this discussion in
the light of the ongoing deliberations in the General
Assembly and elsewhere on the creation of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

My delegation would like to thank the Danish
presidency for convening this timely and very
important meeting and for the submission of the
focused discussion paper for today's debate. We are
also grateful to the Deputy Secretary-General and the
President of the World Bank for their important and
thought-provoking statements today, and to the high
dignitaries taking part in today's discussion.

Ukraine welcomes the fact that the issue of
peacebuilding is becoming increasingly topical for the
United Nations. Indeed, the United Nations peacebuilding
efforts are in great demand all over the world. It is a well-
known fact that almost half of all countries that emerge
from war lapse back into violence within a few years.

Rebuilding the State and its institutions,
establishing effective and democratic governance and
the rule of law, as well as ensuring an environment of
security to help countries in transition from war to
lasting peace requires a comprehensive approach to
peacebuilding.

In our view, such an approach should take into
account the existing links among conflict prevention,
peacekeeping, peacemaking and peacebuilding and
should thus be aimed at preserving the results achieved
and preventing the recurrence of armed conflict. It
should also be based on an understanding of the
interdependence among sustainable peace, security and
development. Obviously, the implementation of such a
comprehensive strategy requires effective interaction,
cooperation and division of labour among all
international partners including the relevant United
Nations bodies, Member States, international financial
institutions, non-governmental organizations, local
stakeholders and other players.

The Security Council undoubtedly has an
outstanding role to play in peacebuilding efforts,
especially in the immediate aftermath of a conflict. The
Council has already undertaken to include peacebuilding
elements in the mandates of peacekeeping operations in
order to ensure a smooth transition to a successful post-
conflict phase. At the same time, we believe that when a
country approaches the phase of moving from transitional
recovery towards long-term development, it is the
Economic and Social Council that should take over the
leading role in coordinating the relevant activities of the
international community.

I would also like to acknowledge the important
role of the General Assembly in mapping out general
peacebuilding strategies, as well as that of the
Secretary-General. Considering the complexity of
peacebuilding activities, there can be no one-size-fits-
all recipe. Each given situation requires dialogue and
cooperation among a number of actors, including local
stakeholders. Fostering local ownership is an important
element of ensuring the sustainability of peacebuilding
efforts. Early involvement, where necessary, of
regional and subregional organizations would also
contribute to the goals of peacekeeping.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Ukraine's support
for the creation of a Peacebuilding Commission. In our
view, the Commission could fill the institutional gap in
the United Nations and help to overcome many existing
challenges in the United Nations peacebuilding
machinery. Ukraine supports, in principle, the Secretary-
General's proposals and ideas as to the functions and
modalities of that body and hopes that the decision to
establish the Commission will be among the major
outcomes of the United Nations summit in September
2005.
