Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We join others in
expressing our deep appreciation to the Joint Special
Represenative for Darfur, Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, for
his comprehensive update on the situation in Darfur.
My delegation supports the conclusions of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/389) and would like to
make the following observations.

We are encouraged by the continuing improvement
in the security and humanitarian situation in Darfur, as
well as the overall reduction in intercommunal clashes,
criminal activities and human rights violations. That
was achieved owing to the strengthened cooperation
among the Sudanese Government, the United
Nations, the African Union and the successful arms-
collection campaign.

At the same time, we note that the progress in
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur has been slow. Kazakhstan welcomes
the extension of a unilateral ceasefire by President
Al-Bashir until July 2018, which aims to create a
conducive environment for peace talks. We hope that
all parties in Darfur will undertake the necessary
efforts to invigorate an inclusive political process
led by the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel and supported by Joint Special Representative
Mamabolo. Furthermore, the Council should consider
all the necessary measures to put pressure on those who
undermine the peace process.

Like the Joint Special Representative, we are also
pleased with the significant progress achieved in the
reconfiguration of UNAMID and the absence of a
reported adverse impact of the drawdown. We expect
that the second phase of the reconfiguration will be
successfully implemented and completed within the
established timeline.

Given those positive developments, we believe
that it is essential to reconsider UNAMID's mandates
to reflect the realities on the ground. In particular,
we need to give priority to UNAMID's peacebuilding
mandate, including support for capacity-building and
quick-impact and community-stabilization measures,
through the implementation of the UNAMID integrated
strategic framework for Darfur and the United Nations
country team. Obviously, there will have to be a
substantial investment by the United Nations system
and donors, delivering as One United Nations, to
streamline operations to meet greater demands within
personnel and resource constraints.

Finally, we call on the international community to
provide the necessary financial and technical support
to the Government of the Sudan to address the root
causes of the conflict, including poverty, the lack of
basic services, drought and massive harvest failures,
as well as to ultimately find a durable solution for the
internally displaced persons.

