Mr. Ging: I am providing this update to the
Security Council today on behalf of Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O'Brien.

As we meet today, the evacuation of the eastern
districts of Aleppo may have concluded, but the situation
in Syria remains catastrophic. Some 13.5 million people
within Syria are in dire need of humanitarian assistance,
including nearly 9 million who are food insecure.

This year has been marked by horrific suffering and
the loss ofso many lives in a conflictcharacterizedby ever
increasing inhumanity against the civilian population.
Attacks on civilian infrastructure - including schools,
medical facilities, settlements for the internally
displaced and public markets - have destroyed
institutions otherwise relied upon by Syrians for food,
shelter, education and medical care. At least 126 attacks
have been recorded against medical facilities this year,
more than 770 medical personnel have been killed
during the conflict and one in four schools has ceased
to function, with some 2 million children out of school.
Despite calls for an end to besiegement as a tactic of

war, we end 2016 with hundreds of thousands of Syrian
civilians - 700,000 to be precise - still trapped in
besieged locations, while humanitarians continue to
struggle to gain access for aid delivery.

The conflict in Syria has recently been most
devastating in Aleppo, where the near-complete
destruction of large parts of the city has subjected its
civilian population to unspeakable horror. The United
Nations welcomed the adoption of resolution 2328
(2016) earlier this week, in the hope that it would
finally ensure that civilians in Aleppo were afforded all
necessary protection and assistance. The United Nations
role in Aleppo and in supporting the evacuation of the
city has four main elements: to observe the evacuation
itself, support the evacuees once they have left, seek
access to the retaken areas of eastern Aleppo in order
to provide assistance in those remaining in those areas,
and continue with the ongoing humanitarian operations
to support those across the remainder of the city.

The operation to evacuate people from the eastern
districts of Aleppo drew to a close late last night.
Overall, more than 35,000 people were evacuated,
including some 20,000 people since the adoption of
resolution 2328 (2016). Those evacuated included
civilians and fighters and their families. Some 734
people were medically evacuated by ambulances,
according to the World Health Organization.

To achieve this, the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
(SARC) were in the lead, working to ensure people
wanting to leave could do so. Overall, 308 buses, 61
ambulances and 1,231 private vehicles were used in
the evacuation, crossing numerous checkpoints from
besieged eastern Aleppo through the western part of
the city and into western rural Aleppo and onwards
to Idlib. In parallel, an estimated 1,300 people were
evacuated from the besieged villages of Fo'ah and
Kafraya, in Idlib.

Due to lack of approval by the Government of
Syria, the United Nations team did not have access to
eastern Aleppo in recent months, but since 15 December
undertook a monitoring and observation function there.
It was stationed around the clock close to the Ramouseh
checkpoint in the Government-controlled part of
Aleppo. Additional United Nations staff were sent from
Damascus in support. In accordance with resolution
2328 (2016), the United Nations team observed the
evacuation of buses and ambulances and, to the extent

possible, monitored whether anyone was forcibly
disembarked, detained or otherwise mistreated as they
crossed through the checkpoint area.
The ICRC and SARC teams were present
directly at the evacuation point and accompanied
the convoys as they crossed each of the checkpoints.
Further, humanitarian organizations were present
on the non-State armed group side to receive those
evacuated to ensure they received essential assistance.
The evacuation operation was an extremely complex
undertaking and was punctuated by frustrating stops
and starts due to negotiations between the relevant
parties, which were setting the terms and conditions for
the evacuations, including insisting on synchronizing
evacuations from eastern Aleppo and from besieged
Fo'ah and Kafraya.

Once evacuated from the besieged area, civilians
had the option to go where they wished. The
overwhelming majority went to non-State armed-group
areas. Two reception centres, in Al-Atarib, in Aleppo,
and Sarmada, in Idlib, were set up to receive those
evacuated, and information centres in Orem Al-Kubra
and Kafr Naha continue to provide basic services and
details about additional humanitarian support. While
the majority opted initially to go to reception sites,
many have subsequently moved on to be hosted by
family and friends.

Humanitarian organizations have recorded the
arrival of 23,615 people to the reception centres and
to more than 60 villages. Approximately a thousand
people were reported to have arrived in the camps
along the Turkish border. Meanwhile a small number
of those evacuated also chose to go to Government
areas in western Aleppo city. Those evacuated from
Fo'ah and Kefraya were initially moved to internally-
displaced-person reception centres in Aleppo city;
while some have stayed in Aleppo, others have moved
on to sites prepared by the Government in Tartous,
Horns and Latakia. The United Nations teams in Horns
and Tartous have been providing humanitarian support.

Humanitarian needs among the evacuees arriving
in reception centres have been acute. The evacuees are a
displaced population that has endured months with little
access to food, medical care or other essential items.
Many of them have been physically and psychologically
traumatized by the deprivation and bombardment that
they have endured. Children are particularly badly
affected. Families have been separated throughout the
evacuation movement, and there have been reports of
at least 75 children being separated from their families
or otherwise unaccompanied upon their departure from
eastern Aleppo. Multiple cases of moderate and severe
malnutrition have also been reported.
The evacuation process itself was difficult and
many times dangerous. A number of security incidents
were reported during the evacuations. The United
Nations received credible reports of non-Syrian allied
forces in western Aleppo stopping a bus of 800 people
on 16 December, detaining and beating 10 people
and reportedly killing one person. Further, 20 buses
were reportedly attacked and burned on 18 December
by a non-State armed group while en route to the
evacuation site. Other protection issues were reported,
including people stranded in buses in harsh security
and weather conditions, prevention of evacuations of
some civilians by non-State armed groups, sporadic
cases of detention of people at checkpoints, and ill-
treatment and harassment of some people as they were
being evacuated.

The United Nations and its partners mobilized a
comprehensive response to make sure that evacuees
have basic essentials. Over 30 partner non-governmental
organizations are on the ground in Idlib. Evacuees at
the reception areas are provided basic services to meet
immediate needs, including food, winterized shelter and
non-food items, and hygiene and sanitation products.
Medical and psychosocial services are also available.
Health partners are serving the reception centres
and neighbouring villages through 22 mobile clinics.
Specialized services are also available for individuals
with specific needs, including women and girls, and
children separated from their families or otherwise
unaccompanied. Some 95 serious medical cases have
been transferred to Turkey. The humanitarian teams
on the ground will continue to scale up the response,
as necessary, to ensure urgent and life-saving needs
are met.

I would like to update and notify the Council of the
arrangements undertaken pursuant to paragraph 7 of
resolution 2328 (2016). While supporting the evacuation
process was our immediate priority, the United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator in Syria has also submitted
a formal written request to the Government of Syria
seeking a blanket travel authorization to Aleppo
for all United Nations senior staff in country and
humanitarian access to parts of Aleppo retaken by the
Government yesterday.

There are currently 105 United Nations staff
members in Aleppo. Of these, 34 have been fully

dedicated to monitoring evacuations from eastern
Aleppo within the framework of resolution 2328 (2016),
while the remaining staff have been carrying out their
humanitarian response duties throughout the rest of the
city. As part of the ongoing surge support to Aleppo,
the United Nations is also requesting agreement from
the Government of Syria to surge up to a hundred
additional staff, including 30 international staff, to
strengthen monitoring and response in eastern Aleppo.

Under the auspices of resolution 2328 (2016), we
are ready to implement a plan for all districts of eastern
Aleppo in the coming days, as soon as we receive
agreement from the Syrian Government to deploy. To
date, the United Nations and its partners have been able
to access nearly all formerly besieged neighbourhoods of
eastern Aleppo except those retaken by the Government
of Syria as of yesterday. A team of 16 United Nations
staff, along with four armoured vehicles, are on standby
to deploy to these last inaccessible areas, as soon as
Government permission is granted.

For all areas formerly besieged, in the first
phase, assessments will be conducted of the number
of civilians in these areas, their needs and the status
of civilian infrastructure, including housing, food,
medical care and other essential services. Medical
teams are on standby to evacuate all remaining critical
medical cases, and life-saving items are available for
those in urgent need.

In the second phase, the United Nations and
partners will launch a comprehensive multisectoral
response, in conjunction with partners and other
relevant institutions, as well as the deployment of
additional surge staff as needed. This comprehensive
response will include emergency assistance to
residents, including shelter rehabilitation, solid waste
and debris removal, livelihood support and, as soon as
possible, rehabilitation of basic services. Throughout,
United Nations teams would be on the ground in the
neighbourhoods as much as possible to monitor and
observe the situation and ensure the well-being of
civilians, but all of this is subject to the consent of
and coordination with the Syrian Government, which
is pending.

I take this opportunity to pay particular tribute
to the heroic staff of the ICRC and the SARC, and
the non-governmental organizations and United
Nations colleagues working diligently on providing
a life-saving response. To all who have been on the
frontline of this evacuation operation, we salute their
courage, persistence and sacrifice. They inspire us with
their basic humanity, which we should all share.

I turn now to areas outside of Aleppo, where the
humanitarian situation is dreadful. In neighbouring
Idlib governorate, the towns of Fo'ah and Kafraya
remain besieged by non-State armed opposition groups
that otherwise control the vast majority of the territory.
As part of the agreement reached about the evacuation
of Aleppo, evacuations in those towns are scheduled to
resume on a tit-for-tat basis with Madaya and Zabadani
in the coming days. As we have seen with the attack on
the buses going to Fo'ah earlier last week, protection
concerns are very high for the residents of the enclave.

There are also broader concerns that the civilian
population in Idlib is at risk of suffering the same fate
as those in Aleppo if it becomes the focus of a new
and more intense offensive. Of the currently estimated
population of approximately 2 million people, 700,000
of whom are internally displaced persons, including
35,000 from eastern Aleppo this month, the United
Nations and it partners currently access vulnerable
communities through its cross-border work out of
Gaziantep and support approximately 700,000 people
each month with food, and some 340,000 with medical
treatments. Some 230,000 are provided with water and
sanitation assistance each month.

In Al-Wa'er, a besieged neighbourhood on the
outskirts of Horns city, the situation also remains of
critical concern. Immediate humanitarian intervention
is required to prevent the besieged neighbourhood,
which hosts an estimated 50,000 civilians, from facing
acute shortages of basic and lifesaving items. There
is a collapse already of the limited medical services.
Food stocks are running out as we speak and, since
26 November, medical evacuations have reportedly not
been permitted. Two critical cases identified by the
United Nations, one involving a pregnant woman, are
in need of urgent evacuation.

We also continue to follow with concern the
anti-Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
operations occurring around Al-Bab and Raqqa. The
reported intensification of fighting from 8 December
around ISIL-controlled Al-Bab town, including through
airstrikes, is expected to result in further displacement.
Preparations are ongoing in the surrounding areas to
receive potential internally displaced persons from the
town, while United Nations partners continue to support
the 10,000 internally displaced persons displaced by
earlier fighting. In Raqqa the primary concern is the
lack of humanitarian access and protection services.
Reports indicate that people are in need of health
services and food. In that regard, United Nations access
to Hasakeh is a major concern, depending on a costly
air bridge from Damascus.

ISIL advances in Palmyra and nearby areas in
eastern Homs are also ofmajor concern, resulting in the
displacement of thousands of people to Horns city and
surrounding areas. We again commend SARC and other
partners for providing assistance to those displaced in
such difficult circumstances.

I am pleased to report that there has been some
improvement of the situation at the berm along
the Syrian-Jordanian border. On 22 November, the
United Nations and its partners resumed lifesaving
humanitarian assistance at the berm through a newly
constructed distribution point negotiated in September.
The latest figures for the distribution of food and
non-food items are 8,404 households compromising
31,094 individuals in Rukban. In addition, distributions
started in Hadalat, and a new service facility, including
a health clinic has been completed, enabling the
delivery of health assistance. The water infrastructure
is projected to be completed by January 2017.

As has been noted in the Council in the past, the
United Nations and its partners reach some 6 million
people in need every month through all modalities
available. Cross-line inter-agency operations to
besieged, hard-to-reach and other priority locations
are a particularly vital lifeline for civilians in those
vulnerable communities. Nearly 1.3 million people have
been reached this year in those locations multiple times.

Alhough we continue to operate in an environment of
acute humanitarian need, we are hindered by persistent
obstacles in delivering much-needed assistance. For
cross-line inter-agency convoys, ongoing insecurity
in many areas and administrative delays on the part
of Syrian Government in the approval of facilitation
letters and convoy plans continue to hamper our efforts.
What was reduced to a two-step approval process
earlier this year has gone back again to being a 10-step
process. We have secured agreement from the Syrian
Government for only one cross-line convoy so far this
month, reaching 6,000 people. That is despite receiving
initial approvals to reach almost 800,000 people in
December. We need timely approvals and simplified
approval procedures. We have immediate capacity to
deliver to 300,000 people in besieged and hard-to-reach
areas per week, should we be given the access by the
parties to the conflict.

We end 2016 at a place where humanitarian and
protection needs are as acute and severe as they have
ever been amid continued fighting across the country.
Despite all the challenges, the United Nations, the
ICRC, SARC and our other key humanitarian partners,
though their heroic staff on the ground, continue to try
to reach every Syrian in need. However, collectively we
are falling unforgivably short in our responsibility at
the global level to support them. I therefore call upon all
Members of the Council and all parties to the conflict
and their allies to redouble their efforts to end this
conflict and in the meantime provide more effective
support to humanitarian action for the innocent victims
of this conflict.

As has been stated so many times, there is no
humanitarian solution to this crisis. We welcome
the announcement by United Nations Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura on the resumption of political talks
in February. As the number of those dying, becoming
displaced and suffering continues to rise, as we end
2016 a new political commitment to peace will be
needed if 2017 is to offer any different prospect than
the death and destruction of the past five years.

