Mr. Malebeswa (Botswana): We wish to pay special
tribute to all the international personnel on the ground in
Bosnia, and in particular to the High Representative, Mr.
Carl Bildt, who, along with others, has helped to ensure the
substantive progress towards peace and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina that we celebrate today.

We welcome the substantial progress achieved in the
last 12 months towards restoring order and tranquillity to
the State of Bosnia. Most of the military provisions of the
Dayton Peace Agreement have been implemented. The
national elections were held on schedule on 14 September
1996 in a relatively calm atmosphere, though there has been
an unwelcome delay in the establishment of the new
institution of Government. In addition, the International
Police Task Force (IPTF) has made substantial progress in
the implementation of its mandate.

Despite the progress, the overall situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is not what we would have liked it to be.
This does not, however, come as a surprise because we
have always known that, after four years of bitter civil war,
the path to lasting peace and stability would be strewn with
formidable obstacles. To our regret, there are ominous signs
that some in Bosnia still continue to pursue the aim of
communal separation.

The draft resolution we are about to adopt gives the
multinational peacekeeping force and the IPTF new
mandates. It is yet another important demonstration of the
international community's continuing commitment to
support the process of national reconciliation and
reconstruction in Bosnia. It is important that the people of
Bosnia not misuse this support. Botswana has consistently
maintained that the ultimate responsibility for lasting
peace and stability in Bosnia rests with none other than
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina themselves. The
international community can only help them to help
themselves.

It is most regrettable, therefore, that the parties have
continued to lag behind schedule in the implementation of
the various aspects of the Dayton Peace Agreement. The
most troubling delays concern the return of refugees, the
free movement of people, respect for human rights,
cooperation with the war-crimes tribunal, the arbitration
of the Brcko Area and the disarmament process.

We are particularly concerned at reports of local
incidents caused by ethnic tension and intolerance
throughout the country. Over 1 million internally
displaced people do not feel secure enough to return to
their communes because of ethnic intolerance and
harassment. In addition, 1.2 million people still live
outside the country as refugees. The great majority of the
people of Bosnia want to live in peace, but it is their
political leaders, from all sides, who continue to prevent
them from putting the horrors of the recent past behind
them. They continue to exploit and fuel ethnic tension for
their own personal benefit. We want to appeal to those
concerned, in the interest of peace and national
reconciliation, to put aside their personal interests in
favour of the common good in Bosnia. It is time for the
people of Bosnia to begin to realize that they have a
common destiny. They should assume greater
responsibility for the establishment of peaceful conditions
in their country, and they should do so with utmost
dispatch. They should not assume that the international
community will baby-sit Bosnia indefinitely.
Certainly, the process of reconstruction and
development will require generous support from the
international community, but, as the draft resolution
rightly points out, the link between the availability of
international financial assistance and the degree to which
all the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina implement
the Peace Agreement cannot be overlooked. The
differences that impede the implementation of the Peace
Agreement must be resolved as a matter of urgency. In
this respect, the human rights provisions of the Peace
Agreement should be fully implemented and all the
indicted war criminals rounded up and handed over to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
in The Hague for prosecution. The authorities in Bosnia

 

and Herzegovina must also create the necessary conditions
for the early return of refugees and internally displaced
persons to their homes of origin.

We are concerned at the report of the re-arming of the
parties. It is important for the parties to commit themselves
once and for all to the disarmament provisions of the Peace
Agreement. It would be tragic, to say the least, if hostilities
were to resume in Bosnia simply because one side or the
other had received enough weapons from outside Bosnia to
give it the courage to try and wrest from others, through the
use of force, what it could not obtain at the negotiating
table. We therefore want to appeal to Member States to
heed the arms provisions of the Peace Agreement and desist
from supplying any of the sides in Bosnia with weapons.

My delegation fully supports the conclusions of both
the Paris and London Conferences, and will therefore vote
in favour of the draft resolution before us.

