Mrs. Viotti: I would like to start by extending a
very warm welcome to Ambassador Li Baodong, the
new Permanent Representative of China to the United
Nations. We look forward to working very closely with
him.

I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
brief the Council today in my capacity as Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). I welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Joseph
Mutaboba, and thank him for his remarks and, most
important, for the work he has been doing in the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNIOGBIS).

Since I last briefed the Security Council on the
relevant activities of the PBC, in November 2009 (see S/PV.6212), the Commission has maintained its
engagement with Guinea-Bissau in several ways.

The National Peacebuilding Steering Committee
concluded the first review of the Strategic Framework
for Peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau. The review's final
report confirmed the validity of the priorities
established, assessed the progress achieved in pursuing
them and signalled the way forward in critical
peacebuilding areas. Based on that assessment, PBC
members drafted and approved a document
(PBC/4/GNB/3) with conclusions and
recommendations for all actors involved in peace
consolidation in Guinea-Bissau. The Commission
formally adopted the document at the beginning of
February.

From 18 to 21 January, a delegation from the
PBC, headed by the Deputy Permanent Representative
of Brazil, Ambassador Regina Maria Cordeiro Dunlop,
Visited Bissau and reiterated the Commission's
continued support to the peacebuilding process in the
country. The report of the field trip (PBC/4/GNB/4)
provides an analysis of the situation on the ground and
a road map for the Commission's actions in specific
priority areas.

The inauguration of President Malam Bacai
Sanha in September 2009 and the formation of a new
Government under the leadership of Prime Minister
Carlos Gomes Junior were hailed by many observers as
the beginning of new phase for Guinea-Bissau. There
was growing recognition that the conditions are now
right for the country to launch a much-needed process
of reconciliation and for stability to take hold.

We are pleased to note the progress made since
then. The National Assembly has taken the lead in the
organization of a national reconciliation dialogue. The
event will bring together all national stakeholders in a
series of debates on the root causes of conflict and will
help to forge a common understanding and a vision for
the future of the country.

Security sector reform has gained momentum.
The Government has submitted to the National
Assembly a number of bills that will provide the legal
framework within which the reform will take place.

The fact that Guinea-Bissau has adopted the 2010
budget in a timely manner for the first time in many
years and has improved fiscal management and
normalized the payment of public servants is very
encouraging. So is the record performance in the
export of cashew nuts, which illustrates the economic
potential the country has yet to achieve.
10-26013

This emerging positive economic and financial
picture was also reflected in the International Monetary
Fund's conclusion, after the field mission to Bissau last
January, that there are good prospects for moving from
the current post-conflict emergency assistance into a
medium-term programme. This could provide the
impetus for reaching the long-awaited completion point
under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative.

As we take the next steps of our engagement on
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau, one of the most
important tasks is the launching of a pension fund that
will allow the security sector reform programme to
move forward. The Peacebuilding Commission should
be able to strongly support the creation of such a fund.

In Guinea-Bissau, as in other post-conflict
countries, the interconnection between the security and
economic dimensions of peacebuilding is evident. It is,
therefore, important to combine efforts on the security
side with measures that aim at job creation, especially
among youth, and promote the revitalization of the
economy. These actions will, in turn, generate revenues
that will enable the State not only to fulfil its role of
ensuring the rule of law but also to provide basic
services to the population.

The projects financed by the Peacebuilding Fund
are now on track. In order for the Fund to have a
positive impact on the ground, it is our duty to make
sure that the implementing agencies are endowed with
the necessary human resources to execute these and
other projects the country needs so much.

The youth employment project supported by the
Peacebuilding Fund has been very successful in
providing training for a number of very talented young
people on how to start small businesses. It would be
important to find ways of supporting its continuation,
perhaps through microcredit schemes that would allow
them to put what they have learned into practice.

The time has come to expedite work on the
approval of a second tranche of Peacebuilding Fund
resources for Guinea-Bissau. The message has to be
one of political support, of using the catalytic role of
the Fund to attract more resources for the country in
order to consolidate gains and make more progress at
this crucial stage of peacebuilding. It is important to
work around issues of absorptive capacity so as to take
full advantage of the Fund's capacity to reinforce the
work of the PBC in a country that has been considered
an aid orphan.
10-26013

Coordination remains an important requirement
to ensure the success of peacebuilding actions in
Guinea-Bissau. It becomes even more important as the
Government starts planning for a donors' round table
that will have security sector reform as one of its main
targets. The PBC is willing to support the Government
in such an initiative.

Institution-building continues to be an important
part of our efforts. Strengthening the capacity of law
enforcement agencies remains a high priority,
especially taking into account that drug trafficking is
still a matter of serious concern. We appreciate
bilateral and multilateral actions in this field and look
forward to the full implementation of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) anti-
drugs regional plan.

In this connection, we welcome the launching of
the West Africa Coast Initiative by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime together with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the United
Nations Office for West Africa/Department of Political
Affairs, INTERPOL and ECOWAS. Its focus on the
creation of transnational crimes units, which will
enable countries in the region to share information and
intelligence, is certainly a major step forward in
enhancing cooperation to combat drug trafficking.

We appreciate the strengthening of the United
Nations presence in Guinea-Bissau through the new
Integrated Office. We hope that UNIOGBIS can fill all
the new positions and be fully operational as soon as
possible.

Despite the remaining challenges, Guinea-Bissau
has recently made significant progress. We should
seize this opportunity and step up our support to the
concerted efforts in enhancing stability and promoting
development. I invite all concerned parties, including
the Peacebuilding Fund, to reaffirm, in concrete terms,
their commitment to peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau.

