Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): I thank the delegation of
Peru for organizing today's open debate. Our special
appreciation goes to the briefers for sharing their
insightful perspectives on this very important subject.

Nigeria aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Nigeria notes with grave concern the alarming
situation in many parts of the Middle East, particularly
in Palestine. In that regard, it is pertinent for all parties
to make genuine and concerted efforts to find peaceful
solutions and to cooperate closely with the United
Nations and its agencies in order to achieve the shared
objective of a two-State solution, in line with the relevant
United Nations resolutions and international law.

As the international community continues to seek
avenues to advance the peaceful resolution of the
Palestinian question, international efforts must remain
focused on paving the way for Israel and Palestine to
return to meaningful negotiations. We therefore wish
to highlight the cogency of multilateral diplomacy,
and reiterate that there is no substitute to an agreed
multilateral approach for addressing the Israeli-
Palestinian conundrum in a sustainable manner.

Nigeria believes that achieving a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement of the question of Palestine
is imperative for the attainment of durable peace and
stability in the Middle East. It is for that reason that we
acknowledge the adoption by the General Assembly of
resolution 72/240, concerning the status of Jerusalem,
on 21 December 2017, and once again call on all parties
to respect the relevant United Nations resolutions on
the Israeli-Palestinian issue.

We therefore encourage Israel to take concrete
measures to freeze all settlement-related activities in
occupied Palestinian territory. On their part, Palestinian
leaders must also signal their readiness to return to
the negotiating table by, inter alia, making enhanced
efforts to forge unity and deal with militancy and
other internal security challenges. It is beyond doubt
that violence and unilateral actions will not resolve the
long-drawn-out conflict.

My delegation reaffirms its full support for the rights
of the Palestinian people, including the protection of
their fundamental human rights, particularly their right
to free movement and self-determination, as well as the
maintenance of the dignity of the individual Palestinian
person and their inalienable right to live without the
fear of persecution. In that regard, we restate our belief
that the Security Council must not fail in its duty and
responsibility to the Palestinian people.

In conclusion, Nigeria calls on States with influence
over the parties concerned to encourage them to
re-engage in dialogue on the basis of the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Quartet
road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and other existing
agreements. We reaffirm our unwavering support for
a two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine existing
side-by-side in peace.

