The President: I thank Judge Elaraby for his
comments and his kind words. That brings us to the
end of our discussion.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, guided by the
purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter, reaffirms its commitment to maintain
international peace and security through effective
collective measures for the prevention and
removal of threats to the peace or other breaches
of the peace, and to bring about by peaceful
means, and in conformity with the principles of
justice and international law, adjustment or
settlement of international disputes or situations
which might lead to a breach of the peace.

"The Security Council recognizes that the
United Nations and its organs can play an
important role in preventing disputes from arising
between parties, in preventing existing disputes
from escalating into conflicts, and in containing
and resolving the conflicts when they occur. The
Security Council recalls, in this regard, the
successes of the United Nations in these areas.

"The Security Council recalls that the
Charter of the United Nations, particularly
Chapter VI, sets forth means and a framework for
the pacific settlement of disputes.

"The Security Council underscores that the
efforts to strengthen the process of the peaceful
settlement of disputes should be continued and
made more effective.

"The Security Council reiterates its
commitment to make a wider and effective use of
the procedures and means enshrined in the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
on the pacific settlement of disputes, particularly
Articles 33 to 38 (Chapter VI), as one of the

essential components of its work to promote and
maintain international peace and security.

The Security Council decides to
continue to keep this item under review."
This statement will be issued as a document or
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2003/5.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5 pm,
