Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to acknowledge the
presence at today's meeting of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Poland, His Excellency Mr. Mike Pompeo
and His Excellency Mr. Andreas Michaelis for being
here today. I would also like to thank Ms. Viotti for
her briefing.

The Middle East is deeply divided and experiencing
a tragic loss of its diverse religious, ethnic and cultural
fabric. That is the situation as we face a slew of conflicts
that undermine stability in the area. We see that the
territorial integrity of countries such as Syria, Yemen
and Libya is under threat and that millions of people
have been displaced from their homes. The impact
of such instability is felt in neighbouring countries
and beyond.

The actions of terrorist groups are akey destabilizing
factor. To meet their objectives, such groups are willing
to sacrifice the lives of innocent civilians, including
children. The war on terrorism must remain a priority.
It is clear that, to safeguard the goal of maintaining
peace and security in the region, efficient mechanisms
that shed light on and punish human rights violations
are needed.

In addition, despite the international legal
frameworks in place to protect women and children,
women and children continue to pay the highest price
of the conflicts in the region. It is vital that their rights
be fully promoted and protected. However, it is also
imperative to protect public institutions, as they play
an important role in re-establishing peace and security
in the region.

Investing in education is key to achieving peace and
development in the region. It is the tool that provides
new generations with the vital link to a normal life. It
is therefore urgent to protect educational institutions
and infrastructure during conflicts, while taking into
account the fact that attacks on such facilities limit
the ability of children and young people to develop the
skills necessary for their future.

The lack of the right to peaceful assembly,
limitations on the freedom of expression, child, early
and forced marriage, sexual and gender-based violence
and the lack of opportunities for women and young
people to participate in decision-making processes are
major constraints faced by a region striving to achieve
lasting peace and security.
The dearth of opportunities as a result of economic,
social and climate challenges lead to the displacement of
groups of people, which, in turn, could result in clashes
among them. No country is immune to the destabilizing
effect of climate change. Combating climate change
requires collective efforts. The United Nations should
therefore continue its efforts to alleviate food insecurity.
Similarly, that effect can exacerbate social, economic
and institutional vulnerabilities, which could lead to
new clashes. We can understand how climate change
has become a multiplier of conflicts.

Control over weapons of mass destruction and
chemical arsenals must be a priority on the Council's
agenda. We must seek to combat illicit weapons
trafficking by strengthening arms control mechanisms.
Illicit weapons trafficking exacerbates conflicts,
strengthens terrorist, rebel and criminal groups
and undermines stability in areas where calm has
been restored.

Lastly, we encourage the Council to reaffirm its
responsibilities and make every effort to ensure that it
stabilizes and reconciles communities and restores the
peace and security lost as a result of conflict.

