Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for
his precise briefing and commitment, which is more
necessary than ever. I will be brief. We have had an
opportunity to speak several times on the situation
in Gaza and the Israeli-Palestinian question over the
past few weeks. I will keep to three points, namely,
the escalation of the situation over the past few days
in Gaza, the ongoing protests in the Gaza Strip during
recent weeks, which are part of a structural crisis, and
the responsibility of the Security Council in the face of
that situation.

First, for several weeks now, we have alerted the
Council to the risk of an escalation in the situation in
the Gaza Strip, which is not tenable in the long-term.
As yesterday showed once again, there is a real risk ofa
cycle of violence, of which the players in question could
quickly lose control. After three conflicts in the past
decade, the situation is sadly predictable, and the same
causes are still producing the same tragic effects in the
Gaza Strip. On 29 May alone, almost 30 rockets were
fired into Israeli territory from the Gaza Strip - an
unprecedented number since the conflict of 2014. Those
rocket launches deliberately targeted civilians. They are
unacceptable. Regardless of the perpetrators, France
condemns them without any ambiguity whatsoever. I
would like to recall France's tireless commitment to
Israel's security. Beyond that, the context is very tense,
and we therefore call for restraint. The issue here is to
try to avoid a new fatal conflict in Gaza, where once
again it would be the civilians paying the price.

Secondly, I would like to underline that the armed
escalation comes at the end of two months of violence
and repression carried out by the Israeli armed forces
against Palestinian protesters in Gaza, and 14 May
marked its highpoint. With more than 116 dead thus
far, 60 on that day alone, and more than 12,000 people
injured, including 4,000 by live ammunition, the
figures of the past few weeks are all the more tragic
because they could have largely been avoided.

We have said it before, that result is directly linked
to an indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force
by the Israeli army, facilitated by extremely permissive
rules of engagement, which we have condemned. Israel
is a democracy and should respect the right to peaceably
protest. As an occupying Power, it should furthermore
respect the obligations for protection that are incumbent
upon it. Similarly, we have called for those protests to
remain peaceful, and we have warned those, first and
foremost Hamas, who have tried to instrumentalize
those protests for political or military ends.

An acute crisis exists in Gaza, which we can all see
and which serves to highlight the vulnerability of the
civilian population against the backdrop of a structural
humanitarian and political crisis, anchored in a decade
of the Israeli blockade and exacerbated by the impasse
in the reconciliation process. The protests over recent
weeks cannot be dissociated from the despair of the
inhabitants of Gaza. We will not be able to address
that crisis without restoring the dignity and renewing a
sense of hope for the future of that population, of which
more than halfis under lS-years-old.

In that regard, we commend the essential work
done by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in
the Gaza Strip. The Agency is one of the last safety
nets to avert the collapse of Gaza's, two thirds of which
is made up of Palestinian refugees. UNRWA requires
increased financial support from the international
community, given the frozen American contribution.
With iin mind, the donor conference to be held on
25 June will be crucial. Any good will that is expressed
will be important and appreciated. We once again call
on our American friends to not turn their backs on their
historic role of supporting UNRWA, which is more
than ever key to regional stability.

Finally, beyond the immediate de-escalation that
is required and the urgent humanitarian response, we
need a long-term response to the issues in Gaza. Such
response is essential for the population of Gaza and for
regional stability, both of which are being addressed
by the plan undertaken by Nickolay Mladenov. The
Special Coordinator has all of our support in defining
priority projects, in particular for infrastructure.
Furthermore, we support his proposals to strengthen
project management within the United Nations in Gaza
and dialogue with Israel, Egypt and the Palestinian
Authority. As we have said, those proposals should
include immediate measures to ease restrictions on
the movement of goods and persons. Ultimately, our
objective should be to lift the blockade, while respecting
Israel's security concerns. Furthermore, Mr. Mladenov's
proposals should be supported by specific approaches to
resuming the reconciliation process. In political terms,
our horizon should be the re-establishment of all of the
prerogatives of the Palestinian Authority in Gaza.

Thirdly, I will conclude by underlining once
again the responsibility that is incumbent upon the
Council - it bears the principal role of upholding
peace and security, which is set forth by the Charter
of the United Nations, but it also has a particular role
to play in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, of which it
has defined the main parameters over several decades
to resolve the conflict, although unilateral action has
recently rendered them fragile.

Gaza has been approaching collapse in the past
few months, while it has been in the grip of violence
for several weeks. It is on the verge of a new conflict,
and yet the Council remains silent. With gravity, I say
to those present that such silence weighs more and
more heavily, it is increasingly deafening and it is not
acceptable. It is unacceptable for the populations of both
Palestine and Israel, who were the first ones affected by
the conflict. It is unacceptable for the world, which is
watching us and sees in that silence not only a sign of
impotence but, worse, also a reason for mistrust. That is
unacceptable for the credibility of the Council and for
our collective action, which is at stake.

The Security Council cannot abdicate its
responsibilities on this matter. France has been ready
to engage in a constructive discussion on all draft texts
that have been presented to Council members over the
past few months and up to today, without exception.
We have been given a new opportunity to overcome
our silence by engaging in an open, but demanding,
way in the discussion on the draft resolution submitted
by Kuwait. The text has already been extensively
improved. A number of aspects still require clarification
and nuance, and we intend to continue to play our part
in arriving at a text that is capable of garnering broad
support within the Council. I invite everyone to commit
to the same approach. Once again, it is a question of our
collective responsibility.

