Mr. Miranda (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese," English textfurnished by the delegation): Let me begin
by congratulating you, Mr. President, on behalf of my
Government, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I would also like
to take this opportunity to congratulate last month's
President, Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani.

At this meeting, convened to discuss the second
report of the Monitoring Mechanism on sanctions
established pursuant to resolution 1295 (2000), I wish
to congratulate Ambassador Richard Ryan, and through
him, the Republic of Ireland, on his election to the
chairmanship of the sanctions Committee. We firmly
believe that Ambassador Ryan and his team will
undertake their mandate with the same commitment,
dynamism and political courage as the team led by
Ambassador Paul Heinbecker, whose work at the helm
of the Committee deserves our appreciation and
recognition.

Since their adoption, and despite continued
reports of violations, the sanctions against the armed
wing of UNITA, led by Mr. Savimbi, have proved to be
a fundamental tool to persuade members of that
organization to abandon the path of war and embrace
the peace accords. The primary impact of the sanctions
is clearly reflected in the significant reduction of the
military capacity of the rebels. In addition to the
internal measures taken by my Government - in
particular those measures in the political and military
fields with a view to restoring order and State authority
throughout our national territory - the sanctions have
left no other way out for the military wing led by
Mr. Savimbi than to embrace the path of reason.
Otherwise, history will judge him.

Events today are very clear to everyone. The
number of former rebels joining the efforts for the
national reconciliation and reconstruction of Angola is
increasing daily. They are adhering to the amnesty law
recently passed by the Angolan Parliament, which was
initiated by President Jose' Eduardo dos Santos.
Accordingly, Angola today is experiencing a climate of
greater political, military and economic stability. It has
evolved gradually, which permits us to face the future
with confidence and optimism.

It is in this context that my Government continues
on the path of political and economic reform. It is
currently engaged in creating conditions that will
permit the next general elections to be held in the
second half ofthe year 2002.

The report of the sanctions Committee submitted
for discussion today enjoys the full support of my
Government. It brings to light clear evidence of what
the Fowler report has already stated and of what
members of the Council have denounced and strongly
condemned here in this Chamber. It is important that
this investigative work continue; and for that reason we
support the decision of the Council to extend the
mandate of the Mechanism established under resolution
1295 (2000).
Despite the fact that systematic violations of
sanctions are declining, some countries and entities
continue to challenge the sanctions imposed by the
Security Council against the armed wing of UNITA and
in the interest of peace in Angola and in the entire
southern and central African region. We note with
particular concern the involvement of the networks of
organized crime operating in direct support of rebels in
Angola. Given this situation, it is imperative that the
Security Council reinforce the sanctions Monitoring
Mechanism. It should also adopt concrete measures to
combat the scourge of transnational organized crime
networks in Africa today.

The United Nations and the international
community must apply pressure to persuade the rebels
to follow the path of peace, and should also consider
strengthening the sanctions, as provided for in
paragraph 6 of Security Council resolution 1295
(2000). It is equally important that members of this
body consider imposing measures against countries that
continue to facilitate propaganda activities in favour of
the armed wing of UNITA.

My Government supports completely the
recommendations contained in the report and hopes
that the members of this body will incorporate these
measures in the decision to be taken next April.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
direct a word of appreciation to Ambassador Juan
Larrain and his team of Experts for the quality of the
report submitted to the Council. It is the product of a
painstaking, in-depth and impartial investigation, and
will surely contribute to the application of more
effective sanctions so that peace and stability can take
hold in my country.

