Ms. Al Tubuly: My name is Rida Ahmed Al Tubuly.
I am honoured and privileged to be speaking before
the Security Council today. I thank you, Sir, for the
invitation and providing me with this opportunity.

I would like to stress that this privilege was
not something that was granted to me by default. I
believe that I earned this opportunity after a lengthy
struggle for my rights as a Libyan woman. My fight
for my rights was first kick-started by my late father,
who courageously resisted the social norms of 19805
Libya. He encouraged me to continue my education
despite the criticism that he received from his peers at
the time, who were generally doubtful of the value of
women's education.

He always told me that the important thing is to be
independent. Because of him, I not only continued my
education, but I went on to become auniversity professor,
holding a master's degree and doctorate in clinical
pharmacology and a master's degree in international
human rights law. In fact, the right to education was
given to all Libyans under the Constitution in 1951, and
asserting the right of women to education enabled many
girls, who were even older than primary-school age, to
attend school.

I remember that, when I was eight years old, I shared
a desk with a girl who was double my age - 16 years
old - at that time. The girl was allowed to go to school
by her parents only because the Government at that
time made the effort to encourage girls' education. This
story is not about personal achievements or a historical
discussion. This story provides the perfect example
to show that Libyans have the potential to progress in
women's empowerment, gender equality and all other
aspects of life if decision-makers make enough efforts
to facilitate and lead such progress.

We all know that social changes are usually led
by political changes. Unfortunately, at this stage,
Libya is going through an unconventional political
process. However, ordinary Libyans and Libyan
decision-makers are not the only actors in the political
process. The international community, especially the
United Nations, can be considered as the main mediator
of the current process.

Being Director and Co-Founder of Together We
Build It, which was established in Libya in 2011, has
given me the capacity to take part in advocacy efforts
and campaigns advocating for the role of women in the
formal peace process. We are often told by international
decision-makers that the reason women are excluded
from the formal peace process is because Libyan actors
are against women's political participation and that, if
we want to ensure that Libyan women have a seat at the
table, then we need to place internal pressure on the
national decision-makers. But that begs the following
question: If there are no means for ordinary Libyans to
take part in the political process, then how will we be
able to change such things on the ground?

Today, the Council might have expected me to
speak only of women in Libya and the amazing work
that they are doing on the ground, and to finish my
statement by delivering recommendations on how to
support Libyan women and their role in peace building.
In fact, I want to talk about the power of the people, of
which Libyan women and youth constitute the majority.
Since 2014, after the last parliamentarian elections in
Libya, ordinary citizens were completely excluded
from the political process. Such exclusion is not only
the fault of Libyan actors, but it is also part of the
responsibility of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) and other international community
actors that are leading and facilitating the current
political process in Libya.

Nevertheless, if elections are not possible, then
UNSMIL and the international community must be
creative and innovative on how to facilitate and lead
a political process that is inclusive of the general
public and both genders. For example, after four
years of exclusion, last year UNSMIL opened up the
political process to ordinary Libyans by conducting
nationwide consultations.

If one has a political conversation with ordinary
Libyans in the street, they will say that their voices do
not matter to the international community. All that is
important is what the international community is saying
and doing to help support and build peace in Libya.
When we interact with members of the international
community, they often say that the conflict in Libya
is an internal issue, and therefore that Libyans should
come together to build peace and end this war. We fully
agree, and we have been doing just that. Women and
young people have been doing it, but the international
community has not taken our efforts seriously. In
the name of preventive diplomacy, State-building
and peacebuilding, the international community
supported troublemakers instead of peacebuilders. The
international community gave power and legitimacy to
a violent minority instead of empowering the peaceful
majority. These days, unfortunately, some members of
the international community appear to be turning a blind
eye by allowing a flood of weapons and ammunition to
reach violent groups.

Neville Chamberlain once said, "In war, whichever
side may call itself the victor, there are no winners, but
all are losers", and that certainly applies in the case of
Libya. The numbers of the dead and injured are rising
every day, not only on the battlefields and in areas
where clashes take place but also on the political and
peaceful activity front. Abductions and assassinations
have been rising since the Libyan civil war began, with
two prominent examples being the assassination of
Salwa Bugaighis and more recently the abduction of
Siham Sergewa, whose fate is still uncertain. The fact is
that the main losers in this conflict are the people who
are excluded from the peace and political negotiations
and have no say in what their dream country should
look like.

In a post made two days ago on Facebook, a friend
of mine says,

"It has been eight months since I left my home.
I miss every detail of my house so much. It hurts
that we did not leave it voluntarily, but were rather
forced to quickly escape an inevitable death. When
the road to your home becomes deadly, you can no
longer visit or see it except Via online satellite maps.
The latest satellite photos showed that our car had
also been stolen. We have finally been morally and
materially depleted."

This is so painful. If UNSMIL and the international
community are serious about bringing peace to Libya,
they must listen ordinary Libyans, and empower and
give legitimacy to people who do not set conditions for
peace based on their personal and political interests.
The international community and UNSMIL, which
are mandated to facilitate the peacebuilding process,
must redesign the negotiating table, first in order to
redistribute power, secondly to redefine power and
thirdly to make power gender-sensitive. But how do we
redesign the table to make it inclusive? That question
has actually been answered by the Security Council
in its resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015), and in
subsequent resolutions. That is the Council's mandate.
When I talked about the 1951 Constitution and girls'
education, earlier in my statement, the Government
acted on it and Libyan parents did not reject girls'
education. On the contrary, many families sent their
daughters to school. The same could apply now. If the
Council implements resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250
(2015), we do not think that the Libyan people will
reject women's inclusion.

The role of the United Nations and the international
community in Libya is not only important but
life-changing. I call on the Security Council to take
the necessary decisions to stop the flow of arms to
Libya, which in turn will definitely stop the war, and to
support the peace process and build stability in Libya.
Libya has reached a situation where what the Council
does and says, and how it interacts with national and
local actors, really matters. For us Libyans, working
for peacebuilding is not a choice. But for the Council
it is. And today the Council has to make a choice. The
question is, will it make the right choice and support the
peaceful majority in Libya? Will Council members, as
members of the international community, stand strong
together against any actor who supports violence in
Libya? When the Council reaches a decision, I ask
it to remember the people on the ground, the Libyan
families who have left their homes and the activists who
continue to die. We want the international community
to help ensure that Libya can return to its golden age
through support to our country's progress.

