The President: I thank Ms. Bouchamaoui for her
briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Secretary of State for International Development of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

I thank the Secretary-General, Ms. Bouchamaoui
and Ambassador Skoog for their statements. I am
very pleased to be presiding over the Security Council
again today, the first Development Minister to be
doing so. That is because development and security are
intrinsically linked.

The United Kingdom sends its heartfelt condolences
to those tragically caught up in terrorism. From Paris
to Syria, from South Sudan to Yemen, from Beirut to
Sharm el-Sheikh, we see more clearly than ever the
pain, suffering and cost of conflict - the human cost.

The Council heard yesterday about the bloodshed
in Syria (see S/PV.7560), which has shattered so many
lives. But let us also look at the social and the economic
cost to the whole country and to future generations. It is
estimated that the Syrian conflict has turned the clock
back on that country's development by 30 years, and it
is conflict-affected States that are the most off-track
for achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
The reality is that, if we are to achieve the new global
goals for ending poverty and to live up to our promise
to leave no one behind, then preventing conflict and
building peaceful societies is absolutely vital.

The past 15 years have shown us that trying to build
development in any country without a solid foundation
of peace and stability is like trying to build a house on
sand: it will simply be washed away when crisis hits.
How can we make sure that solid foundations are in
place? Stability is not only about addressing war and
conflict, it is about countries having strong economies
and healthy and educated populations. Critically, it
is about the strength of their institutions. Our Prime
Minister has called it the golden thread of development.
Stability means the rule of law, property rights and an
independent judiciary, because the poorest people in
the world are not just going hungry. They lack justice.
They want jobs. They want the right to own their own
land and to build their own businesses. If individuals
do not have a voice in society, it does not mean that
their grievances are not there, only that no fair forum
exists for them to be heard. And so grievances fester
and build.

Stability means rights for girls and women. We
know that girls and women are those most vulnerable
when crises hit, and they must be an integral part of any
peacebuilding and conflict solution. The ongoing high-
level review on women and peace and security will be
critical to that. Women's economic empowerment is
essential to sustainable development. Recent research
suggests that if women in every country had the chance
to play the same role in economic markets as men,
as much as $28 trillion would be added to the global
economy by 2025.

Stability means a society and institutions free of
corruption. Corruption is bad for development. It is
bad for the poorest. It is bad for business. It corrodes
the fabric of society and public institutions, acting as a
perverse welfare system that transfers resources from
the poor to the rich. Therefore, addressing those issues
can build the backbone of a stable State. Without them,
individuals cannot fulfil their potential. Communities
cannot thrive. Businesses will not invest. The whole
country stagnates.

It is not only national institutions that matter.
The strength of international institutions is critical as
well. We know that the Security Council has a vital
role in peacekeeping decisions and swift humanitarian
actions - a vital role in ensuring that international
humanitarian law is adhered to when conflict erupts
and in helping to find political solutions. But as the
Secretary-General's report on the United Nations and
conflict prevention (S/2015/730), the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and the report of the Advisory Group of
Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture
(see S/2015/490) set out, increasingly our international
institutions need to take on a greater role in addressing
the underlying causes of fragility and conflict. That
means prioritizing conflict-prevention as much as its
resolution by taking early action when faced with the
signs of a deteriorating situation. It means moving
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding by investing in
basic services in fragile and conflict-affected States;
by helping to build a stronger economy and jobs; by
supporting strong and accountable institutions, the rule
of law, respect for human rights, free and fair access
to markets, the rights of girls and women; and by
tackling corruption. That progress should be achieved
through the United Nations, the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund.

The United Kingdom believes that that is strongly
in our national interest and that of every country.
Investment in prosperity and stability overseas is
critical, if we do not want global problems to end
up on our own doorsteps. Exclusion and the lack of
development provide fertile ground for extremism,
terrorism, organized crime and conflict to thrive, and
they also drive migration. The United Kingdom has
made a historic commitment to spending 0.7 per cent
of its national income on development, with much of
that already spent in fragile States and conflict-ridden
countries. We support development and peacebuilding
through the United Nations and have committed United
Kingdom troops to United Nations operations in
Somalia and South Sudan.

We believe that such investments and steps
are the right thing to do, and right for our national
interest, too. This is about saving the next generation
from the scourge of war and allowing all individuals
the opportunity to live the life and build the future
that they want, free from violence or the threat of it.
It is also about global prosperity, peace and security,
because conflict is costly in every sense. If we act now
and together, we can build a better, more prosperous
and more secure planet for us all.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.

