South Africa continues to welcome the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) as one of most important diplomatic achievements in the area of nuclear non-proliferation since the signing of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. The JCPOA remains an example of global cooperation to address challenges that affect us all. In that regard, we call on all parties to the JCPOA and Council members to uphold and implement resolution 2231 (2015), which is essential for the Council's fulfilment of its mandate to maintain international peace and security. We believe that the Security Council should act responsibly and desist from any divisive actions that could provoke non-compliance with Council's resolutions, as that would undermine the credibility of the Council in fulfilling its central mandate. South Africa therefore urges Iran to fully implement its obligations under the JCPOA in order to preserve its prospect for success. The withdrawal of the United States from the JCPOA and its reimposition of unilateral sanctions measures are regrettable. The United States must reconsider its stance in that regard as its actions undermine previously reached understandings. We also regret its decision to not renew waivers for nuclear non-proliferation projects in the framework of the JCPOA. It is our view that this decision will inadvertently affect Iran's ability to fully implement the provisions of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). We note that the lifting of sanctions, especially with regard to certain nuclear-related materials, is an integral part of the JCPOA. South Africa underscores that the total elimination of nuclear weapons is the only guarantee that they will never again be used by anyone, under any circumstances. We remind the Council that nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing processes. Lack of progress on nuclear disarmament will inadvertently affect the gains made in nuclear non-proliferation. Regarding the broader security of the region, South Africa joins others in expressing its concerns about the growing tensions in the Persian Gulf and its impact on international peace and security. South Africa urges all parties involved to exercise the utmost restraint and not allow the situation to get out of hand. In conclusion, the Council must pursue steps to de-escalate rather than escalate tensions in the Gulf and support any such efforts undertaken by regional players. In that regard, the Council must support initiatives aimed at restoring peace and stability - not only to the Gulf, but to the broader Middle East region. That is why South Africa steadfastly supports continued efforts to resolve tensions among all actors in the region and promotes dialogue rather than antagonism to safeguard disarmament and non-proliferation gains essential for the maintenance of broader international peace and security.*
