President Tadie: Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me the opportunity to comment, at the end of
this meeting, on the reactions to my statement and the
statements by Mr. Sedjiu and the Secretary-General.

First of all, there are no multi-ethnic institutions
in Kosovo and Metohija, even today. There are only a
few Serbs who participate in those institutions, and if
the question is, who is supporting those Serbs, I answer
that it is only the members of the Albanian
Government in Kosovo and Metohija. Belgrade is not
preventing Serbs from participating in those
institutions. There is no confidence in them because of
the lack of results they have achieved. If the question is
how many Serbs have returned to their homes after the
adoption of the Kosovo constitution and the declaration
of independence, my answer is crystal clear: none. If
the expectation is that some Serbs will return to their
own homes in the period ahead of us under these
circumstances, that is not a realistic expectation.

I would like to see progress, and I am going to do
everything in my power to establish the circumstances
in which Serbs will return to their own homes. But the
problem comes from Kosovo, its municipal institutions
and its central Government. Belgrade is not the
problem. Belgrade is the seat of Serbia's legitimate
democracy today. We are participating in the
negotiation process, and we have always been doing so
since its beginning. Even though we have done so, the
Kosovo Albanian delegation has avoided talking with
the Belgrade delegation about the future status of
Kosovo, saying only a few words about our bilateral
relations after Kosovo's independence. That is not
democracy. That is not a dialogue between two sides.
As I say, Belgrade is going to do everything
possible in terms of improving the situation and
ensuring the respect of human rights and better
circumstances for all citizens of Serbia, including
Kosovo. After the unilateral declaration of
independence and after the adoption of the so-called
constitution of Kosovo, Belgrade did not cut Kosovo
off in terms of its economy, transportation and
communications.

Belgrade did not act violently against Kosovo and
Metohij a. Belgrade is trying to do everything stipulated
by the United Nations in terms of providing stability
and security in Kosovo. If Mr. Sejdiu is saying that
Serbia's current policy is sending our region back to
the 1990s, I totally disagree. We are not making war;
we are not threatening; we are trying to achieve a
compromise solution. At the same time, we are
respecting international law.

But this is not only about international law. If a
unilateral declaration of independence and so-called
Kosovo independence are going to happen, it is a
problem not only for our region and my country, but
also for other regions with similar problems. The
Council knows that I speak the truth. This is a very
dangerous precedent in terms of the stability of other
regions all around the world - on all continents -
with very similar problems. I ask Council members
what the next case will be in the Security Council of
the United Nations - it will be one very similar to the
case of Kosovo.

When the Secretary-General says that this is the
most complicated problem of his career, I believe him.
This is indeed one of the most complicated problems in
your career, Mr. Secretary-General. When Mr. Khalilzad,
the Permanent Representative of the United States, says
that he feels the Secretary-General's pain, I expect that
Mr. Khalilzad will feel my pain as well.

I am the President of Serbia. Serbia is a
legitimate democracy - a European country with a
European culture which is defending its legitimate
interests in a normal way: by using diplomatic tools,
not by making war. We expect that our legitimate
interests will be respected, not only with regard to our
European future, which is not in question, but also with
regard to our integrity and sovereignty. We are a
normal and legitimate democracy - a European
State - with our own sovereignty and integrity.
