Ms. Bavdai Kuret (Slovenia): I wish to also convey
my thanks to the Chinese presidency for organizing
this open debate and to align myself with the statement
by the observer of the European Union.

Let me start by expressing our support for Secretary-
General Guterres and his call at this year's general
debate for a "commitment to a rules-based order, with
the United Nations at its centre" (A/73/PV6, p. 2).

Slovenia's commitment to the multilateral system,
based on shared values, the rule of law, respect for
international law and human rights, remains as strong
as ever. Today, we are witnessing rapid changes that
are substantial and fundamental. The international
community has spent the past 70 years building the
system of a rules-based order, which is intended to
ensure equal treatment for all and create a better world
for nations and individuals. Unfortunately, today's
trends seem to be going in the direction of the erosion
of that order. We face many new challenges and threats
that are more complex and multidimensional and are
quickly multiplying, from threats to international peace
and security by non-State actors to environmental
degradation, as well as possible economic and financial
instability. Owing to unprecedented interdependence,
no single nation can hold the answers to everything for
everyone. Slovenia firmly believes that only through
international cooperation that benefits all can solutions
be found and progress achieved. One person's gain
should not mean a loss to another.

With regard to how we can promote the United
Nations role, that should, first of all, be done by
insisting on a democratic, international system based
on rules, by respecting the Charter of the United
Nations, by supporting good governance, sustainable
development and gender equality, by respecting the
rule of law at all levels, including judicial decisions,
and by respecting international law and human rights
in every situation. We stand firm in our belief that
the protection and promotion of human rights and
fundamental freedoms should be the highest priority
for every State and organization.

Secondly, the United Nations is uniquely equipped
to discharge its mission both globally and on the
ground. That is where the United Nations is the most
relevant and closest to the people. To that end, the
United Nations should work with reliable partners
in regional and subregional organizations. They are
present in the environment concerned and are therefore
the best partners when addressing situations.

With regard to your third question in the concept
paper (S/2018/982, annex), Mr. President, Slovenia fully
agrees with the Secretary-General regarding the need

for collective answers to existential threats to people
and the planet. As we all know, this body bears the
greatest responsibility with regard to the maintenance
ofinternational peace and security, and we want it to be
efficient and effective and to address all situations that
pose a grave concern or threat. Members of the Council
have assumed this responsibility and are the ones that
need to safeguard this collective mechanism the most.
The complexity of today's challenges requires us to
work more closely together, be pre-emptive and address
issues early on. We believe that conflict prevention is
the greatest priority and should be attempted before the
international community finds itself having to manage
or solve a crisis. Through efficient preventive diplomacy,
including mediation, the management and solving
of crises could be avoided altogether. Accordingly,
Slovenia adds its voice to those who call for the full
implementation of the reforms proposed, including
reform of the management of the Organization. Only a
financially stable and properly managed Organization
can be strong, reliable and effective in discharging all
the mandates conferred upon it.

Finally, the threats that we are facing today will
not be solved by weakening multilateralism. Quite the
opposite is true. Those threats are a wake-up call for
stronger international cooperation with a strong United
Nations at the centre. We simply do not see any other
way to do the job that would take into account the needs
of all. That is why Slovenia wants once again to express
its support for strong multilateralism. We do not think
that it is the only choice, but we are sure that it is the
best one.

