Ms. Currea: Haiti is the most vulnerable of the
member countries of the Inter-American Development
Bank (IDB), with the highest poverty rates and some of
the most challenging indicators. Some 7.5 million
Haitians lived below the poverty line even before the
multiple crises of 2008. As a new Government came to
power by democratic means in 2007, expectations rose
and, for the first time in some time, per capita gross
domestic product growth was positive. A measure of
political, social and economic stability was achieved.
Without a doubt, the work of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti contributed to that
achievement.

However, the 2008 food and oil price shocks
provoked riots that led to the fall of one Government
and pushed more Haitians into extreme poverty. The
year 2008 turned out to be an exceptionally difficult
year, even considering Haiti's turbulent history. Those
events focused efforts on disaster relief. But now is the
time to relaunch the Government's growth and poverty-
reduction strategy. To ensure that the strategy promptly
translates into improved welfare for the majority of
Haitians, a renewed partnership with donors is required.

That is the purpose of the conference to be held
on 14 April at IDB headquarters. We are pleased to
host that conference. The IDB is Haiti's main
multilateral source of financing. IDB member countries
will make the largest contribution when Haiti is
granted debt relief later this year. Moreover, that will
be financed from internal sources. In response to 2008
shocks, our Governors doubled grant financing for
Haiti to $100 million, reaffirming the institution's
solidarity with its most vulnerable member country.

The Collier report commissioned by the Secretary
General has been a key input for the conference. It has
focused attention on the opportunities for success in
Haiti if there is coordinated and immediate action on a
few priority sectors to implement a strategy that targets
job creation.

The conference will seek financing for
reconstruction and economic recovery. The
Government's priority projects cover investments in
schools, hospitals and the water supply, along with
measures that promote food security and safeguard the
environment in preparation for the coming hurricane
season. The priority projects will help Haiti to restore
pre-hurricane levels of social service provision. Road
and electricity investments are meant to leverage
productive activities. It is the Government's hope that
donors will either pledge new funds or realign existing
resources towards the financing of these priority
projects.
Public works projects, however, are not the only
source of job creation. Authorities also target private
investment to take advantage of the unprecedented
market access to the United States.

More specifically, the conference will seek
pledges for budget support. Despite the 2008 external
shocks, Haitian authorities managed to maintain
economic stability and stay on track on the
commitments under the International Monetary Fund's
programme, which is an essential condition for debt
relief. To close the financing gap for the current fiscal
year, authorities out $75 million from the investment
budget and will resort to $50 million in bridge
financing from the central bank. Thus, authorities are
urgently seeking $125 million in budget support.

Finally, the conference will aim to reach an
agreement on a new cooperation paradigm. The
renewed partnership is based on mutual accountability.
Haitian authorities will commit to reforms to
strengthen governance and enhance the business
environment. Donors are invited to support those
reforms, which seek to ensure greater sustainability
and effectiveness, while moving to align their
programmes with the Government's priorities and
channel resources through the budget.

As the Secretary General noted in a recent
opinion column in The New York Times, this is Haiti's
moment. We look to the 14 April conference for donors
to invest in Haiti and pave the way for potential
investors to do the same.

