Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation supports and welcomes
Security Council resolution 1770 (2007). It is a very
important resolution, for both Iraq and the United
Nations. Over the past four years, the Security Council
has been holding regular reviews of the Iraqi
settlement in the hope of playing its due role in
pushing through a resolution to the situation in that hot
spot. At this time, significant progress has been
achieved in the political process.

However, in other areas, especially in the security
sector, grave challenges remain. The international
community is gravely concerned with the situation.
Achieving stability and tranquillity as soon as possible
is central to the Iraqi settlement. It is also the common
aspiration of the Iraqi people and has a bearing on the
peace and stability of the Middle East as a whole.

China has always believed that the key to the
ultimate and proper solution to the Iraqi issue lies in
achieving an Iraq governed by Iraqis. Of course, this
cannot be achieved without the earnest assistance of
the countries in the region and the international
community.

By adopting resolution 1770 (2007), the Council
has entrusted the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) with new responsibilities, including
providing assistance to Iraq for conducting the process
of national reconciliation, encouraging regional
dialogue, coordinating economic reconstruction and
intensifying humanitarian assistance. History has
shown that the United Nations has a comparative
advantage and abundant experience in those areas, and
the United Nations should have a lot to do. We should
not fail to recognize that UNAMI playing a role in the
country is a gradual process, and that this process also
depends on myriad other factors.

We hope that the Iraqi Government and the
Multinational Force will provide the United Nations
with the necessary security guarantees so as to enable
UNAMI to accomplish its mission as mandated by the
Council. We also hope that the parties concerned will
actively support the United Nations in its efforts and
create the necessary conditions for the United Nations
to play a role.

The Chinese Government and people have always
closely followed the situation in Iraq. We have
maintained that Iraqi sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity should be preserved and have
always encouraged the Iraqi people to put their long-
term national interests in perspective, strengthen their
unity and overcome the difficulties they face in their
national reconstruction process. China will continue to
support Iraq in its reconstruction process, and we hope
this war-affected country will embark on the road of
peace, stability and development as soon as possible.

