Mr. O'Brien: The conflict in Yemen continues
to kill and maim civilians, causing immeasurable
suffering, while destroying livelihoods, homes,
communities and essential civilian infrastructure.
Much of that is the result of indiscriminate bombing
and shelling by the parties. Since March 2015, more
than 35,000 casualties, including over 6,000 deaths,
have been reported by health facilities across the
country. The United Nations has confirmed that at
least 2,997 of those killed and 5,659 of those injured
are civilians. Conservative estimates suggest that well
over 700 children have been killed and over 1,000 more
injured. There are reports that as many as 720 children
have been forcibly recruited by the parties.

The conflict is exacting a terrible humanitarian toll.
Some 2.7 million people have had to flee their homes.
At least 7.6 million people are severely food-insecure.
Some 2 million acutely malnourished children and
pregnant or lactating women need urgent treatment.

Chronic drug shortages, unpaid salaries and
conflict-related destruction mean that around 14 million
Yemenis do not have sufficient access to health-care
services. Since March of last year, nearly 600 health
facilities have closed due to damage, shortages of
critical supplies or lack of health workers. Nearly 220
of those facilities used to provide treatment for acute
malnutrition. In January alone, at least three health
facilities were damaged - one hospital in Sa'ada
governorate and two facilities in the Nahim district of
Sana'a governorate.

More than 1.8 million children have been out of
school since mid-March 2015, bringing the total number
of children out of school to more than 3.4 million when
combined with pre-crisis figures. Over 1,170 schools
are now unfit for use due to conflict-related damage,
the presence of displaced people or occupation by
armed groups.

Water infrastructure serving at least 900,000
people has been either damaged or destroyed by
airstrikes, artillery and rockets. For instance last
week, the water reservoir serving 40,000 people was
completely destroyed, reportedly by an airstrike, in the
capital, Sana'a.

United Nations agencies and theirnon-governmental
organization partners are delivering assistance under
extraordinarily difficult and dangerous circumstances
across the country. For example, on Sunday, a Saudi-led
coalition airstrike hit a building 200 metres away from
the Diplomatic Transit Facility, which accommodates
United Nations and diplomatic personnel.

During January, the humanitarian community
provided regular monthly food rations to approximately
2.6 million people and direct water deliveries to over
234,000 people, and supplied fuel to water-pumping
stations for more than 3 million people. Health
activities reached over 102,000 people. Around 36,000
children were screened for acute malnutrition, and
3,700 malnourished children under 5 years of age were
admitted to feeding programmes. Other relief items
were provided to over 42,700 people.

Despite those commendable and brave efforts,
I am extremely concerned about the increasingly
restricted humanitarian space we face to respond the
staggering needs of Yemeni men, women and children.
In addition to an already dangerous environment,
parties to the conflict are contributing to the reduction
of humanitarian access. The Houthis and allied
groups remain inconsistent in allowing access and
movement of humanitarian goods and personnel. Over
the past week, while some United Nations agencies
were given approvals, several others were denied for
joint inter-agency missions to Ibb, Ta'izz and Sa'ada.
While humanitarian deliveries are ongoing in areas
where Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula is present,
international humanitarian movement to those areas
is extremely challenging and dangerous. That includes
locations in the Hadramaut governorate but also in
Aden, where severe insecurity prevails.

Humanitarian assistance reached the Ta'izz city
enclave following a high-level mission led by the
Humanitarian Coordinator on 22 January. The area
faces severe access restrictions by the Houthis and
is home to over 200,000 people. Deliveries included
food for around 18,000 people, non-food items for
approximately 1,250 families and medical supplies,
including 170 oxygen cylinders and 30,000 units
of dialysis sessions. Over the weekend, additional
assistance reached the enclave, including food for a
further 18,000 people, cancer treatment drugs, surgical
items, intravenous fluids and anesthetic supplies and
HIV antiretroviral treatments. Those are positive
developments, and I note Houthi commitments on
access to Ta'izz city made during talks in Biel and
reaffirmed to the Special Envoy in his last visit to
Yemen. Humanitarian deliveries into the enclave often
require long and protracted negotiations with parties on
the ground, however. Efforts are ongoing to establish
a monitoring mechanism that will enable predictable
access, as opposed to ad hoc/one-time deliveries.

Access to northern governorates, where needs are
among the most severe in the country, also continue
to be challenging due to relentless conflict, including
airstrikes - in particular to communities along the
border with Saudi Arabia, where conflict is intense.
Humanitarian agencies and partners are committed to
implementing an operation to deliver food, health and
sanitation supplies to some 350,000 people in Sa'ada
governorate. This past month, more than 276,000
people were provided food in the governorate.

Recent communication received from the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia regarding the safety of humanitarian
workers in Houthi-controlled areas has impacted the
humanitarian community's planning, causing delays
to important missions over the past two weeks. That
follows the denial of entry to the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia on 17 January of the Regional Humanitarian
Coordinator. On 11 February, one of charter vessels
of the World Food Programme - the MV Mainport
Cedar - which was carrying humanitarian supplies
for United Nations offices in Aden and travelling from
Djibouti with a scheduled and approved stop in the
Yemen port of Hodeidah, was diverted by coalition
forces to the Saudi Arabian port of Jizan.

The parties to the conflict have a duty of care in
the conduct of military operations to protect all civilian
persons and objects - including humanitarian and
health-care workers and facilities - against attack.
The parties should also refrain from using explosive
weapons in populated areas, which cause unacceptable
harm by killing large numbers of civilians, destroying
homes, severely hindering critical services over
the immediate and longer term and leaving behind
explosive remnants of war. I remind all parties of
their obligations under international humanitarian
law to facilitate humanitarian access to all areas of
Yemen. United Nations agencies and their partners will
continue to deliver impartial and neutral assistance
across Yemen according to need, using the established
de-confliction mechanism in Riyadh with the coalition
for humanitarian staff and supply movements, including
those to and from subnational offices in Sa'ada,
Hodeidah, Ibb and Aden.

Humanitarian assistance must be complemented by
efforts to revive the economy and the flow of much-
needed commercial goods, which has been severely
impeded by the ongoing conflict. Given the heavy
dependence of Yemen on imported food and fuel, it
will be critical to ensure that inspections in line with
resolution 2216 (2015) do not adversely impact the flow
of commercial shipping into Yemen of basic items that
Yemeni civilians rely on to survive.

I am pleased to report that the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism (UNVIM)
has now been formally launched. The mechanism
must now contribute to continued improvements in the
levels of commercial imports into Yemeni ports outside
the control of the Government of Yemen and that are
not channelled through a United Nations agency or
recognized international humanitarian organization.
The Secretary-General has formally requested the
Government of Yemen and the Saudi-led coalition to
appoint representatives to sit on the steering committee
by 22 February. All States Members of the United
Nations have been informed. The mechanism will
operate for an initial six months out of Djibouti, and
will move to Aden and/or Sana'a when the security
situation permits. UNVIM. monitors will also be based
in Dubai, Jeddah and Salalah to work with the relevant
authorities.

In two days' time, the 2016 Yemen humanitarian
response plan will be launched in Geneva. The plan
calls for $1.8 billion to address the most critical and
prioritized needs across all governorates in the country,
including food assistance for nearly 9 million people,
water and sanitation support for 7.4 million, urgent
health support for 10.6 million persons and emergency
interventions to mitigate growing and severe
malnutrition rates. I cannot overstate the importance of
donor support for that endeavour, nor the urgency we
face in responding to humanitarian needs, which only
deepen as the conflict intensifies.

Nearly one year into the conflict, it is now more
important than ever that we address the human
catastrophe unfolding in Yemen. I again underscore
the urgent need for the Council, and the international
community more broadly, to impress upon the parties to
the conflict their obligations to facilitate unconditional
and sustained access to all parts of Yemen, and to take
greater measures to protect civilians. I also reiterate
the urgent request that the Council press the parties to
resume peace talks and agree to a ceasefire.

The Yemeni people are suffering. They need the
Council to act now.

