Ms. King (Australia): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for convening this debate. I would like
to acknowledge the presence of the Foreign Minister
of Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose Luis Guterres. I would also
like to acknowledge the presence of the Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and to thank
him for his briefing this afternoon. The Australian
Government has very much appreciated his strong
leadership of the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). As this may be the last
Council debate on UNMIT, we would also like to
highlight the important contribution of former Special
Representatives Atul Khare and Ameerah Haq and
their able deputies. Each performed their role with
great professionalism.

It is clear that Timor-Leste, working closely with
UNMIT and bilateral partners, has made great progress
since the events of 2006. The Policia Nacional de Timor-
Leste has been fully reconstituted, the threat posed by
disaffected groups has dissipated and the Timorese-led
political reconciliation process has contributed directly
to peaceful elections this year. We agree with Prime
Minister Gusmao that security conditions in Timor-
Leste have improved markedly and that, following the
very successful elections held during the course of the
year, it is time for the international security forces to
depart.

As the Council has heard during numerous debates,
Timor-Leste authorities have worked to achieve an
extended period of peace by maintaining stability
and enhancing political and social cohesion. Australia
agrees with the recommendation of the Secretary-
General that UNMIT should conclude its mission at the
end of the year.

Many members today have commented on the
success of the 2012 elections. The Timorese electoral
authorities, security services, political parties and civil
society deserve to be commended for that success.
We acknowledge the crucial role played by UNMIT
and the United Nations Development Programme in
helping to build the capacity of the Timorese electoral
management bodies to the level that we witnessed this
year.

We are pleased that members of the Council
were able to visit Timor-Leste last week and witness
first-hand the achievements of the Timorese and the
significant contribution made by UNMIT - as did
the Secretary-General when he visited in mid-August.
The Mission has successfully integrated the many
functions of the United Nations into a single mission
structure. That will provide useful lessons for future
peacekeeping operations. Beyond its important task of
reconstituting and supporting the PNTL, UNMIT has
also promoted and supported political reconciliation
and the development of human rights standards and
institutions, including building an awareness of
justice issues. We encourage the Mission's leadership
to continue working with the Timorese Government
to manage the economic impact on Timor-Leste
resulting from the closure of UNMIT, particularly on
employment in Dili.

The end of the United Nations peacekeeping and
political presence should not signal the end of United
Nations engagement with Timor-Leste. Timor-Leste
wants to shape an innovative development relationship
with the United Nations. Australia will support the
country in that endeavour.

We commend Timor-Leste for its Strategic
Development Plan for the period 2011-2030, which
sets out long-term principles to underpin development.
Australia was the first development partner of Timor-
Leste to commit to the New Deal for Engagement in
Fragile States. Our partnership is now firmly rooted
in those principles. For example, we are partnering
with the Ministry of Finance to provide development
assistance directly through the Ministry's systems.
We encourage future United Nations engagement with
Timor-Leste to be aligned with those principles.

We would also like to recognize the very
effective relationship between UNMIT and the
International Stabilisation Force (ISF). The division
of responsibility for providing security assistance to
Timor-Leste - shared between the United Nations
police and the ISF - provides useful lessons in the
effective demarcation of responsibility as well as unity
of purpose, which may serve to assist the Council
in developing mandates for future peacekeeping
operations.

Australia will begin to carry out the drawdown
of the ISF, in close coordination with the Government
of Timor-Leste, the Government of New Zealand and
UNMIT. We would like to take this opportunity to thank
our ISF partner, New Zealand, as well as Portugal and
Malaysia, with whom we worked so closely in 2006,
ahead of the establishment of UNMIT.

The coming departure of the ISF does not signal
the end of Australia's security cooperation with Timor-
Leste. We will continue our work with Timor-Leste's
police force and our defence cooperation programme in
support of the country's defence force.

Our relationship with our close neighbour and
friend will continue to deepen and broaden as we work
in partnership with Timor-Leste to alleviate poverty,
provide education and employment opportunities
to young Timorese people and build on the strong,
extensive and enduring community links between our
countries.
The Timorese people have shown tremendous
resilience over the past decade as they set about
building a new nation. While UNMIT and the ISF have
made their contribution, the real credit for the peace
and progress enjoyed today must go to the Timorese
people themselves.

