Mr. Simonovie: I thank you, Madam, for the
opportunity to brief the Council. I visited the Central
African Republic from 28 July to 2 August to
discuss human rights challenges with the transitional
authorities and identify ways to address them. My
mission followed a fact-finding mission sent by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
to Central Africa from 19 June to 11 July to gather
information on human rights violations committed
from December 2012 onwards, in order to report to
the Human Rights Council in September. During my
mission, I met with the Prime Minister ofthe transitional
Government and key ministers, as well as victims, civil
society organizations, religious leaders, the diplomatic
community and United Nations colleagues.

The Central African Republic has been plagued by
decades of fighting and instability. The Bozize' regime's
corruption and its neglect of and discrimination against
the north of the country, which has a large Muslim
population, are among the numerous factors that
contributed to the rebellion. Many of the country's
problems, such as the weak justice system and poor
access to health and education, are not new. However,
the conflict was marked by an unprecedented level of
violence, looting and destruction.

From December 2012 to March 2013, both Seleka
and the former Government's forces committed
serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law, although the majority of the human
rights violations and abuses were committed by Sele'ka
elements. Following the seizure of power by Se'le'ka
on 24 March, human rights violations committed by
Sele'ka have continued until today.

The abuses committed include extrajudicial
killings, summary executions, forced disappearances,
hostage-taking, arbitrary arrest and detention, torture,
sexual and gender-based violence, grave violations
against children - including killing, sexual violence,
the recruitment of child soldiers, and the use of children
as human shields - and the destruction and looting
of private and public property, including hospitals,
schools, administrative buildings and United Nations
and other international premises. Retaliation measures
against civil society activists and journalists who are
critical of the transitional authorities have also been
reported.

While widespread attacks and looting of Christian
places of worship by Seleka elements have been
reported, there have been a number of initiatives to
contain religious tensions, including the establishment
of a platform for dialogue between Catholic, Protestant
and Muslim religious leaders. When meeting with the
Archbishop and the head of the Islamic community, I
was encouraged to see that they closely collaborate to
prevent confrontations and violence between religious
groups. It is important to strengthen this collaboration
in order to prevent a dangerous deepening of the
religious divide.

Some communities have violently opposed Seleka
elements trying to arrest alleged suspects. This has in
turn been met by ruthless retaliation by Seleka elements,
including killings and the burning of entire villages.

Another disturbing element is the systematic and
widespread destruction of public registries, from birth
certificates to court and prison records. This is fuelling
suspicions of an attempt by the Seleka coalition to
modify the ethnic and religious balance, given the
porous borders of the country. The lack of public records
to establish voter lists poses an additional challenge to
organizing free and fair elections in the next 18 to 24
months - an issue about which Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Gaye has already spoken.

Currently, while security in Bangui has improved,
in the rest of the country the State is almost
non-existent. There is no security or rule of law, and no
police, prosecutors or judges, but unpaid Seleka forces
are everywhere, often sustaining themselves through
extortion or looting. Most hospitals and schools are not
functioning and have been looted. The Bambari court
ofjustice, which I visited, is an empty building with no
tables. Its doors and windows are broken, and remnants
of official records and documents are scattered about
the floor.

Fear is pervasive everywhere. Victims, witnesses
and civil society organizations spoke to me about their
fear of being killed, physically or sexually assaulted,
or looted. They spoke of their fear of speaking out,
going to the fields or going home after dusk. Some do
not even dare to go home at all, but remain hidden in
the bush. In some areas, less than 20 per cent of seeds
have been planted, and severe food shortages can be
expected starting in early 2014.
Accurate data on violations is difficult to gather due
to a lack of access to areas outside Bangui for security
reasons, and to the much-too-limited human rights
monitoring capacity of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
(BINUCA). There is an urgent need to have credible
and reliable information on human rights violations
in order to respond effectively. To strengthen national
monitoring and reporting, it is essential to urgently
establish a national commission for human rights and
fundamental freedoms.

In May 2013, the transitional authorities established
the national Mixed Commission ofInquiry to investigate
human rights violations and crimes committed since
2004. However, it does not meet international standards,
lacks independence and impartiality, and does not
have the mandate or capacity to address impunity
appropriately. Civil society is therefore calling for an
international commission of inquiry.

If security does not improve, teachers and doctors
who have taken refuge in the capital will not return to
schools and clinics countrywide, more than 650,000
children will lose another year of schooling, and
another crop will be lost. Rapidly spreading diseases,
including malaria and malnutrition, may kill more than
the conflict itself.

Let me conclude by proposing six recommendations
to the Council and the international community.

First, a key priority is to swiftly provide security
and protect the population from further human
rights violations. The problem is that Seleka forces
distrust the former police and gendarmerie, while the
population mistrusts the Seleka forces. It is therefore
urgent to establish a credible and legitimate national
security force composed ofa limited number of former
regime security elements and Seleka forces. They have
to be screened and vetted under international guidance
to exclude perpetrators of human rights violations,
and they must be properly trained. The remaining
Sele'ka forces should be disarmed, and foreign fighters,
especially those from Chad and the Sudan, must be
repatriated. The promotion and protection of human
rights should be mainstreamed at all stages of this
security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process. However, it will take time.

Secondly, the deployment of a large international
force with a strong protection mandate is therefore
necessary to immediately provide security, protect the
population throughout the country, restore the rule of
law and create favourable conditions for free and fair
elections within 18 to 24 months, as envisaged under the
Libreville Agreements. The presence of 1,400 uniformed
personnel of the International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic, with a maximum strength of
3,500 uniformed personnel authorized by the African
Union, is a step in the right direction, but a much larger
and nationally more diversified force is needed to
provide security and protect the population throughout
the country. Such a force would also prevent foreign
rebel groups, such as the Lord's Resistance Army or
Islamist extremist groups, from finding a safe haven in
the country.

Thirdly, it is urgent to also reinforce the human
rights component of BINUCA. In its current state,
the human rights component does not have sufficient
capacity to monitor, verify or report on human rights
violations throughout the country. Strengthening the
component will allow BINUCA to provide the needed
support to both security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes and to the
national institutions mandated to protect human rights,
fight impunity and promote reconciliation.

Fourthly, in order to overcome the humanitarian
crisis that Under-Secretary-General Amos described,
urgent international aid is needed. Major donors
have suspended development aid because of the coup
and the provisional character of the Government.
However, they should now invest the same amount of
money in humanitarian aid and community protection
programmes in such areas as strengthening civil
society, human rights monitoring, rebuilding schools
and hospitals and reconstructing archives and registers.

Fifthly, our Office has documented numerous human
rights violations committed since December 2012. In
order to prevent further abuses from being committed,
these and other violations must be investigated through
independent national or international mechanisms
and the perpetrators held to account. In her statement
last week, the ICC Prosecutor publicly expressed her
readiness to investigate and prosecute those responsible
for the commission of serious crimes, if necessary. The
Council should send a clear message to the military
commanders and the transition authorities that under
international law they are criminally responsible for
preventing crimes and punishing perpetrators.

Finally, ahead of the elections, there is a need for
national consensus that the future Government will be
inclusive, that the development of all regions will be
even, and that nobody will be discriminated against on
the basis of ethnicity, religion or political affiliation.
That can prevent pre-electoral, electoral and post-
electoral violence. The international community should
encourage that to contribute to sustainable peace and
security.

