Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking Ambassador
Greenstock, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, for his statement, with
which we agree completely. As delegations have said
during meetings of the Committee, we support him
fully. I would also like to join Ambassador Niehaus of
Costa Rica in what he said on behalf of the Rio Group.

Although he is absent at the moment, I would
also like to pay tribute to Ambassador Jorge Eduardo
Navarrete and express how much his professionalism,
dedication and valuable and sensible opinions have
been of great significance in the Council. We wish him
every success in his future responsibilities.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee, created under
resolution 1373 (2001), has responded in a positive and
transparent way to the expectations that the Security
Council had for it. As for the tasks conferred on it by
the Council, I would like to concentrate today on one
of them of particular importance to my delegation: the
financing of terrorism.

In order to achieve the objectives of the
Committee and ultimately of States, it is fundamental
that we recognize the central importance of repressing
and effectively hindering the flow of resources that
feed this activity. It is necessary to cut the links that
make it possible for economic funds and resources to
fall into the hands of terrorist individuals or
organizations. We know well that criminal
organizations often transfer their resources, their
working capital and the fruits of their criminal activity
between the various countries of the world through the
formal financial sector, the financial non-banking
sector, the exchange houses, and also through trade in
goods and services.

In this regard, we feel it is necessary to fight the
laundering of money, assets and goods that enter or
circulate in the economic systems of States as the result
of terrorist or related activities. This struggle must be
carried out by monitoring deposits in banks and other
entities of the financial sector, by sanctioning conduct
aimed at concealing earnings from illicit activities, by
freezing accounts, and through embargoes and the
confiscation of goods. All of this requires that we
follow the trail of these resources, which seek, by
means of sophisticated techniques, to avoid detection
by Government authorities and end up in the hands of
terrorist organizations.

These modes of transfer and laundering illicit
assets must be repressed if we wish to mount a
successful struggle against this phenomenon. To that
end, cooperation is imperative on the part of all
countries that are being used in some way by the agents
of money laundering to acquire, negotiate or sell goods
acquired with illicit profits.

The sacred rule of the financial sector, "know
your client", has been very useful and has made
possible important successes in combating individuals
and organizations dedicated to international terrorism.
Similarly, we must insist that this formula should be
applied to institutions or companies that produce or
market goods and services that are used to carry out
illicit activities. Producers must know their clients, be
familiar with their marketing networks, know
legitimate demand volume and be familiar with other
aspects of monitoring exportable supply. Knowing
one's client is an ideal instrument in the prevention of
money and asset laundering, and would prevent the
funding and carrying out of terrorist acts.

I would like to illustrate this with a simple
example: after the events of 11 September, it is certain
that aviation schools, at least those in the United
States, will not accept anyone as a client without
knowing that person's background and identity. This
additional precaution now being taken by aviation
schools indicates what should be done by other
businesses that produce goods or provide services.
Though it is complicated, this is the path we must now
follow. "Know your client" thus becomes a
requirement of the struggle against terrorism that will
also lead to greater transparency in international trade.

We must also draw attention to diversification
and the relations between criminal enterprises. The
illicit traffic in weapons, drugs and psychotropic
substances and terrorism are now being combined with
the international contraband in goods, the diamond
trade, the illegal traffic in chemical precursors, the
illicit traffic in human organs, fraudulent bankruptcies
and electronic fraud.

The development of effective instruments and
mechanisms to control the various activities that feed
terrorist organizations is one of the greatest challenges
before the Committee. With the cooperation of its
experts and that of other institutions or organizations,
the Committee will be able to provide technical
assistance to Member States based on an analysis of the
reports that have been submitted. On this basis, it will
be possible to identify the strengths and weaknesses of
each of our countries in the fight against terrorism - a
fundamental and decisive factor in achieving the
objectives set by the Security Council in resolution
1373 (2001).

I would like to conclude by saying that the
Security Council, in its creation of the Committee, is
taking important decisions that are steering the fight
against terrorism in the right direction. Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001) and the measures that
are being adopted by most Governments in the world to
combat international terrorism constitute fundamental
progress that Colombia unhesitatingly and
unwaveringly supports.

In response to these great challenges we should
become constantly active, without interruption. We
should not wait until atrocious events such as those of
11 September occur before acting with the readiness
and rigour that should always characterize our work.
Let us bear in mind that terrorism never rests.

