Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I
congratulate you, Mr. President, on Equatorial Guinea
completing its presidency of the Council. I thank
Special Envoy Schraner Burgener for her briefing and
for her important work on Myanmar. I welcome the
Foreign Secretary of Bangladesh and thank him for
joining us and for all that his country has done for the
Rohingya people.

The United States remains deeply concerned
about the situation in Myanmar, especially in Rakhine
state. Progress on the ground has been limited. As our
Vice-President said in his meeting with State Counsellor
Aung San Suu Kyi, the violence and persecution by the
military and vigilantes that resulted in driving 700,000
Rohingya to Bangladesh are without excuse. We
agree with the assessment of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) that conditions
in Myanmar are not yet conducive for voluntary returns
and that the responsibility to improve those conditions
rests with Myanmar.

The return of refugees and internally displaced
persons must be voluntary, safe, dignified, sustainable
and consistent with international principles. Returns
should be based on reliable information about
the conditions in the relevant areas of Myanmar.
Unhindered access for humanitarian assistance,
media and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) is
necessary to understand conditions in areas of return
and to allow refugees and internally displaced persons
to make informed choices.

We continue to urge the Government of Myanmar
to create conditions for voluntary repatriation and to
address the root causes of the crisis in Rakhine state.
That requires improving the living conditions for those
ethnic Rohingya remaining in Rakhine state, including
a transparent and efficient citizenship verification
process, freedom of movement, access to livelihoods,
security reform, ensuring accountability and other key
recommendations of the Annan Commission.

In addition, the Government of Myanmar's
memorandums of understanding with UNHCR and
the United Nations Development Programme expire in
June. It is imperative that the work streams outlined
in those documents be implemented. The international
community is willing to help but must be allowed to
do so with unhindered humanitarian, media and NGO
access. We urge Myanmar to play a constructive
role in resolving this crisis, including by ensuring
accountability for those responsible for human rights
violations and abuses.

The United States supports the multiple efforts
and mechanisms at the United Nations to foster
accountability for human rights abuses in Myanmar,
including in northern Rakhine state. In addition to the
Special Envoy's role, we strongly support the United
Nations fact-finding mission on Myanmar.

We have monitored the expeditious
operationalization of the independent investigative
mechanism for Myanmar, whose mandate is to collect,
consolidate, preserve and analyse evidence of the most
serious crimes. In addition, we have also called upon
the authorities in Myanmar to resume cooperation with
the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in Myanmar. This year we look forward to working
with Member States on a General Assembly resolution
that addresses the human rights situation in Myanmar.

For the 1 million ethnic Rohingya who fled the
violence to Bangladesh, the situation is urgent. We
applaud Bangladesh's generosity in continuing to host
1 million Rohingya refugees, and we will continue to
seek creative ways to increase access to education,
livelihoods and durable shelters for Rohingya refugees,
while maintaining pressure on Myanmar to create the
conditions necessary for voluntary repatriation.

The international community cannot ignore the
world's largest refugee camp. We can and must take
steps to effect change on the ground and to resolve this
humanitarian crisis.

We again thank Special Envoy Schraner Burgener
for her briefing, and we look forward to further
discussions on these issues. We sincerely hope the
democratic reforms and humanitarian efforts that the
United States has supported in Myanmar will ultimately
result in a peaceful, successful civil society and a new
beginning for all the people of Myanmar.

