Archbishop Auza (Holy See): The Holy See
commends the presidency of Angola for bringing the
subject of the prevention and resolution of conflicts in
the African Great Lakes region to the attention of the
international community.

Pope Francis, during his visit to the Great Lakes
region last November, found inspiration in the motto of
the Central African Republic that exults the values of
unity, dignity and work. The Pope sees in this triad an
expression of the aspirations of each Central African
country, and indeed of each of the inhabitants of the
Great Lakes region.

The region continues to suffer from decades of
multiple local and regional conflicts fuelled by, among
other things, political instability and poor governance,
corruption and extreme poverty, ethnic divisions and
the exploitative use of the abundant natural resources.
My delegation believes that the three values of unity,
dignity and work are pillars of any prosperous society
and thus could greatly facilitate solutions to the complex
of causes of armed conflicts and underdevelopment in
the region. No solutions to the region's many problems
will be possible if there are divisions instead of unity,
grave violations of human rights instead of respect for
the dignity of each person, and extreme poverty instead
of dignified work for all.

Unity is a cardinal value for the harmony of peoples
in all their diversity. It drives away the fear of the other
tribes and communities. It recognizes the plurality
of political views and religious beliefs. It eschews
the corruption and greed that endanger justice and
solidarity. However, translating the fundamental value
of unity in diversity into reality is a constant challenge
that demands creativity, generosity, self-sacrifice and
respect for others. With respect to dignity, mutual
respect and solidarity are possible only if everyone
recognizes the inherent and equal dignity of all. Finally,
with respect to labour, decent work for all would greatly
improve the lives of those in the region.

Addressing the Central Africans in Bangui, Pope
Francis exhorted all the countries of the region to
improve themselves by wisely exploiting the natural
resources that make the region one of the two lungs
of humankind on account of its exceptionally rich
biodiversity. The international community must
support the countries of the region in preventing the
abundant natural resources from becoming a curse
instead of a blessing, from being exploited in favour
of a privileged few instead of remaining the common
good of all. It is no doubt superfluous to underline the
capital importance of honest administration on the part
of public authorities.
Stable and legitimate Governments require
electoral processes that are free, credible, inclusive and
transparent in order to discourage the recourse to arms.
Governments and all stakeholders in the region must
be helped to negotiate and deal with the various issues
at stake in the most impartial way possible, having in
mind only the common good of all citizens.

The region has been destabilized by the vast
proliferation of arms and armed groups fighting in the
territory. These groups must be persuaded to disarm and
commit themselves to cooperating in the development
of their respective countries. The international
community must assume a larger role in programmes
aimed at controlling the legal and illegal arms trade.
The Holy See expresses deep appreciation for the
countries that have already committed themselves to
this path.

A greater investment in preventive diplomacy
must accompany all efforts. The priority of the
diplomatic activity of the Holy See in the Great Lakes
region and elsewhere is preventive action geared
towards safeguarding the inviolable dignity of every
human person, protecting fundamental human rights,
promoting education and health care for all, and
fostering the identity of peoples. The grave problem
of the recruitment of youth and children by armed
groups and terrorist organizations must be made to
decisively contrast with investments in both education
and job opportunities that offer the young hope for a
better future.

Pope Francis expresses deep appreciation for all
that the international community and the regional
organizations have been doing and calls upon all to
continue along the path of unity, dignity and work to
help the countries in the region achieve disarmament,
prosperity and sound administration at all levels.

