Greece congratulates the Russian presidency of the Security Council on convening today's open debate on women and peace and security on the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the ground-breaking resolution 1325 (2000), which triggered the evolution of the women and peace and security agenda. The agenda reaffirms the disproportionate impact of armed conflict on women and girls and stresses the importance of their meaningful participation, as agents of peaceful and democratic change, in peace and security efforts. This year also marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, the most comprehensive global agenda for the realization of gender equality and the human rights of women and girls. Furthermore, it marks the fifth anniversary of the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which recognizes the role of gender equality in the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. All those anniversaries highlight substantive gender equality as a key requirement for international peace and security, human rights, the rule of law and sustainable development. Nevertheless, 20 years after the adoption of the women and peace and security agenda and despite some progress in some of its priority areas, women continue to be disproportionally affected by violent or non-violent threats to their security. Whether survivors of conflict and conflict-related gender-based violence or peacebuilders, mediators, human rights defenders or journalists, women continue to experience the disproportionate burden of war, authoritarianism and instability. Added to that, the global health crisis caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, along with climate change, exacerbates, as threat multipliers, pre-existing inequalities, having a negative discriminatory impact, particularly on women and girls. Greece remains committed to achieving substantive gender equality by establishing and implementing a coherent legal and institutional framework. To that end, the law mainstreams a gender perspective across the entire range of public policies. Moreover, the National Action Plan on Gender Equality is being renewed for the period 2021-2025, in conformity with international legal principles and standards, as well as the European Gender Equality Strategy 2020-2025, focusing, inter alia, on tackling the multidimensional impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. At the same time, Greece is currently finalizing its first national action plan on women and peace and security, to be adopted later this year, which aims not only to strengthen the foundations for systematic gender mainstreaming in foreign, defence and security policies, but also to enhance gender-equal representation, participation and leadership in decision-making at all levels. Furthermore, this action plan draws attention to the protection of women and girls, including migrants and refugees, from any form of violence, be it sexual, gender-based or domestic, as well as to the full and unimpeded enjoyment of all their rights. In addition, by implementing the aforementioned action plan, Greece seeks to strengthen meaningful cooperation with the United Nations, the European Union, NATO and other like-minded partners in order to advance the beneficial role of women in conflict prevention and resolution and peacebuilding. Finally, Greece firmly believes that substantial gender inclusiveness with regard to peace and security efforts, as envisaged by the women and peace and security agenda, together with the gender-responsive implementation of the 2030 Agenda, is the appropriate tool for achieving a better future for generations to come, namely, a peaceful, sustainable and gender-equal world.
