Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): The
protection of human dignity is the cardinal principle of
the United Nations Charter. All States have committed
themselves to respecting it. In actuality, we see that
this principle is often flouted. The United Nations and
humanitarian organizations are coping with growing
difficulties in the area of humanitarian activity. The
resulting grave violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law are not made known to,
or taken into account by, the international community
until long after the crisis threshold has been crossed.

Blackmail of humanitarian assistance activities
has become a common practice: one need only consider
the deliberate hindrances to humanitarian
organizations' access to millions of civilians affected
by the 20 or so conflicts currently under way. In order
to improve the physical and legal protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the Secretary-General has
proposed a set of steps to be taken in all stages of a
conflict, ranging from political and diplomatic
initiatives aimed at the behaviour of the parties, to
coercive measures to promote a generalized respect for
rules.

Our discussion today is of particular importance
since it enables us to see how far we have come. We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
taken the initiative in providing us with this
opportunity for discussion. We greatly appreciate the
briefing just given us by the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs on the Secretary-General's
fourth report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2004/431). We agree with the Secretary-
General that the Security Council must strengthen
pressure on States that are responsible for protecting
civilians and on the major players who violate human
rights and international humanitarian law, who must be
held responsible for their acts. In this regard, we recall
the spirit of resolution 1468 (2003) on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which aimed at preventing
heads of armed groups from holding key political
positions by taking into account their respect for
human rights and international humanitarian law in
choosing those responsible for political transition.

We also think that we should improve the access
to and quality of assistance given in humanitarian
emergencies. It is in this regard that we welcome the
deployment of Operation Artemis in Ituri, Democratic
Republic of the Congo; the multinational force in Haiti;
the initiative by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) in Western Africa; and of
the African Union in Burundi and Darfur. We must, of
course, find a balance between the principle of
sovereignty and the relevant provisions of the United
Nations Charter and international conventions with
regard to human rights and international humanitarian
law. However, in any case, the moral responsibility for
alleviating human suffering must prevail.

The international community must also reconcile
international humanitarian law with the nature and
development of conflicts that defy the very basis on
which the international instruments for the protection
of civilians were built. Specifically, the responsibility
of States must serve as a basis in situations where there
is no longer a State or where the problem arises as to
the legitimacy of armed groups in respect of their
responsibility for political dialogue. This is especially
pertinent since such armed groups sometimes have real
power. They may be called upon to protect the civilian
population or may make a target of these very
populations. We see this in Africa; we also see it in
Latin America.

Moreover, in these new conflicts, it is not always
simply combatants who face each other, but,
sometimes, neighbours who kill one another, as in the
cases of Rwanda and Kosovo. We should also take a
look at the compatibility of peacekeeping operations'
mandates with the protection of civilians in armed
conflict in order to avoid giving the impression that the
protection of United Nations soldiers takes precedence
over ensuring that the lives of innocent civilians are
safeguarded.

On a different level, the essential requirement for
the effectiveness of the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts can be found in the safety of humanitarian
assistance staff. That is why we will continue to
condemn violence against humanitarian aid staff. This
is an outrageous challenge facing the international
community. These violations must be punished just as
violations of the rights of civilian populations are
punished, since such attacks deprive civilians of their
last hope for support. Stricter control over the presence
of and trade in small arms and light weapons, as well
as anti-personnel mines, through both preventive and
normative measures, must also urgently be established.

In order to refine their response to the challenge
of protecting civilians in conflict in Western Africa, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
organized a conference in Accra, Ghana, in May 2003.
Some of the recommendations that came out of that
meeting could be useful for our debate. I will only refer
to a few of them. First, the proliferation of
humanitarian organizations in Western Africa requires
better coordination in order to maximize the impact of
the efforts made. Second, governmental forces and
armed groups are often in the same food-deprived
situation, which makes refugees even more vulnerable.
Third, the protection of civilians should be integrated
into regional good-governance programmes, with or
without the presence of conflict. Fourth, the civilian
nature of refugee camps should be maintained. Fifth,
legitimate refugees from among members of armed
groups should be acknowledged. Sixth, the problem of
security requires subregional strategic assessment.
Seventh, refugee camps should be established as far as
possible from the borders of countries in conflict.

The aim of this meeting was to strengthen and
disseminate a culture of protection of civilians in
armed conflict in West Africa. The creation of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone also contributed
towards the achievement of that objective by
combating impunity. In more general terms, the
International Criminal Court can also help to achieve
that goal.

Finally, it is important to prioritize the prevention
of conflict, which is the best way to protect civilians.
In that regard, we would stress the links between peace
and economic and social development, as well as the
importance of addressing the causes of conflict by
mobilizing resources for sustainable development.

