President Arias sanchez (spoke in Spanish): I
am grateful for the opportunity to say a few words in a
place so emblematic of international order in the
nuclear age. The Security Council is the product of a
mixture of stupor and hope, the harvest of an atrocious
fear that led to faith in a peaceful destiny for the

human race. This institution was founded on the
promise that we would be able to sleep peacefully
following the most abominable of wars - a promise,
reflected in Article 26 of the United Nations Charter,
that the Security Council would promote "the
establishment and maintenance of international peace
and security with the least diversion for armaments of
the world's human and economic resources".

That promise has yet to be fulfilled. While we
sleep, death is awake. Death keeps watch from the
warehouses that store more than 23,000 nuclear
warheads, like 23,000 eyes open and waiting for a
moment of carelessness. Death is incited and spurred
on by those who perfect weapons of mass destruction
instead of destroying them, and by those who each year
allocate tens of billions of dollars to vertical
proliferation. Death is courted by fundamentalists and
megalomaniacs, radicals and populists, who sustain
their power with gunpowder.

I thank President Barack Obama for the
opportunity to discuss the reduction of nuclear
weapons in the world. A large group of Nobel peace
laureates has gone even farther. For years, we have
lobbied for the total abolition of nuclear weapons,
because we believe that they run counter to the
survival instinct of every species. However, it does not
seem plausible to discuss disarmament so long as not
even existing agreements are being honoured; so long
as there are countries that resist ratifying the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty; so long as
some hide data, store fissile material and reject
international verification mechanisms, shielded behind
their sovereign status; so long as nuclear tests continue
to take place; and so long as this Security Council
maintains its silence before widely known secrets, such
as the clandestine network of proliferation of nuclear
supplies, led with impunity from Pakistan by Abdul
Qadeer Khan in open mockery of the logic underlying
resolution 1540 (2004).

It does not seem plausible to speak of a safer
world so long as the proliferation of other types of
weapons remains in its perennial second-place position
on our international agenda. This Council fails in its
historic mission every day that it turns a blind eye to
the rampant arms race. The world spends $3.5 billion
every day on weapons and soldiers. Each year, more
than $42 billion in conventional arms are sold to
developing nations, where weak or non-existent
democracies are incapable of satisfying the most basic
needs of their peoples. Even in Latin America, which
has never been more peaceful or more democratic, this
year nearly $60 billion will be allocated to military
spending - this in a region with an average of seven
years of schooling for its population, and poverty that
affects more than 200 million inhabitants.

That is why I ask that we approve the arms trade
treaty that my Government has presented to this
Organization. If it is legitimate for us to worry about
the possibility that terrorist networks may gain access
to a nuclear weapon, it is also legitimate for us to
worry about the rifles, grenades and machine guns that
are given into their hands. Who said that killing
thousands in one blow is worse than killing thousands
every day?

Twenty years ago, I visited the United Nations
during my first presidential term. In those days, we
talked about a world without nuclear warheads, a world
in which we would finally control the weapons that
fuelled wars between brothers. I have come back again
as a modern-day Rip Van Winkle, to find that
everything has changed - everything except that.
Peace remains just out of reach. Nuclear and
conventional weapons continue to exist, despite all the
promises. It is up to us to ensure that 20 years from
now we do not awaken to the same terrors we suffer
today.

I am not unaware of the fact that the world's
biggest arms sellers are represented here. But today I
speak not to the makers of arms, but to the leaders of
humanity, who have the responsibility to put principles
before utilitarian considerations, and make good on the
promise of a future where - finally - we can sleep in
peace.

