Lieutenant General Prakash: Of the two
questions asked of me, the first, from the representative
of Gabon, concerned my assessment of the threat of the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) in the region, and what
cooperation can happen between the interregional
missions to neutralize it.

The threat of the LRA in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is real. While its numbers are
not large, the threat cannot be wished away. On
average, we get reports of about 15 to 20 incidents of
LRA activity every month. Over a period of time, the
brutality of the attacks has lessened, the number of
killings has fallen, and the number of civilians being
abducted has also been greatly reduced. This reduction
in the LRA's activity can, to a great extent, be
attributed to a number of proactive operations that the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
has been undertaking in the area.

That said, I would reiterate that the threat is real
and cannot be wished away. The fact is that the terrain
is rugged, the numbers they operate in are small, the
areas where they operate are inaccessible, and the
borders are porous. We have established a joint
intelligence operations centre in Dungu that became
operational this year and is a step towards sharing
information between the partners: the Uganda People's
Defence Force, the Forces arme'es de la Republique
Democratique du Congo and our mission, MONUSCO.
Also, in May, we had an inter-mission force
commanders' conference in Entebbe where we shared
information about the LRA. That said, this is not
enough, and there is more scope for sharing
information and conducting more effective operations
against the LRA, provided we are given the right kind
of resources to do it.

The second question was about the existing
capability gap in our aviation assets and how it affects
the Mission. The non-availability of aviation assets -
both utility and attack helicopters - is of great
concern for the Mission. As the years have gone by, the
negative activity has shifted west, away from the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and more
towards the jungles, to areas that are accessible only by
helicopter. The Council is well aware of the fact that
there is no road infrastructure in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Today, of 93 bases that we have
in the country, 31 are air-supported; that is, one-third
of the temporary operating bases/company operating
bases are in areas that can be logistically supplied only
by air assets. If we do not get the right kind of air
assets to support those bases, not only will we not be in
a position to establish more bases that are required in
inaccessible areas, but we will find it difficult to
support even the existing 31 bases.

The fact that since 4 July we have had no attack
helicopters has greatly reduced our deterrence
capability against the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda in the Kivus. We have no
capability for undertaking any proactive actions against
the armed groups in the Kivus. Since the elections are
approaching, we also feel that future requirements for
air assets are going to be much higher. There will be
conflict between meeting the requirements for
protecting civilians and for transporting electoral
material. That is when we will be totally stretched, and
I feel at this stage that our ability to do our basic task
of protecting civilians will also be highly constrained.

