Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing today. We have read very carefully the reports
prepared by the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations and on Special Political Missions (see S/2015/446) and the report of the Secretary-General
(8/2015/682) with his vision for the implementation
of the recommendations of the High-level Panel.
Those documents will be a good starting point for
a comprehensive and careful analysis by Member
States of ways to further develop the peacekeeping
architecture of our global Organization.

We agree that today's threats and challenges,
as well as the changing nature of today's conflicts,
require appropriate adaptation on the part of the United
Nations. We fully agree with the approach taken in the
reports that there is a need for change in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, in particular with regard to
the political tools for resolving crises. Good quality and
painstaking political and mediation efforts should be a
priority for us. The experience of conflicts in various
parts of the world has shown that such an approach is
what helps to eradicate the root causes of conflicts and
not just treat the symptoms. Otherwise, even after a
temporary lull, crises are likely to re-emerge.

We support the observation that there is a need
to strengthen global and regional cooperation in the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
role of the United Nations and its significant authority
in terms of peacekeeping potential is unique. However,
it is also important that the degree of involvement of
the Organization be carefully balanced depending on
the situation in each specific country. Furthermore,
the interests and needs of the people of the country
must be taken into consideration as much as possible,
through the organization of close dialogue with local
Governments and communities. We are still convinced
that the United Nations presence must seek to assist the
host country only on the basis of the priorities identified
by its Government. In that context, it is crucial to have
constructive regular cooperation between peacekeepers
and the local authorities of the host country, along with
efforts to strengthen the capacities of the receiving
State.

We have paid particular attention to the ideas in
the report stating that United Nations peacekeepers
should not be used to combat terrorism and violent
extremism. The international community has other
tools at its disposal for that purpose. In that regard, it
is encouraging that the recommendations confirmed
the basic principles of peacekeeping. We cannot
agree with the idea, which is being increasingly put
forward at the United Nations, that there should be a
flexible interpretation of peacekeeping. The protection
of civilians is and remains one of the main aims of
peacekeeping, but it cannot be the ultimate aim of the
operation, because the need to protect civilians is a
result of the conflict, not the cause. We must not forget
that the responsibility to protect civilians should be
borne by the States themselves. They alone ultimately
can ensure the quality and stability of such protection.
In that regard, one of the main aims of peacekeeping
operations is to lend a hand during difficult times to
the host country, when it is not able to assume that
responsibility on its own. That assistance must be
impartial and based on the consent and understanding
of the host State. At the same time, we must not forget
that, in any case, it is a temporary measure that is
needed in order to allow time to find a political and
diplomatic solution.

We believe that it is important to be careful with
regard to the excessive focus in peacekeeping on human
rights issues, including the Human Rights Up Front
initiative of the Secretary-General, and gender issues.
We are not trying to undermine the importance of those
issues, but we urge a responsible and rational approach
to them. Otherwise, it may affect the execution of the
primary peacekeeping tasks. There is also a need on
the part of the various departments of the Secretariat
to carefully respect their mandates and curb the
practice of assuming others' mandates and duplicating
efforts. Such modern words as "links", "coherence",
"coordination" and "flexibility", which one encounters
in nearly every United Nations decision, must not lead
to everyone doing everyone else's work. The inevitable
result of that would be that no one does anything and
no one assumes responsibility for anything. As a side
effect of such an approach, we have seen a growth
in the number of offices and increased costs and
expenditure. United Nations mechanisms, including
in the area of peacekeeping, need to be cut back, and
additional mechanisms should not be established to
do so. Furthermore, we must not artificially restrict
the number of troop-contributing countries, and the
Secretariat must not have too broad a remit over staffing
policy, including in the areas of early deployment and
civilian personnel management.

It is imperative that the United Nations cooperate
with regional and subregional organizations and
countries in the region and find other forms of
cooperation. That cooperation could operate along
various tracks: from an exchange of information and best
practices to joint activities on the ground and providing
resource support in order to quickly and effectively
respond to existing and emerging challenges. We see
great potential in developing that type of cooperation
in almost all regions of the world.

In conclusion, I would like to note that the whole
range of issues, including those related to preventive
measures, the principles of peacekeeping, structural
changes in the Secretariat, as well as the use and
redistribution of human and financial resources, demand
significant and substantive consideration by Member
States. That work should be carried out primarily within
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of
the General Assembly and the Fifth Committee of the
General Assembly.

