Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Today's debate
highlights the fact that it is not sufficient for the
Security Council to simply put an end to conflicts,
but that it should help to break the conflict cycle. In
large part, this is, of course, a task we assigned to the
Peacebuilding Commission when it was created in
2005. I will focus my brief comments today on how to
ensure that reconciliation leads to genuine, sustainable
peace. The process requires, among other things,
eschewing impunity, fostering inclusion and addressing
root causes.

Sustainable peace is only possible when opponents

deal with the past and commit to a shared view of the
future. Reconciliation must never allow for de facto or
de jure impunity for the most serious crimes. Justice for
atrocity crimes removes those most likely to go back on
peace agreements from political life and deters them
and others from committing similar crimes in future.
When reconciliation does include amnesties that prevent
accountability for atrocities committed by politically
powerful figures, it disregards victims' calls for justice
and creates the conditions for divisive memory politics
or even a new phase of conflict. We support the United
Nations position that the peace agreements it endorses

"can never promise amnesties for genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity or gross violations
of human rights" (S/2004/616, para. 10).

That being said, the Council's recent meeting on
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina illustrates
the difficulties involved in ensuring that international
criminal justice leads to long-term accountability,
sustainable peace and meaningful reconciliation (see S/PV.8658). Achieving accountability often requires
the inclusion of restorative justice, as well as such
transitional-justice mechanisms as truth commissions.
Key to this process is that each and every situation has
an approach to accountability shaped by the needs of
those seeking justice.

For reconciliation to last, it must include people
from all parts of society. Participation in processes
where reconciliation is sought must be gender sensitive
and incorporate the perspectives of young people and of
minority groups within a State. Civil society, religious
leaders and indigenous representatives may also play
significant roles. Inclusive reconciliation builds a
broader constituency for a lasting peace.

Reconciliation must also grapple with factors at the
root of division. There has been a significant growth
in intra-State conflicts, many of which are based on
claims by communities within a State to a greater
measure of governance over their own affairs as an
expression of self-determination, often on the basis of
ethnic, cultural or religious identity. On this basis, we
are currently working on a handbook for mediators,
affected communities and States to bring together
best practices in preventing and resolving these
conflicts, based on five principles: self-governance, the
protection of minority rights, inclusive reconciliation
processes, the acknowledgement of historical context,
and awareness of the role of affected third States. We
hope that this will make a contribution to the successful
reconciliation of conflicts and disputes over issues of
self-determination.

