Mr. Nitzan (Israel): Once again, we have heard
serial human rights abusers, such as Zimbabwe, Syria,
Nicaragua, Cuba, Iran and Saudi Arabia, as well as
systematic religious rights violators such as Bahrain,
Qatar and - once again - Iran and Saudi Arabia
attack my country. President Kennedy once said, "No
matter how big the lie, repeat it often enough and the
masses will regard it as truth".

Today, I heard a lot of lies directed at the State of
Israel, so I wish to clarify a number of issues. Israel
respects and protects religious freedom and grants full
religious rights to people of all faiths - an uncommon
practice in our region.After reuniting Jerusalem in
1967, Israel abolished discriminatory laws. Israel
introduced religious freedom that allowed millions of
Muslims and Christians to visit and pray in the holy
sites in Jerusalem. Today Jerusalem is an open city
for all faiths that celebrates religious tolerance and
diversity.

I want to remind some of the delegations here in
this institution that Jerusalem had a Jewish character
long before most cities in the world had any character
at all. Jews have lived continuously in Jerusalem for
3,000 years, from the time that King David built his
great palace in the city's rolling hills. By denying the
history of the Jewish people, the Arabs and Palestinians
are planting seeds of intolerance. The truth is that the
Palestinian Authority incites violence in Jerusalem
and on the Temple Mount. President Abbas and other
Arab leaders try to advance their political agendas by
inflaming tensions and encouraging violence. In doing
so, they are playing with fire and distancing us from
peace.

I have to admit that it was difficult to follow the
complex conspiracy theory devised and delivered by the
Syrian representative earlier today. Syria has become
an expert at blaming others for its problems. The
responsibility for the catastrophe of the humanitarian
crisis taking place in the Syrian Arab Republic lies
solely with the Syrian Government. Blaming Israel
for the evacuation of United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) troops from the area of
separation is nothing more than revisionist history. The
truth of the matter is that the Syrian Army fled in the
face of the advancing Jabhat Al-Nusra fighters, leaving
UNDOF troops unprotected and at risk. Recognizing
the danger, Israel opened its gates and provided
UNDOF safe harbour.

Finally, I want to once again address the remarks
made by the representative of Qatar. The Qatari
representative once again had the audacity to criticize
Israel. The fact of the matter is that Qatar serves as the
chief financial sponsor for Hamas and others among the
most brutal and dangerous groups in the Middle East.
That is a matter that should be a source of concern for
the Council and for the international community.

