Mr. Roet (Israel): Let me begin by thanking you,
Madam President, for Lithuania's able stewardship of
the Security Council this month and for holding this
very important debate, as more than half a million
people die every year as a result of the illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons.
Last year, Israel was proud to sign the Arms Trade
Treaty. Israel supports the principles and goals of the
Treaty and believes it is an important step towards better
regulating the trade in arms and preventing weapons
from reaching terrorist groups and rogue actors. Israel
has passed significant pieces of legislation to guide its
own robust export-control system.

In the Middle East, the illicit trafficking in small
arms is a big problem. Small arms are the weapons
of choice for terrorists who seek to spread fear and
undermine stability. For years Iran has destabilized
and radicalized the Middle East. In recent years it has
also intensified its campaign to smuggle weapons to
its terrorist proxies, including the Houthis in Yemen,
Shiite militias in Iraq, Hizbullah in Lebanon and the
Syrian Golan and Hamas in Gaza.

Last summer, Hamas terrorists fired over 3,800
rockets and mortars from Gaza towards Israeli
civilian communities, an average of l projectile every
10 minutes. One of those mortars hit the home of Gila
and Doron Tragerman. Their four-year-old son, Daniel
was playing in the living room when the mortar shell
slammed into their house and killed the little boy. Two
days later, Ze'ev Etzion and Shahar Melamed from
Kibbutz Nirim were also killed by mortars fired by
terrorists in Gaza.

The grim reality is that small arms will continue to
take the lives of innocent civilians unless the Council
takes meaningful steps to enforce compliance with
sanctions and arms embargoes, particularly with regard
to Iran. The Iranian regime regularly transfers tons of
weapons and munitions to Hizbullah terrorists in blatant
violation of four Security Council resolutions - 1559
(2004), 1701 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1929 (2010). If
the international community continues to be missing
in action, those resolutions will continue to be dead on
arrival.

In Iraq, Syria, and Yemen, terrorists groups
have taken advantage of the chaos and instability to
raid unsecured weapons caches. After securing the
weapons, terrorist groups recruit and kidnap young
boys to fight their battles. In Yemen, for instance,
seven-year-old Hassan was recruited by Houthi rebels to
man checkpoints. Instead of learning to read and write,
Hassan's only lessons are how to use his Kalashnikov
rifle. Like Hassan, countless young boys have been
forced to give up their childhoods to fight someone
else's war. The next generation of children in our region
deserves a brighter future - a future without hate,
without conflict and without terror.
Every nation is threatened by the proliferation,
illegal transfer and misuse of small arms. Following
the downfall of Muammar Al-Qadhafi, armouries
brimming with assault rifles, grenades and surface-to-
air missiles were plundered by militants. Thousands
of Libya's 20,000 surface-to-air missiles have fallen
into the hands of non-State actors and terrorists.
Similarly, the uncontrolled trafficking of shoulder-fired
missiles known as man-portable air-defence systems
(MANPADS), is of particular concern to Israel. In
2002, Al-Qaida-affiliated terrorists in Mombassa,
Kenya, fired two surface-to-air missiles at an Israel
Airlines plane. The missiles narrowly missed, but the
attack marked a turning point: terrorists were using
small arms to target civilian airliners.

In recent years, the Middle East has seen the
proliferation of thousands of MANPADS. Misleadingly
categorized as small arms and light weapons,
MANPADS have the potential to cause mass casualties
and undermine stability. The threat is very real and
demands the immediate attention of the international
community.

At this moment, as we speak, smuggling ships are
steaming across the high seas, cargo trucks are snaking
across mountain passes and small aircraft packed with
illegal weapons are flying low to avoid detection. The
mortars and missile launchers that they carry could
take dozens of innocent lives and spark the next major
conflict.

Terrorists and their backers depend on divisions in
the international community to keep their operations
afloat. No nation is free from responsibility, and
no nation can escape the consequences of inaction.
The Council must take a bold first step by holding
accountable those Member States that arm, train and
fund terrorists. The failure to act today will invite
disaster tomorrow.

