Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the presidency of
the United States for convening today's meeting in this
format. It has been a long time since we discussed this
topic in an open meeting.

We also thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
and Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Sudan and South Sudan, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for the
information that they have shared with the Security
Council today.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia agrees with the
Secretary-General that the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) is one of the most
successful peacekeeping missions. We highlight the
commitment of its staff and the cooperation of the
Government of Ethiopia, which have led to the current
state of relative stability in Abyei and along the border
between the Sudan and South Sudan.

While we emphasize the stability of the Area, we
recognize that the political, humanitarian and security
situation continues to present challenges, to which
UNISFA is responding within its means, limited by
several factors beyond its control. It is clear to us
that it is the Governments of both countries that must
advance more in the development of measures to build
mutual trust, which would allow for the implementation
of the 2011 Agreement between the Government of
the Republic of the Sudan and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement on temporary arrangements for
the administration and security of the Abyei Area and
for identifying the definitive status of the Area.

In that regard, we have taken note of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General to adjust
the UNISFA mandate. We agree in principle that
its objective should be the implementation of the
cooperation agreements with respect to border issues,
security arrangements and the final status of Abyei,
in collaboration with the African Union Commission
and the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel. Similarly, we agree that it is necessary for
UNISFA to reinforce its support for the parties in the
implementation of the signed agreements.

We commend the good offices of UNISFA for
bringing the parties together and rekindling the political
process, as well as promoting understanding and
reconciliation between the Dinka Ngok and Misseriya
communities by promoting coexistence between them
through commercial activities and the creation of
community protection committees, helping to establish
bonds of trust that are critical to the inhabitants of the
area. In particular, we must continue working to further
reduce the tensions in the Amiet common market,
which, as we know, is the economic centre of the region
and allows for the meeting of both parties.

Another important point for my delegation is,
undoubtedly, maintaining UNISFA support for the
development of the operational capacity of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, which
is crucial to maintaining good relations between both
countries. Moreover, while emphasizing that UNISFA
cannot replace the role of the State, the cooperation of
both countries is necessary in consolidating institutions
that manage the area properly and can guarantee
basic services to the population of Abyei. Likewise,
international cooperation is critical to financing projects
that meet the needs of the communities of the area,
mainly in the areas of reconciliation and development.

We wish to take advantage of the presence of the
representative of the Sudan to commend the role that
his country has played in the signing of the recent
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, and we understand that the
process may have delayed the meetings of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism. While it is necessary
to take such variables into account, we encourage the
parties to hold meetings of the Mechanism that could
lead to concrete results.

Finally, we thank the Secretary-General for
the recommendations he has presented. Bolivia
supports the extension of the UNISFA mandate while
maintaining its operational capacity and support for
the Mechanism, as well as continuing to encourage the
parties to work together to establish specific measures,
as we did in resolution 2386 (2017). Any change to
the mission's mandate must first be coordinated with
the countries involved and based on consultations
with troop-contributing countries and regional and
subregional organizations, and take the Secretary-
General's recommendations into account.

