Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Jean-Marie Guehenno for his very complete - as
usual - briefing on the latest developments in Kosovo.
France endorses the statement which the representative
of Spain will make during our discussion on behalf of
the European Union. I shall limit my statement to
recalling issues which are important to us in our
national capacity.

Mr. Steiner and his team deserve our
encouragement and support. Three years after the
adoption of resolution 1244 (1999) and the arrival of
the United Nations in Kosovo we have come a long
way. The international community remains determined
to foster complete implementation of the resolution and
ensure its respect. Since the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General took up his duties in February
additional steps have been taken. Mr. Steiner has
succeeded in making the provisional institutions of
self-government a reality. He fostered their
establishment and convinced representatives of all the
components of Kosovar society to take part in them. He
has encouraged implementation of the Constitutional
Framework while seeing to it that initiatives which do
not respect its provisions are identified. Thanks to the
action of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), noteworthy results have
been achieved.

We should also welcome the dialogue
between the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the Yugoslav authorities. It is important
that trusting cooperation be established between
UNMIK and the provisional institutions on one hand
and the Belgrade authorities on the other with respect
for the competences of each. Implementation of the
Common Document of 5 November 2001 remains the
cornerstone of this relationship and of the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). Moreover,
Mr. Steiner has emphasized the importance of the
return of refugees and displaced persons. No effort
should be spared in making these returns a reality.
Their success will be decisive in gauging the ability of
Kosovar society to find roots in democracy, to
eliminate violence and make a positive contribution to
regional stability. All Kosovars should mobilize to
ensure the success of the projects managed by UNMIK.
This mobilization should extend to restoring the rule of
law, affirming justice and combating impunity. We
support UNMIK's actions in that regard.

Self-governing authorities should get involved in
daily life in Kosovo by complying fully with resolution
1244 (1999) and the Constitutional Framework - and
with nothing else. The conditions for beginning
specific work are now present. More than 100 days
after its inauguration, the Government is complete,
now that the Minister of Agriculture and the Inter-
Ministerial Coordinator for Returns have taken their
oath before Mr. Steiner. We should welcome this. What
we have to do now is work for the well-being of the
entire population without any distinction as to origin.
The benchmarks referred to by the Secretary-General
in his latest report will enable us more precisely to
evaluate progress achieved by Kosovo in the areas of
democracy, the rule of law, regional stability and
respect for international law. Kosovo officials should
continue their efforts along those lines. There is no
alternative. This is the condition in order for Kosovo to
move closer to European standards. Any action
contrary to resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Constitutional Framework will run directly counter to
that objective.

In this regard, initiatives such as the resolution on
the protection of the territorial integrity of Kosovo,
which exceed the competence of the self-government
institutions, are null and void. The Security Council
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General emphasized this recently. Such initiatives
prevent Kosovo from making progress towards stability
and a better future. The provisional institutions of self-
government must show their sense of responsibility in
this regard. We will firmly support the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in his efforts
to ensure that the rule of law is respected. In this
context, we support the 13 June guidelines for
agreements of institutions of self-government in the
area of international cooperation.

Respect for international law is incumbent upon
the institutions of self-government, as well as upon
States. That principle should have prevailed with
regard to the memorandum of understanding signed on
30 May between the Minister for Economic Affairs of
the Republic of Albania and the Minister for Trade and
Industry of the Kosovar Government. The Special
Representative quite rightly declared that memorandum
of understanding null and void. The logic behind the
stabilization and association process launched by the
European Union for States in the region calls for States
to avoid all interference in the rule of law and the
efforts of the international community in Kosovo. That
is the spirit of the Zagreb summit, which we must
maintain.

Finally, the Security Council's position regarding
the Agreement on the border between Yugoslavia and
Macedonia is clear. Practical arrangements regarding
its implementation, concluded through dialogue and
cooperation between all the parties concerned, should
help invigorate the spirit of the Zagreb summit.

