Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Let me start by
thanking Mr. Michael Williams, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his statement.
We too wish him well in his next endeavour, which we
hope will be less turbulent than the one he has just
completed.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered later today by the Permanent
Representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

In the past several weeks, there has been
encouraging movement towards re-igniting the search
for peace in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The
meetings between Palestinian President Abbas and
Israeli Prime Minister Olmert have been a positive
development, as was the historic visit to Israel
undertaken by two Arab foreign ministers representing
the League of Arab States to promote the Arab Peace
Initiative. The call by United States President Bush for
the holding of an international conference on Palestine

in the coming months to bring the parties together in
order to reinvigorate the peace process has also raised
hopes in the Middle East, and indeed beyond the
region.

However, those encouraging developments have
yet to be translated into progress on the ground in
Palestine. The reality is that Palestinians continue to
live under occupation, which they have endured for
decades. They face daily hardships, compounded by
the 550 checkpoints that restrict their movement and
access. The violent incursions by the Israeli army into
Palestinian areas continue unabated, while Israeli
settlements and the separation wall expand, despite
international condemnation. Additionally, thousands of
Palestinian political prisoners continue to languish in
Israeli jails.

On a daily basis, Palestinians in the occupied
territories continue to face an Israeli policy that
violates the basic principles of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Those actions undermine positive movements towards
peace. In particular, the situation in Gaza deserves our
special attention.

A year ago yesterday, 28 August 2006,
Mr. Arnold Vercken, Country Director of the World
Food Programme in the occupied Palestinian Territory,
said the following about Gaza:

"The economy is really reaching rock
bottom. Industries which were once the backbone
of Gaza's economy and food system, such as the
agriculture and fishing industries, are suffocated
by the current situation and risk losing all
viability." (United Nations News Centre, web- page, 28 August 2006)

Mr. Vercken went on to report that the destruction
of nearly 400 hectares of agricultural land, including
irrigation pipes and greenhouses, had left farmers
destitute with no support to re-cultivate their land. He
went on to say that Gaza's infrastructure lay crippled,
affecting the lives of the 1.4 million population on a
daily basis. He also said that power and water supplies
remain low and unreliable.
In an attempt to reconcile the hopeful signs with
the continuing tragic situation on the ground,
Ambassador Riyad Mansour, the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations, wrote in his letter of
26 July 2007 addressed to the Secretary-General and
the President of the Security Council that

"These opportunities must be seized and built
upon and the illegal actions of Israel, which move
us all in the opposite direction, must be rejected,
and Israel must be compelled to cease its
violations of international law, including
humanitarian and human rights law, to abide by
resolutions of international legitimacy and to
seriously pursue peace in good faith."
(S/2007/459, fifth paragraph)

The international community bears the
responsibility to ensure that political progress in
Palestine is coupled with a change for the better in the
lives of ordinary Palestinians. The Council, with its
Charter-mandated responsibility for international peace
and security, cannot afford to ignore the suffering of
the Palestinian people. Inaction on the part of the
Council will always be misunderstood as condoning
the suffering on the ground.

Once again, my delegation wishes to reiterate that
the way forward to peace must include the
establishment of an independent State of Palestinian,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side
with Israel, with both States enjoying secure and
internationally recognized borders. That vision of a
two-State solution has already been enshrined in
resolution 1397 (2002). We cannot allow that vision to
fade.

