The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make a statement in my capacity as representative of China. The situation in Afghanistan is at a critical juncture. At present, Afghanistan's peace process, political dialogue, its security situation and its economic development face grave challenges, as well as precious opportunities. The international community should work in synergy to help all parties in Afghanistan seize those opportunities and address those challenges. China welcomes the Joint Declaration between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the United States of America for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan and the Agreement for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan between the United States of America and the Taliban. The Afghan parties and the United States should work together to actively implement the Agreement. As part of implementation, efforts must be made to ensure that the foreign troops stationed in Afghanistan are withdrawn in an orderly and responsible manner and that the situation in Afghanistan transitions smoothly in order to avoid a security vacuum and, in particular, to prevent the rise of terrorist organizations that might take advantage of such a situation. To that end, the capacity-building of the Afghan National Security Forces should continue to be supported. China firmly supports a broad, inclusive and peaceful reconciliation process led and owned by the Afghans. We respect the Afghan people's independent determination of their country's future. The Afghan parties should start the intra-Afghan negotiations promptly to discuss together future political and security arrangements for the country that are acceptable to all parties and they should work in unison for lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan. We hope that the international community will respect the will of the Afghan people, continue to support reconciliation among them and help Afghanistan achieve peace at an early date. The international community must continue its efforts to lay a solid foundation for lasting peace in Afghanistan. To that end, it should focus on a peaceful reconstruction process, increase investment in infrastructure construction, promote regional connectivity, pay attention to the crucial role of countries and organizations of the region and inject momentum into Afghanistan's sustained development. China stands ready to work with the international community and to continue to make its contribution to peace, stability and development in Afghanistan. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. There are no more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.
