Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I would like to thank the
delegation of the Republic of Korea for convening this
important meeting today.

Ukraine welcomes the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1540 (2004) and the forthcoming 2016
comprehensive review as important milestones and as
opportunities to identify realistic goals for the future.

Ukraine attaches great importance to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and the
subsequent resolutions 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008).
We participate actively in projects to advance the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
In March 2013, Ukraine approved the concept of
combating terrorism, including nuclear terrorism.
Measures to respond to the threat ofterrorism are being
implemented on a permanent basis. Nine anti-terrorist
exercises have been carried out.
A State plan has been approved that provides for
interaction among central and local authorities in the
event acts of sabotage involving nuclear facilities,
nuclear materials and other sources of ionizing radiation
during their use, storage or transportation, as well as on
nuclear waste in the process of treatment.

A common tactical and special training session was
held to test the capabilities involved in ensuring the
physical security and anti-terrorist security of nuclear
power plants in Ukraine.

In October 2013, Kyiv hosted a joint training
session on combating acts of nuclear terrorism for
law enforcement officials and other central authorities
of Ukraine and Belarus, aimed at improving the
professional abilities and skills of relevant experts in
nuclear and radiological terrorism resistance.

The work is ongoing, with the goal of enhancing
the efficiency of radiation monitoring systems along
Ukraine's national borders. At the beginning of 2014,
such systems had been installed at 57 checkpoints.
Eventually, there are plans for their installation at 150
checkpoints. The use of mobile radiation-monitoring
systems that provide monitoring of "green borders" is
also being expanded. In June 2013, Kyiv held a meeting
of the interagency expert working group on countering
the threat of the proliferation of weapons and materials
of mass destruction and related terrorist threats and on
protecting State infrastructure critical to supporting
life.

International and regional cooperation among States
is a crucial step towards achieving the key objectives of
resolution 1540 (2004). That is why, in November 2013,
in Kyiv, the Government of Ukraine, in cooperation
with the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs
and the Conflict Prevention Centre of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, held a regional
workshop on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). The resolution is an international legally binding
instrument that addresses the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and that has played a crucial role in
global and regional non-proliferation efforts.

I would like to underline that the existing global
non-proliferation regime is based on the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Ukraine
became a member of the Treaty 20 years ago. Since
then, Ukraine has been thoroughly implementing all
the provisions of that document. Moreover, Ukraine
has undertaken and successfully fulfilled additional
obligations within the Nuclear Security Summit
framework by eliminating all its stockpiles of highly
enriched uranium.

Ukraine's decision to remove all nuclear weapons
from its territory and to accede to the NPT as a
non-nuclear-weapon State was adopted under strict
conditions. In the 1994 Budapest Memorandum, the
United States of America, the Russian Federation and
the United Kingdom not only welcomed Ukraine's
actions, but also established their commitment to
respect the independence, sovereignty and existing
borders of Ukraine.

The Russian Federation's deliberate aggression
against Ukraine and its annexation of Crimea, as well
as its support for the separatist groups operating in the
eastern regions of Ukraine, has provoked an imbalance
in the existing international security system. Today
we have a situation where the Russian Federation is
undermining the NPT regime not only by violating
the Budapest Memorandum but also by violating the
Non-Proliferation Treaty itself. At the same time,
Ukraine considers the NPT a cornerstone of the
global non-proliferation regime and an essential basis
for achieving the objectives of nuclear disarmament.
My country commends the efforts of States that have
reaffirmed their commitment to guarantee the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine and counts on
their support and engagement for those commitments
to be further fulfilled. We still count on their support,
because my country will never agree to recognize the
deliberate annexation of a part of its territory by the
Russian Federation.

