Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing and
his commitment.

The situation on the ground in Syria remains
worrisome, and we are particularly concerned about the
escalation of violence in Idlib. We call on all parties,
in particular the Astana guarantors, to strengthen their
commitment to the agreement signed in September. A
military offensive would lead to a humanitarian crisis
with disastrous consequences, not only for the 3 million
inhabitants of Idlib but also for the entire region. We call
for the ceasefire to be implemented throughout Syria.

After eight years of conflict, millions of people are
still in need of humanitarian assistance and millions are
still displaced. Syrian citizens must remain at the centre
of our concerns. In the current context it is difficult to
describe the developments as positive, but it is our duty
to keep hope alive and work together as members of
the Security Council towards a political solution. We
encourage the Special Envoy in the implementation of
his five objectives.

We support the Special Envoy in pursuing his
specific actions in favour of detainees, abductees and
missing persons. We note the recent exchange of 18
prisoners, but we still have a long way to go. Much
progress remains to be made in that area, in accordance
with international humanitarian law. Thousands and
thousands of Syrians are waiting for a sign of life
from their loved ones. We call on all Member States
to use their influence on the parties to the conflict to
promote the release of arbitrarily detained persons. I
would like to ask the Special Envoy what prospects
he sees for moving beyond the one-for-one exchange
that has existed so far in order to be able to expand the
prisoner exchange.

Belgium calls for the convening of a constitutional
committee as soon as possible, as a first step towards
a more in-depth dialogue and genuine negotiations
on the implementation of the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015) under
the auspices of the United Nations.

However, the United Nations can confer its seal of
legitimacy only if the composition of the committee
meets the necessary criteria of credibility, balance and
inclusivity. In addition, its procedures and working
methods are not just technical details but must also be
an integral part of each agreement. The parties should
work diligently and constructively towards a solution.
A successful agreement must reflect a real commitment
by all parties. We support the Special Envoy in his
regular exchanges with the parties to the conflict to
deepen dialogue and build trust.

In conclusion, Syria and its citizens deserve a
peaceful and inclusive future. The path to lasting peace
is through reconciliation and justice. Only when the
conditions for a safe, dignified, voluntary and well
informed return are met will refugees be able to go home.
Only when a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive
political transition is firmly under way will Belgium be
ready to support the country's reconstruction.

