The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Council for the month of April 2012, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Ambassador Mark Lyall
Grant, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of March 2012. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Lyall Grant and his
delegation for the great skill with which they
conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Peace and security in Africa

The President: Under rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
condemnation of the forcible seizure of power
from the democratically elected Government of
Mali by some elements of the Malian armed
forces, and recalls in this regard its press
statement of 22 March 2012 and its presidential
statement of 26 March 2012. The Council calls on
the mutineers to ensure the safety and security of
all Malian officials and demands the immediate
release of those detained. The Council renews its
call for the immediate restoration of
constitutional rule and the democratically elected
Government and for the preservation of the
electoral process.

"The Security Council supports the efforts
of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), which issued communiques
on 27 and 29 March 2012, and commends the
work of President Blaise Compaore, as ECOWAS
facilitator, in promoting the return to full civilian
authority and the effective re-establishment of
constitutional order in Mali. The Council also
commends the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa and of the African Union in this regard and
takes note of the announcement of the mutineers
to restore constitutional rule as of 1 April 2012.
The Council expects the mutineers to take
immediate steps to effectively implement this
commitment and will follow developments
closely.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the continued attacks, looting and seizure of
territory carried out by. rebel groups in the north
of Mali and demands an immediate cessation of
hostilities. The Council is alarmed by the presence
in the region of the terrorist group Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb, which could lead to a further
destabilization of the security situation. The
Council calls upon the rebels to immediately
cease all violence and urges all parties in Mali to
seek a peaceful solution through appropriate
political dialogue. The Council stresses the
importance of the safety of civilians and of the
respect of human rights.

"The Security Council reaffirms the need to
uphold and respect the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of Mali.

"The Security Council renews its serious
concern over the insecurity and rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian situation in the Sahel
region.

"The Council commends efforts of
humanitarian organizations involved and calls on
all parties in Mali to allow timely, safe and
unimpeded access of humanitarian aid to civilians
in need, in accordance with international law,
including applicable international humanitarian
law, and guiding principles of emergency
humanitarian assistance. The Council calls for an
increased mobilization of the international
community to support humanitarian efforts.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
at the risk posed by fighting to Mali's World
Heritage sites.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to update it, as appropriate, on
12-28357
developments in Mali and will remain seized of
the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/9.

I now give the floor to the representative of Mali.


