The President (spoke in Spanish): I now will
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Panama.

I would like to begin by thanking Ambassador
Jan Eliasson and Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guehenno, for their detailed briefings on advances in
the political process and the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). We draw attention to the endeavours of
Ambassador Eliasson and his counterpart in the
African Union, Ambassador Salim Salim, in
establishing dialogue between the parties to the
conflict and the individuals affected. We welcome the
decision by the Secretary-General to extend the
mandate of Special Envoy Eliasson. We take this
opportunity to assure him of Panama's fullest support
in his discharge of this mandate.

On 31 July 2007, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1769 (2007) through
which it authorized the deployment of UNAMID. This
historic decision emphasizes the political determination
of two organizations to share responsibilities in
achieving a common objective. In addition to
confirming our unswerving commitment to Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations regarding
cooperation with regional organizations in the pacific
settlement of conflicts, it underpins Panama's stated
position to deal with different conflicts with different
measures, in keeping with the characteristics and
particularities of the conflict. This innovative spirit
could be employed in resolving other conflicts.

We emphasize that the deployment of the Hybrid
Operation and political negotiations are parallel
processes. The political process, as the lynchpin of
peace, security and stability in Darfur, calls for an
unswerving commitment to a cessation of hostilities
that can only be achieved in a secure environment for
dialogue, which should be obtained through the Hybrid
Operation.

Since this operation was authorized, we have
encountered numerous difficulties. However, we
welcome the information provided by the Secretary-
General regarding the imminent signature of the status-
of-forces agreement and that the Sudanese Government
has shown new flexibility in its position regarding the
origin of contingents that make up the Hybrid
Operation.

Still, many matters remain pending, particularly
the generation of aviation and transport units. In this
regard, we welcome the efforts of the Government of
the United Kingdom in obtaining offers for these units.

We note that the most recent trip by the Special
Envoys to the region has produced significant advances
in the political process. The greater consistency in the
positions of a number of rebel groups and signs of
flexibility constitute progress. We share the concern of
many delegations regarding the slow pace of the
process. However, we do acknowledge that this
conflict is the product of decades of discontent affected
by the creation of borders that do not reflect the social
reality on the ground and that we cannot erase with our
desires to adhere to pre-established timelines. We
repeat our urgent pleas to the countries able to
influence the leaders of some of the rebel groups to
step up their efforts to encourage them to join this
process.

Moreover, Panama echoes the sentiments
expressed by States regarding their serious concerns
regarding the lack of protection by the Government of
Sudan of the human rights of its citizens and its lack of
respect for the authorities of the International Criminal
Court.
Lastly, we cannot ignore the critical situation that
exists in Chad and the potential impact of this situation
on refugees from Darfur and on internally displaced
persons. This crisis may compound tensions between
the Sudan and Chad and therefore may have an impact
on the political process in Darfur. Similarly, it
undermines regional endeavours to settle the conflict in
Darfur where Chad's participation is fundamental. We
therefore appeal to both countries to adhere to the
commitments entered into under the various
agreements with a view to normalizing their relations.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I call on Mr. Jan Eliasson, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Darfur, to respond to comments
or questions.

