Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Wane for his briefing.

Please allow me to begin by expressing my deepest
condolences to the families and friends of the victims
of Sunday night's atrocious terrorist attack in central
Ouagadougou. Let me also express my condolences for
the loss of a peacekeeper, alongside a Malian soldier,
in Douentza yesterday, and for the loss of lives of
employees of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the Malian gendarmerie during the attack in
Timbuktu yesterday. Our thoughts go out to the families
of the victims and we hope for the speedy recovery of
those injured.

Those tragedies and heinous attacks are stark
reminders of the challenges facing the Sahel countries.
In that regard, I commend the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel) countries' collective efforts to move
towards the full operationalization of the G-5 Sahel
joint force. In order to respond to those challenges
and the regional implications of terrorism, we need
regional, multidimensional and coordinated solutions.
The G-5 Sahel joint force is one part of that response.
A sustainable solution will, however, also require
continued and increased attention to the root causes of
instability. We must ensure that the young women and
men of the Sahel envision a future without having to
migrate or join criminal or extremist networks.

I agree with colleagues who state that while the
primary responsibility for the operationalization of the
force lies with the States members of the G-5 Sahel, the
support of the international community and the United
Nations is needed on the basis of a clearly defined
catalogue of capability gaps and needs. Let me therefore
also highlight some issues that we believe remain to
be clarified, in order to ensure the full efficiency and
success of the G-5 Sahel joint force.

First of all, an overarching political framework
and a coherent strategy should guide the force's
activities. Command and control structures must also
be well defined. Similarly, and considering the amount
of stakeholders and security actors in the Sahel, it is
crucial to ensure coordination both on the ground - not
least with MINUSMA and European Union capacity-
building missions in the region - and on a political
level. Embedment within the African Union peace and
security architecture is desirable, as is consideration of
other regional initiatives.

Secondly, while the general concept of operations
of the joint force includes references to human rights,
protection of civilians with particular attention to
women and children, gender, respect for international
humanitarian law and the right of pursuit across
borders, we welcome and Mr. Wane's view that those
aspects must be further developed and clarified, not
least in the light of the important role of women in
peacebuilding, as highlighted in resolution 2359 (2017).
We therefore ask for further details on how the joint
force aims to take those perspectives into account in the
implementation of its mandate.

Lastly, and related, the civilian component is
paramount to the success of the joint force. We would
ask actors to clarify its structure, size and function as a
matter of urgency.

Let me conclude by reiterating that the challenges of
the Sahel concern all of us and require multidimensional
and coordinated investments in both security and
development throughout the region. Sweden remains
fully committed to supporting those efforts.

