Mr. Giacomelli da Silva (Brazil): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this debate, as well as the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2019/373) and the briefers for their
insightful presentations.

Brazil associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians
in Armed Conflict.

Twenty years have passed since the adoption of
resolution 1265 (1999). As we celebrate that milestone,
we should recognize our progress in mainstreaming the
protection of civilians in the Security Council's work.
At the same time, we should reflect on the reasons
for which the state of the protection of civilians today
is tragically similar to that of 20 years ago, as the
Secretary-General indicates in his report.

No one disputes the evolution of the Council's
treatment of the protection of civilians agenda, from
providing broad guidance to increasingly detailed
and prescriptive language. About 95 per cent of
peacekeeping operations today include a protection
of civilians mandate, and considerations related to the
protection of civilians form part of sanctions regimes.
Yet this robust protection of civilians architecture has
not been sufficient to reduce the heavy civilian toll of
armed conflict. But that should not be seen as a failure
of our efforts. It should rather be understood as a stark
reminder of the human devastation that any armed
conflict causes as well as a clear call to prevent them.

Force should be used only as a last resort. We were
therefore pleased to see that the Indonesian presidency
had chosen prevention as one of the main topics for this
debate. We also agree with the assessment contained
in the concept note (S/2019/385, annex) that the
engagement of local and affected communities plays
an instrumental role in increasing national capacity to
prevent conflict escalation. Local ownership is linked
to a broad understanding of conflict prevention. It
ranges from addressing exclusion, intolerance and other
grievances at the root of conflict, to placing genuine
emphasis on the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Understanding local concerns and sensitivities helps to
build trust between affected communities and United
Nations peacekeepers, thereby contributing to their
preventive work in protecting civilians. Finally, when
everything else fails and civilians are not spared, local
community engagement is essential in promoting
accountability and fighting impunity.

This year we are also celebrating the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions. We are
appalled to see that, in many instances, civilian deaths
do not represent minor casualties of military action.
Brazil strongly condemns the blatant violations of
international humanitarian law. When violations
occur, they must be investigated impartially and their
perpetrators must be held accountable. In that regard,
Brazil reiterates the central role of the International
Criminal Court, and remains a steadfast supporter of
the universality of the Rome Statute.

In order to effectively protect civilians, peacekeeping
operations must have realistic mandates with feasible
tasks from military, political and legal perspectives.
They must also be provided with adequate capabilities
and resources. In addition, we need to acknowledge the
proven benefits that an increased presence of women in
peacekeeping brings to areas including, but not limited
to, the protection of civilians, especially in the light of
the continued use of conflict-related sexual violence,
often as part of a broader strategy. Brazil welcomes
the recent adoption of resolution 2467 (2019) and
encourages further related efforts by the Council as we
approach the twentieth anniversary of the women and
peace and security agenda.

Finally, protection mandates must also factor in the
specifics of each situation. Brazil understands the need
for greater consistency on the protection of civilians
agenda as a call for unbiased and responsible action,
and not as a defence of one-size-fits-all approaches.
Let me express our hope that, 20 years from now,
we will be witnesses to a better scenario - one in
which respect for international humanitarian law will
have become the norm and, most importantly, one in
which we will have achieved the first objective of the
Organization, which is to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. For that, we need to do more in
preventing armed conflict, including through the active
engagement of local and affected communities in the
implementation of protection of civilian measures.

