Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak
Republic and Slovenia, as well as the associated
countries Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey, declare that
they align themselves with this statement.

As this is the first time we are speaking since you
assumed your duties, Sir, I wish to extend to you our
warmest congratulations and best wishes for an
excellent presidency of the Council. I would also like
to congratulate the German delegation on its very good
presidency.

The European Union, further to its statement of
18 February 2003, wishes to reaffirm its continuing
deep concern over the situation in Iraq. The way its
unfolding will be handled will have an important
impact in the coming decades on world affairs and the
system of international relations. In particular, we are
determined to deal effectively with the threat of
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

The extraordinary meeting of the European
Council on 17 February is a testament in this regard. Its
conclusions, together with the conclusions of the
ministerial meeting of 27 January and the terms of the
4 February public demarche to Iraq, which all remain
valid, contain our common positions formulated in
order to deal with this grave situation.

The European Union's objective remains Iraq's
full and effective disarmament of weapons of mass
destruction in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 1441
(2002). We want to achieve this disarmament
peacefully. It is clear that this is what the people of
Europe want. War is not inevitable. Force should be
used only as a last resort.

We are committed to the United Nations
remaining at the centre of the international order. We
recognize the central role and the primary
responsibility of the Security Council in dealing with
the Iraqi disarmament. We pledge our full support to
the Council in discharging its responsibilities.

The European Union reiterates its full support for
the ongoing work of the United Nations inspectors. We
appreciate their work and take note of their latest
report. They must be given the time and resources that
the Security Council believes they need. However,
inspections are not an endless process and cannot
continue indefinitely in the absence of full Iraqi
cooperation.

Baghdad should have no illusions. Iraq has to
comply with the demands of the Security Council and
seize this last opportunity afforded to it. They have to
cooperate immediately, fully, actively and
unconditionally with the inspectors, including by
providing them with all the additional and specific
information on the issues that have been raised in the
inspectors' reports. Baghdad alone will be responsible
for the consequences if it continues to flout the will of
the international community and does not take this last
chance.

The European Union recognizes that the unity
and firmness of the international community, as
expressed in the unanimous adoption of resolution
1441 (2002), and the military build-up have been
essential in obtaining the return of the inspectors and in
the work done so far. Those factors will remain
essential if we are to achieve the full cooperation we
seek.

In the regional context, the European Union
reiterates its firm belief in the need to reinvigorate the
peace process in the Middle East and to resolve the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We continue to support the
publication and early implementation of the roadmap
endorsed by the Quartet. Terror and violence must end.
Settlement activity is a major impediment to the
reinvigoration of the peace process, and, as such, it
must be immediately stopped. Palestinian reforms must
be speeded up, and in this respect President Arafat's
announcement regarding the appointment of a Prime
Minister is a welcome step in the right direction.

The unity of the international community is vital
in dealing with these problems. The European Union
recognizes the international efforts undertaken to solve
the crisis; it works closely with its partners in the
region to bring home to Saddam Hussain the need for
full compliance with resolution 1441 (2002).

The European Union is committed to working
with all our partners, especially the United States, to
deal effectively with the threat of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and for the disarmament
of Iraq, for peace and stability in the region and for a
decent future for all its people.

