Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak in Austria's capacity as Chair-in-Office of the

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE).

Permit me at the outset to thank Mr. Carl Bildt for
his excellent presentation this morning. His analysis of
the regional problems enables us to see the issues in a
larger context. We fully share his view that only a
broad regional approach can enable us to achieve the
establishment of lasting peace and stability in the
region. The overriding goal of self-sustaining stability
based on a firm regional framework can be achieved
only through active commitment and active
participation of the local population and local
politicians.

In that context, Wolfgang Petritsch developed the
concept of "ownership", which calls on the local
population to become fully involved in the rebuilding
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Like previous speakers, I
am pleased to hail recent positive developments in the
region. The elections and the new Government in
Croatia have demonstrated that people and politicians
are taking responsible positions on their future.

We have also seen promising developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. There has been a significant
rise in the return of refugees; the security situation has
improved; the military budget has declined; and the
Brcko district has been established. However, many of
these positive developments occurred only after the
High Representative had made use of his powers.
Genuine cooperation among the Bosnian ethnic groups
is, unfortunately, still the exception.

Members of the Council are fully aware of the
various projects of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in the region,
especially in the fields of free media, refugee return,
human rights and police training. Let me therefore only
briefly address the main current project ofthe OSCE in
the western Balkans: the local elections in Kosovo in
October and the general elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in November. I would like to concentrate
on this issue because it is central to the question at
hand: how to involve the local population and get them
to accept active responsibility for their own political
future. There is no better instrument than free and fair
elections. Clearly, not everyone chooses to participate
in that process, but everybody should have the
opportunity to do so.

For that reason, the OSCE and its chairperson-in-
office, the Austrian Foreign Minister, Benita Ferrero-
Waldner, will continue to support all efforts to create
an environment which enables the participation of all
citizens in this process. Democracy is the cornerstone
of a peaceful future in the Balkans, but there must also
be an end to ethnic tension; there must also be
sustainable economic recovery; there must also be the
safe return of refugees; and above all, there must be a
regional solution with a clear European perspective.

In conclusion, let me express the appreciation of
the chairperson-in-office of the OSCE for the excellent
cooperation between the United Nations and the OSCE,
both at Headquarters and in the field. Considering the
complexity of the tasks and the differences in mandates
and structures of the missions, it is not surprising that
initial difficulties arose. Today, however, the common
achievements demonstrate that sound cooperation can
benefit both organizations, alleviating the burdens and
responsibilities of each organization.

