Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom would like to join preceding speakers in
thanking the Presidents and the Prosecutors of the two
Tribunals: President Pocar, President Byron,
Prosecutor Del Ponte and Prosecutor Jallow.

As this is Prosecutor Del Ponte's last appearance
before the Security Council, we would like to pay
tribute to her enormous contribution to the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and hence to the embedding of
security and stability in the Balkans region. Her
dedication and tireless efforts have kept the ICTY at
the forefront of the international battle against
impunity and have helped to bring a sense of justice to
many of the victims of terrible crimes in the former
Yugoslavia. Her work has been an immense
contribution to the cause of reconciliation in the
Balkans. It is fitting that, on the eve of her last
appearance before the Council, she should have been
paid the tribute of the transfer of Djordjevic. We wish
her every success in the future, and we pay tribute also
to the work of her dedicated team.

In addition, I would like to extend a welcome to
Judge Byron in his first appearance before the Council
and to wish him success in his new role President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR). Along with other speakers, I would also like to
pay tribute to the excellent work of his predecessor,
Judge Erik Mose, over the past four years.

First, I should like to speak about the ICTY. We
are pleased to note the significant progress made by the
ICTY in implementing the completion strategy. It has
introduced a number of efficiency measures, including
conducting multi-accused trials and greater use of the
Rules of Procedure to shorten court time and maximize
courtroom usage. We acknowledge that there is still
likely to be slippage in the timetable, but we urge the
ICTY to keep as closely as possible to the 2010
indicative target.

Completion does not, of course, mean that the
doors of the ICTY will close. Work has already begun
on analysing the need for residual mechanisms; we
thank the two Tribunals for their draft paper. We
continue to emphasize, in that regard, that Karadzic
and Mladic must be arrested and transferred to the
ICTY at the earliest opportunity. As we have done on
many occasions, we call on all parties, including the
Governments of Serbia and of Montenegro and the
authorities in Republika Srpska, to cooperate fully with
the ICTY.

We welcome the February judgment of the
International Court of Justice (ICJ). We reject attempts
by some to hold all of Republika Srpska and Bosnia
guilty of war crimes; but, at the same time, we draw
the Council's attention to that part of the ICJ's
judgment in which it held that Serbia has an obligation
under the Genocide Convention also to transfer
Karadzic and Mladic to the ICTY. We recall that
Srebrenica was the worst massacre in Europe since the
end of the Second World War - a massacre of more
than 7,000 Muslim men and boys. We note that the
twelfth anniversary of Srebrenica is imminent, in July.
We should not let another anniversary pass without the
apprehension of the highest-profile indictees, Karadzic
and Mladic. It is in line with the recent Security
Council resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004) that
they should be tried by the ICTY. I would like to make
clear our support for that in the Council.
As Ms. Del Ponte has noted, there have been
some positive developments, and we welcome them.
We congratulate the authorities of Serbia, Montenegro
and Republika Srpska on the transfer of Zdravko
Tolimir to the ICTY, and also of Vlastimir Djordjevic
this weekend. It is clear that fugitive indictees can turn
up in the most unlikely places, as we saw with the
arrest a few years ago of Ante Gotovina, and we
commend the Croatian authorities for their role in that
respect.

Ms. Del Ponte has noted the more positive
approach of Serbia towards the Tribunal. We commend
in particular the role of the National Security Council
under President Tadie. That new approach has enabled
the European Union (EU) to restart Serbia's
stabilization and association agreement, which has
been one item on the agenda at the EU foreign
ministers' meeting today. We welcome that progress,
but I would also like to make clear that the pace and
the conclusions of the negotiations on the stabilization
agreement in particular depend on full cooperation
with the ICTY. The Council and the European
Commission will jointly review Serbia's performance
in those areas before any decision to sign the
agreement is taken by the Council.

In that respect, I would like to note that it is
disappointing that some Serbian leaders have sought to
pretend that both the resumption of the stabilization
agreement and NATO's offer of Partnership for Peace
membership for Serbia mean that somehow the
international community is less interested in bringing
fugitive indictees to justice. I would like to make it
clear that that is emphatically not the case.

I would now like to turn to the ICTR. We also
commend the ICTR for its efforts to keep to the
indicative target date of 2010 for the completion
strategy. Again, we underline that remaining fugitive
indictees cannot outwait international justice. We call
in particular for the arrest and transfer by Kenya of
Felicien Kabuga.

The transfer of cases to national jurisdictions
remains an important element in the completion
strategy. Along with other speakers, I commend the
Netherlands for having accepted one such case, and we
note that the Prosecutor has just filed an application for
the first transfer of a case to Rwanda's domestic
jurisdiction. We note the welcome development that
Rwanda has passed legislation to exclude the
application of the death penalty to cases referred to it
from the ICTR or from other States. If Prosecutor
Jallow were able to provide more information about
that new legislation, we would certainly welcome
hearing more about it.

It will be important in the coming months for the
Security Council to make progress on residual
arrangements for the ICTY and the ICTR, and also to
incorporate residual issues for the Special Court for
Sierra Leone into that process. The draft paper from
the ICTY and the ICTR is a very good basis for those
discussions. We look forward to tomorrow's meeting of
the Working Group on Tribunals, where consideration
of those issues will be continued.

