Mr. Sidikou (spoke in French): I would like to
begin by thanking the Security Council for organizing
this meeting on the situation in the Sahel, a region of
the world that is facing a thorny and complex crisis.
This demonstrates the Council's interest in our
subregion, despite the many other sources of concern
for international peace and security.

On behalf of the member countries of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel), I would like to
thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, whose
pertinent and strategic report on the establishment of
the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel (S/2018/432) perfectly
summarizes the reality of the current issues in that
region of Africa and proposes several pragmatic ways
to make the international community's response to the
multifaceted crisis more effective.

Faced with multiple challenges, which are often
minimized or ignored, the Sahel region has gradually
become a major area of instability in Africa and is
today a growing threat to international security. Five
countries at the heart of the Sahelian space - Burkina
Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger - decided
to join forces as an organization and form a core group
to face with solidarity the immense shared challenges
that threaten the stability of already fragile States and
hinder socioeconomic development. Foremost among
those challenges is the security crisis, which has for
several years, but with extreme urgency recently, been
characterized by the proliferation of armed conflicts in
our countries, the spread ofextremist religious terrorism,
drug trafficking and other forms of cross-border crime
with international ramifications, the migratory crisis
and its most hideous manifestation, namely, the abject
trafficking in human beings, organized by illegal
immigration channels towards Europe.

On the strictly military level, the mobilization of
our five countries and the support of the international
community have enabled the taking of a very positive
first step forward. As the Secretary-General notes in his
report, over recent months, we have been in the process
of successfully establishing the Joint Force of the
Group ofFive for the Sahel, which is composed of 5,000
soldiers and which enjoys the support of the international
community, in particular through the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) and Operation Barkhane, led
by France. A so-called technical arrangement was
concluded in that regard among the United Nations, the
European Union and the Group of Five for the Sahel last
February, and was signed by the President of the Niger
and current President of the G-5 Sahel, His Excellency
Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou. Moreover, in order to
comply with United Nations standards in this area, the
Joint Force has integrated into its strategic concept of
operations the human rights compliance framework
advocated by the United Nations. This United Nations
support following resolution 2391 (2017) is therefore to
be welcomed. It has already enabled us to collaborate
during the setting up of the Joint Force's headquarters
in Se'vare, Mali, and during the conduct of the first two
operations of the Force, namely, Operation Hawbi and
Operation Pagnali, in the sensitive border area between
Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger.

In line with the Secretary-General's statements, we
must acknowledge that we are still far from reaching
a good cruising speed in the concrete implementation
of our security response to the crisis that threatens
to totally destabilize the Sahel and its surroundings.
Although more than 80 per cent of our troops are
already deployed at headquarters in Sevare' and in the
three operational areas, the fact remains that the troops
are still generally poorly equipped, and the military
bases and, more generally, the logistics necessary for
an effective intervention are lacking, especially in an
environment that is often hostile in several respects. In
the same vein, the configuration ofMINUSMA support
for the Joint Force currently authorized by resolution
2391 (2017) severely limits effective regional coverage
and operational control on all fronts identified as urgent
for future interventions by the Force to fight terrorist
groups and other criminal organizations determined to
spread terror in the Sahelian space.

We therefore confirm the diagnosis established by
the Secretary-General in his report, which highlights in
particular the inadequacy of the mechanism put in place
to support the Joint Force. It is "neither sustainable
nor commensurate with the challenges we face in the
Sahel" (S/2018/432, para. 74). Against that backdrop,
it would undeniably be a matter for the Security
Council to place the United Nations contribution at a
more appropriate level, which will include compulsory
contributions as the best option in order to be able to
provide long-term support. This is an opportunity to
reiterate our call to the Council to provide the Joint
Force with the strengthened mandate it deserves and the
resources necessary to complete its operationalization
and ensure its full and efficient response capability.
Such an evolution of the Joint Force's mandate
would be precisely in line with the recommendations
resulting from the consultations conducted last March
by the Security Council in the context of improving
peacekeeping operations with a view to making them
more flexible, more dynamic and more adapted to
the different theatres of operations - in short, more
effective in a constantly changing world. This is
therefore also a good opportunity to take advantage of
this more pragmatic and dynamic approach to United
Nations interventions.

More specifically, with respect to the solutions for
supporting the Joint Force suggested by the Secretary-
General and better adapted to the context, as Council
members know, before taking up my duties last February
at the helm ofthe G-S Sahel, I had the honour of leading
two important international missions, one under the
auspices of the African Union - the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) - and the other under
the auspices of the United Nations - the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). In both cases,
the good collaboration between African forces and
the United Nations led to positive results, particularly
in Somalia, through the substantial logistical support
provided by the United Nations to AMISOM. and, in
the case of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the establishment within MONUSCO of a rapid Force
Intervention Brigade, which is made up exclusively of
troops from the countries of the subregion and has been
responsible for the most significant successful military
interventions by the United Nations in that country
since the establishment of a United Nations mission
there nearly 20 years ago. I am therefore speaking
from experience, having recently had an opportunity to
experience the various realities of intervention missions
on a daily basis, but always in a context framed by a
Security Council resolution.

It is therefore a question of succeeding, on the
Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel, in setting up an effective
operational force with an African backbone but strongly
supported by the entire international community, led by
the United Nations, in order to send a clear and strong
message to all the negative forces and thereby carry
out one of the most dangerous missions, whose failure
would mean the total destabilization of a good part of
the African continent, a region, we should recall, that
is a neighbour to the Mediterranean, and therefore the
European continent. It is also an important crossroads
of traffic towards the rest of the world - America, Asia
and the Middle East, in particular. For the nebulous
international terrorist network and all related groups,
the failure of our intervention would mean offering them
on a silver platter the best possible operational basis to
organize the almost unlimited spread throughout the
world of an even more terrifying mass terrorism than
we are already unfortunately experiencing today.

Aware that they are the first to be affected, our
States, despite their very limited financial resources,
recently undertook major efforts to increase the
capabilities of our defence forces and security sectors,
which now benefit, on average, from more than
20 per cent of our five countries' budgets, often to the
detriment of social sectors, despite their critical nature,
which constitutes a particularly painful trade-off
for our Governments. The expected share of the five
countries to the financing the Joint Force is therefore
paid by all, sometimes with some delays. In addition,
the trust fund established to manage the financial effort
of the international community in support of the Joint
Force already has an account with the Central Bank of
Mauritania, the headquarters country of the G-5 Sahel.

Following the meeting ofour organization's Defence
Ministers two weeks ago in Ouagadougou, instructions
were given to urgently appoint the members of the Trust
Fund Support Committee, including its guarantor,
the European Union, with a view to accelerating

its operations. It should also be noted with gratitude
that the first financial contributions, mainly African,
to date, have already arrived or are in the process of
arriving, particularly from Rwanda and the member
countries of the West African Economic and Monetary
Union. Also, all the mobilization for the Sahel currently
taking place must materialize very quickly in a tangible
way on the ground so as to restore hope and confidence
to our populations, their support being essential to
the success in the long term of the multidimensional
intervention of the international community that has
come to the aid of our region.

It is with this in mind that we are also involved in
the in-depth work that is beginning to be carried out,
particularly with the support of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, with
a view to ensuring strict respect for human rights in
this fight against terrorism. The promotion of citizens'
rights and freedoms should be considered an asset
and not a constraint, because it greatly contributes to
discrediting the discourse of the backward forces we
are fighting.

It is crucial for our success to be long term and not
ephemeral, and for the security response not be isolated
from the rest of the complex Sahel problem. Without
peace and security there can be no development
or prosperity. The clear lack of development and
socioeconomic progress favours the increase in
insecurity and instability. We are therefore faced with
a vicious circle that requires a more global solution
and a more holistic approach in our response to the
Sahelian situation. The security-development nexus
must therefore be at the heart of our effort. It should be
very tangible on the ground for the people of the Sahel.
From here, from the Chamber, the necessary momentum
will emerge to transform the commitments made by
all into concrete actions in order to rapidly achieve
the crucial goal of pacification and of securing the
Sahel region in parallel with the implementation of an
ambitious socioeconomic development plan that meets
the expectations of our populations, in particular young
people and women. To that end, the United Nations
developed the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel together with the African Union, which we
commend. At the specific level of the G-5 Sahel, we
have in place a development and security strategy that
includes an operational plan - the Priority Investment
Programme i for whose implementation we count on
the contribution of the entire international community.
I note with satisfaction that a number of friends and
partners of the Sahel, many of whom are represented in
the Chamber, have already indicated their intention to
support the Priority Investment Programme.

We can clearly see that the deliberations to find the
proper solutions to adequately deal with the immense
challenges of the Sahel region have taken place and that
multifaceted solutions, as well as some of the necessary
resources, have been identified. It remains only to
take strong action to realize all those good intentions
in an appropriate framework and to thereby meet the
expectations of the people of the Sahel, including young
people without hope for the future who are reluctant to
join the ranks of the retrograde terrorist groups or to
attempt the suicidal venture of clandestine migration,
and women living in the desert areas of the Sahel who
face drought and see their newborns die in their arms
owing to the prevailing insecurity that has caused the
medical staff to flee the area and, more generally, the
population's lack of basic services.

It is high time to act for the Sahel beyond speeches
and half-measures. The time for resolute action must
begin here in the Chamber under the momentum of the
Security Council.

