Ms. Stener (Norway): I speak on behalfofthe Nordic
countries 4 Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and
my own country, Norway. We commend our colleagues
from Peru for including this matter on the Security
Council's agenda. Both terrorism and organized crime
threaten international peace and security.

Networks such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida continue to depend on
external financing to run their organizations, recruit
fighters, buy weapons, spread propaganda and move
across borders. That financing must be cut off. In order
to identify and stop illicit financial flows to terrorist
organizations and criminal networks, we must disrupt
the links between organized crime and terrorism. We
must combine measures targeting the profits from crime
with measures targeting financial flows to terrorists.

Terrorist groups and organized-crime networks
often flourish where governance and State presence are
weak. In such spaces, terrorist and organized criminal
networks both use similar approaches to develop and
run illicit economies. They seek to develop and exploit
territories that are beyond the reach of law-enforcement
agencies, where they can safely recruit members and
raise funds.

The traditional sources of the financing of illicit
activity have typically included drug trafficking and
kidnapping for ransom. Examples of newer sources
include the illicit exploitation and taxation of gold, oil
and other natural resources. Both terrorist organizations
and criminal networks use violence, illicit sources
of revenue and political ideology to achieve social,
financial and political goals.

International cooperation is crucial in combating
those developments. We need effective coordination.
United Nations Headquarters in New York and the
United Nations offices in Vienna must work more
effectively together, including by making the best
possible use of their existing presence in the field. As
we strive to disrupt illicit financial flows and terrorist
financing, we must also make sure that our efforts do
not create barriers for legitimate flows and financial
inclusion. To that end and to find the best solutions, we
need cross-sectoral cooperation among humanitarian,
financial and counter-terrorism experts.

We welcome the 2018 addendum to the Madrid
Guiding Principles to prevent violent extremism and
radicalization in prisons. We also welcome The Hague
Good Practices on the Nexus between Transnational
Organized Crime and Terrorism, developed by the
Global Counterterrorism Forum. We must address the
role that prisons play in dealing with terrorists and
violent extremist offenders, as well as with those at risk
of being radicalized while in prison. ISIL in particular
has consciously targeted people with a criminal past to
offer them a narrative for joining terrorist groups.

Policies addressing terrorism and organized
crime should be part of a broader strategy to reduce
vulnerability. We must strengthen security-sector
reform and the rule of law. We encourage the expansion
and development of initiatives to deal more effectively
with the nexus between terrorism and organized crime.
The aspects of those global security challenges are
closely connected. They must be addressed both within
the security pillar and as part of advancing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Only then will
we be able to truly disrupt the link between terrorism
and organized crime.

