Mr. Dahlgren: Let me first state that my Government
associates itself fully with the clear statement made earlier
today by the representative of Finland, on behalf of the
European Union.

As we have heard all through this day, and even as we
speak, horrendous crimes are being committed against the
people of East Timor. After the clear expression of its wish
for independence, the most terrifying acts have been carried
out by armed elements in an effort to prevent that wish
from being fulfilled, including, as we have heard today, the
butchering of children.

The eyes of the world are on East Timor and on
Indonesia. But they are also on the United Nations, on what
can be done in this very room. The United Nations has
been instrumental in allowing for the people of East
Timor to enjoy their right of self-determination. The
Secretary-General was one of the signatories to the May
5 Agreement, and the Security Council established the
United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET), which
so successfully administrated last month's consultation.

My Government is indeed pleased to see the
Security Council so actively seized of this matter, which
clearly could endanger the maintenance of international
peace and security, and we endorse its initiative of
sending a special mission to the area. We also appreciate
the opportunity given through this open debate for the
international community to deliver a very clear message
to Indonesia regarding its responsibility.

It is still the duty of the Government of Indonesia to
secure law and order in East Timor. It is also clear that it
has failed to do so. That failure must not be allowed to
persist. Indonesia must be made to accept the offers from
the international community to assist in establishing order
and security, after an endorsement by this Council. The
rest of us should help to make clear to Jakarta that such
acceptance must be given now, without delay. In giving
such encouragement and in extending such pressure on
the Government of Indonesia, we should be ready to use
all possible means at our disposal, because if the leaders
of Indonesia refuse, as the Secretary-General said
yesterday, they will have to take responsibility for
what - according to reports - could be no less than
crimes against humanity.

That time is gone when the rest of the world can
stand idle while appeals for common sense are ignored
and another humanitarian catastrophe is taking place. We
urge the Security Council to continue to consider what
further action will most effectively bring safety and
dignity to the people of East Timor, while making clear
that the process of its independence is irreversible.

