Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): I would like to thank you for having taken the
initiative of holding this open debate, with the presence of
the Secretary-General, on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. There can be no doubt that this is
a legally complex and politically sensitive topic. We are
convinced that the first step to solving a problem is
recognizing that it exists. This is what we in Latin America
and the Caribbean have done in the past with our own
problems. With the understanding and support of the
international community and motivated by the desire to find
real, definitive and peaceful solutions to disputes, we
successfully moved forward and created peace and tangible
progress for our peoples. Accordingly, we can understand
the complexity of the current situation in some parts of
Africa.

We take a respectful approach to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are guided by a
real desire to defend peace and to encourage the parties to
turn to the path of negotiation.

This conflict is legally complex. In our View, it is
neither exclusively internal nor exclusively international.
The influence and extent of each of these aspects could be
debated, but certainly they both exist. At the same time, the
conflict is politically sensitive because, either directly or
indirectly, it involves major countries of the subregion and
has the dangerous potential of spreading.

There can be no doubt that the main responsibility for
resolving the conflict lies with those directly involved. No
third party can impose a lasting solution if the parties lack
the political will to adopt it. Nonetheless, we still believe
that it is important to explore options that might encourage
or point the way towards such a solution. In this regard,
Argentina strongly supports the regional efforts that are
under way, as well as the Lusaka process. This does not
exclude the Security Council from playing a role by
providing concrete support to the regional initiative during
its various phases. During the current phase the priority
is to obtain an effective ceasefire. The second phase is
securing and consolidating this ceasefire by means of a
peacekeeping operation. United Nations assistance is
essential in both these phases.

While negotiations in such conflicts are essentially
political, this does not exclude the implementation of
principles and norms of international law. In the case of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we believe that
the following legal principles are essential.

First, there is an obligation to peacefully resolve the
dispute. This obligation applies not only to the means but
also to the ends. Therefore, we think that - with the
necessary flexibility and without prejudging the legal
status of the actors in this sensitive conflict -
mechanisms for inclusive dialogue should be sought.

Secondly, once again it should be noted that the use
of force does not bring territorial rights or legitimize
changes in established borders. The rule of the
immutability of colonial borders is a principle of general
international law and applies to the African continent as
it does to the American.

In this regard, respect for the principle of the
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is essential. This is not incompatible with the
principle of protecting minorities. As has been
successfully done elsewhere, it is possible to establish a
system of safeguards that protects minorities' ethnic and
cultural identities.

Among these essential legal principles, we wish to
reiterate the principle of non-interference in the domestic
affairs of other States, a principle that is incompatible
with the presence of foreign forces. Through negotiations
and dialogue, and with the United Nations assistance if
necessary, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
together with its neighbours, must resolve all the security
questions that affect their shared borders.

In this, the legal, context, we would like to reiterate
once again that the serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law that have taken place and
continue to occur on the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are also the essence of the
problem. These horrible violations deserve our concern
and more firm and open condemnation. We urge that
these events be duly investigated and punished.

 

We believe that a long-term solution to the problems
that affect the Democratic Republic of the Congo today
cannot be found in an insolated manner, but rather must be
found within a politically stable regional context and with
certain expectations for economic and human development.
This is why we believe that convening an international
conference on the Great Lakes region - as has been
proposed by France - could, under the proper
circumstances and at the appropriate time, provide an
appropriate forum to analyze all these aspects of the
regional situation in a comprehensive manner.

Finally, Mr. President, I would like on behalf of the
Government of Argentina to thank you for your
condolences.

