I will make this statement on behalf of Belgium and Germany, the humanitarian co-penholders. We want to thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Special Envoy Pedersen for their briefings today, and we extend our gratitude to all humanitarian and medical workers in Syria. They are at the forefront of every humanitarian disaster, they are front-line fighters against the pandemic, and they deserve all our respect, assistance and protection. In his latest report about the humanitarian situation in Syria (S/2020/1031), the Secretary-General states that he is alarmed over the daily impact of attacks harming civilians, including humanitarian workers. The military conflict continues, yesterday's air strike in Idlib took place in close vicinity to an internally displaced person camp, and we simply cannot accept that such events continue to happen on an almost daily basis. Victims of attacks included humanitarian workers, for example from the Red Crescent and Syria Relief and Development, whose representative, Amany Qaddour, asked the Council in July (see S/2020/758) to share the risk humanitarian aid workers are exposed to. Therefore, we must lend our full support to the Secretary-General's appeal for a nationwide ceasefire. The Secretary-General has also reminded us that there can be no business as usual in Syria as long as impunity for serious violations of international law and abuses of human rights persists. We agree with the Secretary-General that accountability for these violations and abuses is both a legal requirement and central to achieving sustainable peace in Syria. Let me recall the conclusion of a recent report - it is crucial to demonstrate that there are consequences for unlawful attacks to deter future atrocities and to show that no one can elude accountability for graves crimes. Regarding access issues, Mark Lowcock just told us that he is concerned about winterization. Even if the capacity of the only remaining humanitarian border crossing of Bab Al-Hawa has been enlarged, travel on the roads in north-western Syria remains difficult. During the weeks to come, more trucks will use these roads and conditions will deteriorate further. As humanitarian co-penholders, we simply do not understand and are not willing to accept the logic behind the closure of Bab Al-Salam, the logic behind limiting access for humanitarian aid, or the logic behind putting humanitarian workers at additional risk. That logic is an insult to hundreds of thousands of children dependent on our help. Meanwhile, the shortfalls in the north-east, particularly in the delivery of health care, continue to exist. Many health facilities simply do not receive what they need and cannot provide the same assistance to patients they could when the border crossing at Al-Yarubiyah was still in use for the delivery of urgently needed medical supplies. The pandemic only serves to make things worse. Years of war and chronic mismanagement of the economy, exacerbated by the pandemic and the devaluation of the Syrian pound, have led to significant food insecurity. Acute and chronic malnutrition - children are the most vulnerable victims - will become more widespread. The World Food Programme - rightfully, this year's Nobel Peace Prize winner - and other humanitarian agencies are already asking for more funding in order not to be forced to cut food rations. Food assistance has reached 5.4 million on average each month, and the number is on the rise again. Access to water is another problem. In previous sessions, we mentioned the problems around the Allouk water station and urged all parties to cooperate for an urgent and sustainable solution. Other areas, like Al-Bab in northern Aleppo, are likewise affected. 185,000 people are suffering from water shortages and have to rely on insufficient and unsafe sources. The high number of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cases in the region can be linked directly to insufficient access to sanitation. Given that testing capacities for COVID-19 remain very low, it is safe to assume that the official numbers represent but the tip of the iceberg. The destruction of health facilities and the shortage of health workers dramatically imperil any response. All this indicates that not less but more attention to the humanitarian situation in Syria is needed from the Security Council. As co-penholders, we deplore that attention is limited by combining political and the humanitarian sessions, as today. And we reject attempts to convey the impression that the situation on the ground is somehow normalizing. The facts and numbers we have just heard are testament to the contrary. And finally, only a political settlement in line with resolution 2254 (2015) can put Syria back on track towards peace.
