Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Malaysia's initiative to convene this open
debate of the Security Council on children and armed
conflict. We welcome to New York His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs Sri Anifah Aman, who is
presiding over our discussion today. I thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Zerrougui, and the Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF, Ms. Brandt, for their briefings.
China also listened attentively to the statement by the
non-governmental organization representative.

Children are the future and the hope of the world.
They are also the most vulnerable to violations and
abuses. Children are bearing the brunt of armed
conflict in many parts of the world. Barbaric acts
against children are still occurring from time to time. In
particular, the phenomenon of child abduction in armed
conflicts has become increasingly acute and should
command the serious attention of the international
community. Parties to conflicts are responsible for the
full protection of children in armed conflict. China
supports the unrelenting efforts of the international
community to protect children in armed conflicts. I
would like to emphasize the following points.

First, we need to tackle the issue at its roots by
providing a sound environment for the growth of
children. The best way to protect children in conflict
is to prevent, reduce and resolve conflicts at their
roots. That is far more meaningful than remedial
measures after the eruption of conflict. The Council
bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. It should therefore
strengthen preventive diplomacy and make more use
of the measures provided for in Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations, such as mediation, good
offices, dialogue and negotiation. It should support and
encourage parties to resolve their differences peacefully
and to eliminate the root causes of the problem of
children caught up in armed conflicts.

Secondly, we must respect the principle of national
ownership by the country concerned and create a solid
foundation for the protection of children. Governments
bear the primary responsibility for the protection of
children in conflicts in their own countries. The key
to the implementation of Council resolutions and the
enforcement of various programmes and plans aimed at
protecting children lies in the cooperation and efforts of
the countries concerned. The international community
should give full play to the leadership role of the
Governments concerned and respect the sovereignty
of those countries, while providing assistance and
support, and should concretely strengthen their
capacity-building in that field.

Thirdly, the international community should
adopt a comprehensive strategy and form international
synergy for the protection of children. In post-conflict
rebuilding efforts, comprehensive measures must be
taken to ensure that child victims of armed conflicts
are smoothly reintegrated into society and to provide
a favourable, secure and social environment for the
health and growth of children. UNICEF, UNESCO, the
World Bank and other relevant agencies should draw
on their respective advantages, strengthen coordination
and cooperation, and support the countries involved
in conflicts in their efforts to eliminate poverty,
provide universal education and promote sustainable
development.

Fourthly, we must give priority to resolving the
issue of child abductions in armed conflicts. China
supports the addition of child abduction in armed
conflicts as a criterion for being listed in the annex to the
Secretary-General's annual report. That would help to
strengthen the international community's fight against
that heinous behaviour. The international community
should fully utilize the resources and means available
now, adopt comprehensive measures and policies and
work on multiple fronts to step up the fight against the
phenomenon of child abduction so as to effectively halt
those acts. Measures should include, first, strengthening
the sharing of information and intelligence while
trying to rescue those abducted children; secondly,
strengthening international cooperation to ensure
that those responsible for child abduction will be
brought to justice; and, thirdly, improving the rescue
and resettlement of abducted children to ensure their
smooth reintegration and rehabilitation.

China stands ready to work with the wider
international community to fully safeguard international
peace and security, to jointly improve the situation of
children in armed conflict and to prevent them from
suffering in wars and conflicts, as well as to foster a
harmonious and secure environment for their health
and growth.

