Ms. Londofio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your
country, Azerbaijan, which I had the privilege of
visiting a few months ago. I would like to congratulate
you for presiding over the Security Council and
convening this important debate on a subject of
important relevance worldwide. I would also like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
statement on the issue.

Terrorism is a threat to international peace and
security. It affects society as a whole, including the
rule of law and the enjoyment of human rights. The
human costs of terrorism are felt throughout the world.
Therefore, the international community must address
that many-faceted threat through coordinated action
aimed at all levels and aspects of terrorism.

Over the course of decades, the international
community has developed a body of law that includes
14 international treaties and four modifying protocols
that address specific aspects and acts of terrorism. In
addition, the resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council provide a comprehensive
framework that addresses terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.
Although we have not agreed on a definition of
terrorism, we have made progress in identifying the
key elements of acts that the international community
considers to be terroristic and condemns as
unjustifiable in any circumstances, be they of a
political, ideological, racial, religious or any other
nature.

Terrorism and other threats to international peace
and security have several phases, dimensions and
complexities that we must address through
international consensus and cooperation, as highlighted
in the concept note prepared by the Azerbaijani
delegation (S/2012/281, annex). Since this is a
phenomenon with global implications, the United
Nations and especially the General Assembly, as its
universal organ, should be the focal point for
discussing policy agreements and cooperation. In turn,
the Security Council, operating within own purview,
has adopted measures that contribute to and
complement international action against terrorism.

There are other forums for dialogue and the
identification of best practices that should work closely
with the United Nations. Among them, the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum has identified specific areas
of cooperation and best practices that have great value
to all States in their fight against terrorism.

Among the various existing mechanisms that
address the threat in a coordinated way, I stress the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy as
an effective tool for preventing, punishing and
eradicating the scourge of terrorism. While recognizing
capacity-building as an essential element of global
action against terrorism, the Strategy is dedicated to
adopting decisive measures to enhance coordination
and coherence within the United Nations system in
order to promote international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism.

In that context, the development and strengthening
of national legislation and the consolidation of
mechanisms for cooperation and capacity-building are
crucial complements to the Global Strategy. The
Organization should take further steps to provide
technical assistance in order to facilitate the
strengthening of national capacities.

States should guarantee that the counter-terrorism
measures they adopt comply with all their obligations
under international law and in particular with human
rights. That includes the adoption of measures to
protect the rights of victims and compensation for their
suffering, which should be seen as a crucial aspect of
the fight against terrorism. In that regard, we note the
emphasis accorded to human rights in resolutions 1624
(2005) and 1963 (2010).

Terrorism does not exist in isolation from
transnational organized crime. There are networks
whose funds derive in large measure from the activities
of organized crime, including drug trafficking, illicit
arms trafficking, illegal mining, extortion, kidnapping
or piracy.

By its very nature, the financing of terrorist acts
is a matter on which the international community
should take more effective measures. In order to
prevent terrorist networks from accumulating the
financial and logistical resources necessary to operate,
we need to develop comprehensive measures that
incorporate elements of the legal instruments that
address transnational organized crime. Funding derived
from various crimes creates new scenarios that require
States to join forces in order to design comprehensive
strategies to address both the problem and its solution.

My country believes that the adoption,
implementation and promotion of cooperation
frameworks offer an effective response to terrorism.
Colombia is an active participant in new and varied
mechanisms of regional and multilateral cooperation.
In addition to the United Nations, the Organization of
American States and the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum, we have worked with countries of Central
America, the Caribbean and, more recently, Africa to
share experiences and build capacities to combat
transnational crimes that are linked in one way or
another to terrorism.

We believe that the international community has
an obligation to continue its head-on struggle against
terrorism.

