Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): We too wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate. We also thank Under-Secretaries-General Alain
Le Roy and Susana Malcorra and Special
Representative Hedi Annabi for their respective
statements. We also join previous speakers in
expressing the best of wishes to Ambassador Butagira
in his new responsibilities. Viet Nam associates itself
with the statement to be made later by the
representative of the Kingdom of Morocco on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

The cumulative complexity of protracted
conflicts and hot spots has overstretched the capacity
of the United Nations in the area of peacekeeping.
There has also been a drastic change in the
environment in which peacekeeping operations are
deployed. Peacekeeping is now confronted with a
number of challenges. Most fundamental of all, it is
required to address the related challenges of personnel
management, logistical support, quality assurance,
oversight and political engagement, as well as the
durability of the political commitment of national
stakeholders, the burden-sharing of the international
community and the efficiency of coordination among a
number of United Nations agencies.

Furthermore, the abrupt surge in the number,
scope and size of peacekeeping operations and in the
demand for them has also exposed questions such as
how to better reconcile the confluence of local
peacekeeping and conflict prevention and resolution,
preventive diplomacy, peacemaking and peacebuilding
within the collective framework of preventing the
recurrence of conflict and ensuring a smooth transition
to durable peace, security and sustainable
development.

We wish to reaffirm our strong support for the
efforts and initiatives to make peacekeeping operations
more effective and more efficient. It is our conviction
that the establishment and deployment of peacekeeping
missions should strictly observe the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and the basic principles that have evolved to
govern peacekeeping, namely, the consent of the
parties concerned, the non-use of force except in self-
defence, and impartiality. In a broader context, the
success, credibility and effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping operations continue to rest upon respect
for the fundamental principles of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of all
States and non-intervention in matters that are
essentially within their domestic jurisdiction.

Given the widening gap between the increased
demand and diversification of mandated activities, on
the one hand, and existing resources and capacities, on
the other, my delegation strongly supports efforts
aimed at enhancing the Organization's ability to
effectively and efficiently manage peacekeeping
operations across all related phases of planning,
establishing, deploying, conducting and terminating
mission mandates.

We commend the efforts undertaken by the
Secretariat along those lines and wish to reiterate that

any initiative to be taken should work to ensure the
greatest degree of unity of command, lines of
accountability, integration of efforts and the safety and
security of United Nations peacekeepers. In that
connection, my delegation shares the view that there is
a need to develop effective strategic oversight with a
view to improving the preparation, planning,
monitoring and evaluation of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

