Mr. Gallardo (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I would
first like to welcome to the Council the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iraq, His Excellency Mr. Hoshyar
Zebari. I would like also to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq,
Mr. Ashraf Qazi, for his briefing and the representative
of the United States for his briefing on behalf of the
Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I).
The circumstances in which we are meeting today
continue to be critical in Iraq, as illustrated, once
again, by the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2007/330), and by the most recent reports of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI)
on the human rights situation in that country. Violence
has intensified again, following the initial drop in
criminal acts of sectarian origin that resulted from the
implementation of the Baghdad security plan -
although, unfortunately, we do not have official data.
The attacks are nevertheless being repeated, as
happened this morning at the Al-Askari shrine.
Likewise, the violence in Basra has caused the United
Nations to leave its headquarters in that city. Peru
condemns the sectarian violence and acts of ethnic,
tribal or religious intolerance, and it rejects all terrorist
acts committed in Iraq.

Moreover, the reconciliation agenda seems
plagued with difficulties. Reconstruction is very slow
and the consequences of the conflict are reflected in
dramatic figures, such as the existence of 30,000 to
50,000 new refugees each month, the more than
800,000 internally displaced persons, according to
some figures, and the fact that 17 per cent of primary
school students have left school or that only 34 per
cent of girls and 43 per cent of boys attend secondary
school, and that university education has been severely
affected by the violence. The levels of malnutrition
also show a deterioration of social indicators. These are
factors that cast a shadow over the future of Iraq,
despite the efforts of the Government to make progress
in the area of security or in the stabilization of the
currency and the economy.

Regrettably, the seriousness of the situation has
still not generated in those Iraqis who seek to secure a
future for their country a quick but sustained
mobilization towards the dialogue that could be opened
up in their country in order to deal with the basic issues
that are affecting life for everyone.

The Iraqis and their authorities first and foremost,
as well as the neighbouring countries, the regional
players and other external players present in Iraq, must
act with the greatest caution and the utmost diligence
in the current situation to find ways out of delicate
situations and move the country forward in key areas,
such as constitutional reform, the distribution of oil
revenues, the distribution of regional and federal
power, the situation of Kirkuk, the changes in the
de-Baathification process and the creation of national
security bodies which are effective, credible and
legitimate, as well as cooperating in the stability of the
country and in the full recovery of its sovereignty.

The task of reconstruction in Iraq is a central
subject for its Government and, unfortunately, there
have been many delays and much backsliding because
of the situation of insecurity and ungovernability. The
International Compact with Iraq is an important
reference point for international assistance. Conditions
for its implementation will be enhanced with improved
security, reconciliation, transparency and laws that
reflect solid political agreements for the management
of natural resources. Iraq's oil wealth must be handled
responsibly and with transparency. The distribution of
oil revenues must be negotiated, which will help to
reinforce the spirit of understanding among Iraqis and
their trust that these resources will be used to build a
better future, particularly for the country's citizens.

It is clear that what is needed is an evaluation of
the strategic orientation and of the means necessary for
all the internal players in Iraq to regain the country's
stability and its viability as unified, sovereign and
independent State. At this stage, that includes an
evaluation of the presence in the country of the
Multinational Force, of which the Government of Iraq
has asked for an extension.

Peru supports the initiatives to contribute to
re-establishing trust among all sectors of Iraqi society.
We hope that these initiatives will be translated into a
drop in the level of violence in the country, particularly
in Baghdad and in other multi-ethnic and pluricultural
cities that have seen an increase in violent acts.

We encourage the Government of Iraq and those
responsible for its security forces to act with
determination to implement security and protection
policies for all of its citizens and to strengthen the
central control of its public powers. Caution dictates
that all types of internal confrontations between Iraqis
should be discouraged since in the long run the
consequences of an escalation are unpredictable. At the
same time, we repeat that the use of force must be
carried out in full respect of the international
commitments undertaken, particularly those in the area
of human rights and international humanitarian law.

There must be no room for impunity in the
construction of democratic institutions in Iraq. The
raison d'etre of the Iraqi State is the defence of the life
and the human rights of its citizens, and whoever
attacks the rule of law and the human rights of the
citizens of Iraq must be brought to justice.

Finally, my delegation would like to express its
support for the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq. We feel that it should continue to function in
accordance with its mandate and with the options in the
field in the consolidation of all the tasks that contribute
to political and legal stability, to institutional and
economic reconstruction, and to provide humanitarian
aid and to protect human rights in Iraq.

