Mr. O'Brien: As we meet again this month, the
suffering of civilians in Aleppo and across Syria
rages on unabated. Horror is now usual; it is a level
of violence and destruction that the world appears to
consider normal for Syria and for the Syrian people.
Month after month, I have reported to the Council that
the level of depravity inflicted upon the Syrian people
cannot sink lower, only to return the following month,
in shocked disbelief, with hideous new reports of ever-
worsening human suffering.

I am more or less at my wits' end as a human being,
but I am here, like my colleagues, to be professional
and objective. I had hoped to say today that last month
I put it all on the table, and, frankly, it is still just as
terrible. Let us leave it at that. Shame on us all for not
acting to stop the annihilation of eastern Aleppo and its
people and much of the rest of Syria, as well. Of all the
facts and reports that I gave last month (see S/PV.7795),
not one of them has been changed, qualified, denied or
proven wrong by anyone in or outside of this Chamber.
My statement then detailed the objective reality of
what was taking place in Aleppo. It was hoped that
the advocacy undertaken by me and others demand
that sanity and humanity prevail and reporting based
on clear and undisputable facts - although it is
sometimes unpleasant to hear and even an inconvenient
truth - might have an impact. There was a glimmer
of hope. A unilateral Russian and Syrian pause on
aerial bombardment over eastern Aleppo instituted
on 18 October for an initial 72 hours was maintained
beyond the stated end. We last met on 26 October (see S/PV.7795), when I welcomed the then ongoing pause
in air strikes from the Russian Federation and the
Government of Syria, although members will recall
that my welcome was not heard that day in all quarters
of the Council.

Daily and even weekly, the pause held over eastern
Aleppo. The same was not the case for western Aleppo,
as non-State armed groups launched hundreds of
mortars into civilian areas in the western part of the
city. Had all parties had the fortitude to cease all attacks
over Aleppo, today's might have been a different
briefing. But I cannot leave it at that because - one can
hardly believe it - it is even worse now. Regrettably,
over the past week we have seen an intense unleashing
of military aggression in Aleppo and the surrounding
rural area with truly devastating consequences for
civilians. The pause over eastern Aleppo was shattered,
thereby returning the city and its inhabitants to death
and destruction once again. Reports of a high tempo
of air strikes and shelling across areas of Aleppo city,
held by non-State armed groups, reportedly by Syrian
Government forces began again on 15 November. For
the sake of accuracy and completeness, let me report
here that the Russian Federation has repeatedly asserted
that its air force and air strikes have resumed only in
Idlib and Horns and not over eastern Aleppo.

Since last Tuesday, the bombing of eastern Aleppo
has not stopped. Over the past days, reports have
indicate that hundreds of civilians have been killed,
injured or otherwise affected by the relentless attacks
on eastern Aleppo. Entire families were reported
to have been buried under rubble in the Al-Sukkari
district as first responders searched for survivors. Fires
raged from incendiaries and household gas breaches in
residential buildings following the attacks that stretched
throughout eastern Aleppo. Deaths were reported in
at least 10 neighbourhoods. As of yesterday, there are
barely any functional hospitals left in eastern Aleppo
able to treat those who have escaped death, as all the
hospitals are being bombed into oblivion.

In parallel, more than 350 mortars and rockets
have been reportedly launched by non-State armed
groups indiscriminately into western Aleppo since
1 November, killing over 60 people, including women
and children, and injuring more than 350 others. Over
the weekend, an attack on a school in the Al-Furqan
district in western Aleppo with mortar shells and rocket
projectiles by non-State armed groups reportedly killed
eight children and injured several others, while the local
university was also hit. Overall, some 25,000 people
have been displaced in western Aleppo in the last few
weeks as a result of shelling by non-State armed groups.
Let me be clear. We are not just seeing a resumption of
violence in Aleppo. It is not business as usual. What
has been unleashed on civilians this past week is yet
another low in an unrelenting inhuman onslaught, and
it is as heart-breaking as it is not inevitable. The parties
to the conflict are - all of them - choosing to do this.
It is civilians who pay the price.

Since July, 275,000 civilians have been trapped
in eastern Aleppo owing to the siege tactics placed on
them by the Syrian Government and its allies. Russia
and Syria have opened corridors for civilians to leave,
but they are reportedly unsafe or perceived as unsafe
to traverse. There have also been reports that non-State
armed groups inside eastern Aleppo prevented those
wishing to leave the city from doing so. Humanitarian
conditions in eastern Aleppo have gone from terrible to
terrifying and now barely survivable by human beings.
On 13 November, the last of the available food rations
from the World Food Programme were distributed.
Pre-positioned before United Nations access was cut
off in July, rations were drawn out as long as possible,
but now they are gone. Only a handful of rations from
local non-governmental organizations (NGOs) remain,
food in markets is scarce and prices have skyrocketed.
Fuel and gas to cook food are reportedly unavailable
in most neighbourhoods. That is resulting in negative
coping strategies, reducing meals and restricting diets
to feed children.

And along with limited food and medicine, there
has been growing discontent with protests against
corruption and a monopoly on goods reported last
week, some of which turned violent, indicating the
extreme desperation of the trapped citizens. And to
add to the humanitarian crisis, they will shortly face
a harsh winter without heating or the bare essentials
for life. The United Nations has employed significant
and tireless efforts to deliver life-saving aid. I yield to
no one in saluting the undiluted, selfless bravery of all
humanitarian aid workers across the United Nations,
including the international NGOs, the local NGOs,
first responders and people in their communities and
families. They do that time and again, if they do not
fall victim themselves at the time that they venture out,
even risking a cynical second follow-on air strike, shell
or sniper's bullet deliberately aimed at them, searching
for life and saving lives. Let us repeat - they are
not a target. And I urge the Government of Syria to
give the Secretary General's internal board of inquiry
into the attack on the humanitarian convoy, which
resulted in the death of aid workers on 19 September
at Oram Al-Kubra, full access in Syria to conduct
its investigations.

Our teams in Damascus and Gaziantep have
presented successive plans to all sides, working to
ensure delivery of medical supplies and evacuation
of the most urgent medical cases. We stand ready to
move the moment that security guarantees by all
parties are granted. The United Nations four-point
plan presented last week to all parties includes critical
medical evacuations and delivery of medical supplies.
It includes the provision of food and other essential
relief items. Finally, it includes the rotation of doctors
to provide assistance to those in need. The 30 medical
doctors left in eastern Aleppo city, exhausted from their
heroic efforts and non-stop work from July continue to
serve in unrelentingly traumatic circumstances.

All parties have the plan, and we have been
engaging in unremitting discussions to obtain their
agreement to proceed. But the restart of intense
fighting is a clear setback to our goal of reaching
agreement and delivering to those in need. Yet we are
not deterred. Despite the bombing and whatever the
difficulty, we are determined to follow through. The
United Nations humanitarians and our partners will not
give up on the people of Aleppo. We will continue to
insist on the parties' obligations to respect international
humanitarian law and human rights law and see to
sustained humanitarian assistance delivered to those
in eastern Aleppo and all who are in need throughout
Syria. I call on all with influence - that is the phrase
I am diplomatically required to use, but those around
this table and beyond knows who they are - to do their
part to end the senseless cycles of violence once and for
all and put an end to the slaughterhouse that is Aleppo.
All sides, and those with influence over them, must
immediately provide the necessary guarantees for the
humanitarian four-point plan to move ahead.

While it defies comprehension, the citizens of
eastern Aleppo are not alone in the depths of horrors
being faced by civilians in Syria today. I remain
seriously concerned about the fate of all those living
in besieged locations. Aid deliveries and medical
evacuations to the towns under the Four Towns
ceasefire agreement covering Zabadani, Madaya, Fu'ah
and Kafraya and surrounding areas, known as the Four
Towns Agreement, have been unable to deploy owing to
the tit-for-tat nature of the agreement.

The gruesome deaths by starvation in Madaya
shocked the world in January and dragged the parties
to the conflict to allow the delivery of aid. February,
March and April this year all saw aid deliveries to
the four towns. However, since then, the situation has
deteriorated. Only one convoy has reached the four
towns in over six months and that was on 25 September.
In addition to no supplies getting in, those in need of
medical attention are dying because they are not being
allowed to leave. Since I last reported to the Council
(see S/PV.7795), at least three people have died due to
the denial by parties to the Four Towns Agreement to
enable the evacuation of people who could have been
saved but for that punitive application of the tit-for-
tat approach. More will die soon in each of the four
towns if that travesty is not resolved. I urge those with
influence over the parties to the Agreement, notably
Jaish Al-Fatah and Iran, must do all they can to see that
aid is delivered immediately and that those requiring
medical care are able to evacuate.

I have long called for the lifting of all sieges, which
have become one of the most prevalent and insidious
aspects of this merciless conflict. Yet, this past year,
we have seen the opposite - a massive increase in the
use of besiegement and of the overwhelming numbers
of people, particularly by the Government of Syria.
This time last year, the number of besieged people
stood at 393,700. Six months ago, it stood at 486,700.
Today, I have to report to the Council that, following a
comprehensive review, we estimate that tonight a total
of 974,080 people - nearly 1 million Syrians - are
living under siege. New locations include Jubar in
Damascus and Hajjar Al-Aswad, Khan Al-Shih and
multiple areas in the enclave of eastern Ghouta in
rural Damascus.
There is nothing subtle or complicated about the
practice of besiegement. Civilians are being isolated,
starved, bombed and denied medical attention and
humanitarian assistance in order to force them to submit
or flee. It is a deliberate tactic of cruelty to compound
the people's suffering for political, military and, in some
cases, economic gain to destroy and defeat a civilian
population, who cannot fight back, and perpetrated
monstrously by the one party, above all, who should be
defending and protecting its own citizens - all of them,
even those who do not like and disagree with the State
and its leader and his Government. Those maintaining
the sieges know by now that the Council is apparently
unable or unwilling to enforce its will or agree now
on steps to stop them. The procedures give us crumbs;
an occasional convoy here and there around the time
of Council briefings, to tick the box that we are all
trying our best. But the near 1 million Syrians trapped
in besieged locations cannot live on crumbs. The real
question is - how can we prevent now nearly 1 million
people from being subject to a cruel form of collective
punishment that gets more severe and intense, month
after month, across the country? If the Council cannot
come together to bring an end to sieges, then it and we
must all ask ourselves why we are having this meeting
here this morning.

Attacks on civilian infrastructure, most notably
hospitals and schools, have become so commonplace,
it takes one's breath away. Such attacks are violations
of international humanitarian law. Some have been
called out as war crimes by the Secretary-General,
including again yesterday and the High Commissioner
for Human Rights has indicated that some may even
amount to crimes against humanity. They are senseless,
unconscionable acts with no purpose other than to
punish civilians, including women, children and the
infirm, and deny those left behind the means to survive
or rebuild. Millions of Syrian children have had their
childhoods ripped away by calculated and reckless
attacks on schools. In the last two weeks of October
alone, the lives and dreams of 30 children were stolen
during attacks on five schools. On 26 October, the
very day of my most recent briefing when denials were
screeching through the air, 22 children and six of their
teachers were killed, when their school compound was
repeatedly attacked in Hass, Idlib governorate. But the
facts are that the children and their teachers are dead.
Death, a dead body, warm to cold blood - however
hard anyone may try, death is an undeniable fact and
there is always a cause of death.

Let us imagine the terror of those children; imagine
those who may have survived the first strike, some
hysterical, some frozen in fear, only to see another
round coming in. This year, UNICEF has documented
84 attacks on schools, killing at least 69 children and
injuring many more. And what of those who survived
such attacks - those children who dream of becoming
doctors? To become a health-care worker in Syria is
to take on a dangerous profession and to even go to
a medical facility is to risk one's life. The Council
adopted resolution 2286 (2016), protecting health-care
professionals and facilities, but that has resulted in
scant protection to those in Syria.

From 1 November to 18 November, 13 attacks were
verified, and there are reports of many more attacks.
Hospitals, health centres, blood banks and ambulances
have all been hit. The fact is, since resolution 2286
(2016) was adopted on 3 May, over 130 attacks
on medical facilities have been documented. The
Syrian war has already killed more than 750 medical
personnel. It is a disgusting and blatant disregard for
the special protected status of health-care facilities
under international humanitarian law and a clear spit
in the face of the Council's resolution, as my World
Health Organization colleague will expand on after
my briefing. Despite the challenges and hardships, the
United Nations and our partners continue regularly
to reach nearly 6 million Syrians in need across the
country per month. That assistance is delivered through
regular programming and cross-line activities from
Damascus, and cross-border assistance from Turkey
and Jordan.

Let me touch briefly on cross-border activities,
which have become a vital part of the response.
Since cross-border operations began over two years
ago, the United Nations has conducted 420 cross-
border convoys, or nearly four a week on average,
delivering health assistance sufficient for 9 million
people, including vaccinations for 2 million people;
food for 3 million people, many on a monthly basis;
non-food items for almost 3 million people; and water,
sanitation and hygiene supplies for over 2.5 million
people. Assistance has been delivered to various parts
of Aleppo, Idlib, Latakiya and Hama governorates
from Turkey, and Dar'a and Al-Quneitra governorates
from Jordan. Our efforts complement the critical role
played by international and Syrian non-governmental
organizations who provide assistance and services to
millions more from neighbouring countries. We also
continue to reach people via air. Since operations
started several months ago, the World Food Programme
has completed 153 airdrop rotations, dispatching
2,815 metric tons of food, nutrition, health and water,
sanitation and hygiene supplies over Deir ez-Zor city.
The United Nations has also completed 159 airlifts to
Qamishli, delivering 5,660 metric tons of food, water,
sanitation and hygiene supplies, nutrition, education,
shelter and non-food-item assistance on behalf of
humanitarian actors, including 61,500 full food rations.

At the berm along the Syrian-Jordanian border,
which I visited in early September, the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners have worked ceaselessly,
together with the Jordanian authorities, to ensure the
resumption of sustained aid operations to the many tens
of thousands of women, men and children amassed at
the border and in need of urgent lifesaving assistance.
I am pleased to announce today that security and other
arrangements have been finalized, and aid operations
are set to commence tomorrow. I pay tribute to the
cooperation I have personally had with the Jordanian
State at the most senior levels to help enable the
delivery of humanitarian assistance in the most
challenging circumstances.

Unfortunately, I must report to the Council that,
since the last reporting period, none - not one - of
our inter-agency convoys was able to deliver aid across
lines. Cross-line access requires detailed access
negotiations with all sides to ensure security and allow
aid to be delivered. Though our main interlocutor is, of
course, the Syrian Government, we also work with the
other parties to the conflict and the Member States that
have influence over them - through the Humanitarian
Task Force as well as bilaterally - but our efforts
are increasingly met with delays, blockages and
rejections. Every month we encounter new bureaucratic
challenges that need to be navigated. We have dealt
with late approvals, approvals with restrictions on the
number of beneficiaries, delays in clearing trucks at the
warehouse, negotiations over routes, medical supplies
removed or not approved, and additional clearances
beyond the agreed two-step process.

So far this month, we have three times navigated
these hurdles, three times deployed convoys to reach
those who are in need. Two of these convoys, both to
Wadi Barada on 9 November and en route, in Rural
Damascus, to Duma on 17 November, reached the final
Government of Syria checkpoint before being forced
to turn back when Syrian security forces, believed
to be the Syrian Republican Guard, demanded the
cleared containers be opened and searched. This is in
clear breach of agreed protocol and a possible security
threat for our convoys and aid workers. An earlier third
convoy to Harbnafseh, in Rural Hama, scheduled for
1 November, was blocked by pro-Government armed
elements while under way and also forced to turn back.
Just yesterday, on 20 November, an inter-agency convoy
to Rastan in northern rural Horns could not proceed
owing to delays at the checkpoint in terms of approval
to proceed, as well as shelling in the area once approval
had finally been received.

As a result, as I said earlier, no inter-agency
cross-line convoys have been able to deliver aid yet
this month. We have now gone four months without
delivering aid to anyone via an inter-agency cross-line
convoy before 19 November. The result is that we are
once again unlikely to reach more than a small portion
of those whom we do receive formal approval to access.

Syrians have also been impacted by a series
of anti-Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
operations. This has resulted in initial displacement of
8,000 people in the north of Raqqah governorate. We
are foreseeing the need to support over 400,000 people
as operations progress further. In Al-Bab, anti-ISIL
operations are taking place just a kilometre outside
the city, and planning for a more immediate response
for the over 100,000 people estimated to be in the city
and surrounding area is in its final stages. Let me be
clear - when people need our support, we are working
and will continue to work day and night to try to reach
them no matter who or where they are. That is not being
virtuous; that is ourjob, providing the Council gives us
the funds to do it and we can get safe access.

I have had little positive to report on the
implementation of the resolutions of the Council as
regards the humanitarian situation in Syria. Air strikes
and shelling kill and injure more and more civilians,
and protected civilian infrastructure is destroyed
with implications that will resonate for years to come.
Besiegement is increasing, people are going hungry.
Schools and hospitals are being bombed. The United
Nations is increasingly blocked from delivering to
those most in need.

Most frustratingly, this human suffering is all
unnecessary. There is no amount of suffering that will
result in an end to the conflict. There is no amount of
military operations that will see an end to the conflict.
The only solution, as has been said countless times
before, is a political solution. There are people here
at this table and beyond with the influence to tell the
Syrian Government we are not prepared to take no for an
answer. If you are a petrified civilian patient in Aleppo
tonight, you do not need to hear your own Government
pray national sovereignty in aid to justify using that
sovereignty to bomb its own people and that patient.

I am mandated to report to the Security Council
every month on the implementation of Council
resolutions relating to the protection of civilians and
the humanitarian situation in Syria. It is worth, for
the record and at the risk of being accused again of
preaching, reiterating what the Council demanded of
all the parties nearly three years ago in resolution 2139
(2014), including, first, to immediately put an end to
all forms of violence; second, to immediately cease all
attacks against civilians, as well as the indiscriminate
employment of weapons in populated areas; third, to
immediately lift sieges in populated areas; fourth, to
promptly allow rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access for United Nations humanitarian agencies
and their implementing partners, including across
conflict lines; fifth, to respect the principle of medical
neutrality and facilitate free passage to all areas for
medical personnel, equipment, transport and supplies,
including surgical items; sixth, to protect civilians and
desist from attacks directed against civilian objects; and
seventh the immediate end of the practices of arbitrary
detention and torture of civilians.

This is neither a long nor an exceptional list. More
importantly, this is a list of neither unreasonable nor
unattainable demands. These are the basic elements
of how parties to a conflict must operate under
international humanitarian law. They are based on the
most basic concepts of universal decency and humanity
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations to
which the Member States that are parties and proxies
have signed up and international humanitarian law,
which applies to all parties, States and non-State
actors alike, except, it would seem, in Syria. In
Syria - contrary to international humanitarian law and
in blatant rejection and defiance of the resolutions of
the Council - death, deprivation, violence, starvation,
siege tactics and attacks on civilian-populated areas
and civilian infrastructure continue and they continue
without penalty to the perpetrators.

I have called over and over for strong action from
the Council to back up its resolutions and to take action
when they are ignored day in day out. Without such
backing, words and resolutions have proven to have little
meaning for Syrians. Without strong backing from each
Council member, red lines will be crossed again and
again; international humanitarian law will be trampled
on; war crimes will be committed. And until there is
action by the Council, there will be no accountability.

It is high time to act. The United Nations
humanitarians and our partners will continue to do
our part. The United Nations will push at all angles to
reach those in need. As is myjob, I will report the facts,
advocate and give voice to those suffering without
respite and whose lives have been shattered time and
again. I will do so until the Council decides to unite
once again to do its collective part and resolve to bring
this Syrian horror to an end.

I hear the argument that the Council should not
pass a resolution because it would be "premature". It is
never, never too premature to save a life. It is never too
soon for the Council to find a solution to this conflict
and end the suffering of the Syrian people.

