It is an honour and a great pleasure for me to address the Council remotely, at a time when the whole world is facing the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, to present the Secretary-General's report on Mali (S/2020/223) and to commend the technical performance that enables us to have this meeting. Mali is not an exception to the pandemic. As of today, the country has recorded 46 positive cases, including one in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and five deaths. This has led MINUSMA and the country team to develop a contingency plan with different scenarios that allows many of us to continue to work from our respective residences and some others, for special reasons and on a voluntary basis, to return to their countries of usual residence while working remotely. As members can see, despite these exceptional conditions MINUSMA is continuing to fulfil the mission entrusted to it by the Council in accordance with resolution 2480 (2019), which assigns MINUSMA two priorities, namely, the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and supporting the political framework for the management of the crisis in the centre, including the protection of civilians, the reduction of intercommunal violence, the strengthening of the presence of the State and the return of basic social services. As part of the implementation of the Agreement and as a result of the impetus provided by the holding of the inclusive national dialogue, I am pleased to report the following. The redeployment of the first reconstituted units of the Malian defence and security forces in the north, notably in Gao, Timbuktu, Kidal and Menaka, has become a reality, with more than 1,000 elements deployed since February 2020. The Prime Minister's visit to the northern regions, notably to Kidal, Tessalit and Aguelhok, is a demonstration of trust-building among the signatory parties to the Agreement. The Agreement Monitoring Committee has resumed its activities, unlike the inter- Malian framework, whose activities are slowing down. A high-level workshop on the inclusion of women was held and enjoyed strong participation, and the first round of the legislative elections was conducted in a peaceful atmosphere despite the kidnapping of the leader of the opposition, Soumaila Cisse, three days before election day. At the national level, the 30 per cent quota for women has been respected. With regard to the centre, as a second strategic priority of the United Nations, MINUSMA continues to implement its adaptation plan. A total of 19 additional civilian staff have already been redeployed to Mopti. In addition, as part of MINUSMA's efforts to respond to early warnings, a hotline has been established in Mopti to serve the civilian population, and the Force has continued Operation Buffalo to better protect civilians and established temporary operating bases around sensitive localities. With the support of MINUSMA, the Malian authorities have continued to conduct dialogue and reconciliation initiatives. The consultation framework of the Permanent Secretariat of the Cadre politique de gestion de la crise au centre du Mali held a series of meetings in Mopti with local authorities, civil society and representatives of the Dogon and the Fulani from Bandiagara, Bankass, Douentza and Koro. The Prime Minister's visit sent a strong signal by ordering the dismantling of checkpoints illegally installed by militias along the main Mopti-Bankass road. It is to be hoped that concrete actions to fight impunity will be taken, as the number of displaced persons continues to increase, reaching 218,000 people in March 2020, compared with 199,385 in November 2019. In terms of regional security cooperation, MINUSMA continues to provide logistical support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. In that context, I am pleased to inform the Council that construction work on the Joint Force headquarters in Bamako has started. Lastly, I would like to highlight the exemplary cooperation that has been established between the United Nations system in Mali and the Government in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. Since 19 March, commercial flights to Mali have been suspended, group gatherings have been prohibited and a curfew has been introduced from 9 p.m. to 5 a.m. However, MINUSMA and the country team continue to fulfil their mandates while complying with Government decisions. Thus, by decision of the Secretary-General, the rotation of uniformed contingents is suspended until 30 June 2020. However, exceptions may be envisaged for the implementation of the mandate, with authorizations on a case-by-case basis and respecting isolation periods and other guidelines to prevent the spread of the virus. Staff with medical conditions or wishing to join their families have been given the opportunity to do so using special flights requested by some embassies and authorized by the Government. This is a brief account of the evolution of the situation in Mali. As members can see, we face many challenges, including the safety and well-being of the whole United Nations family in Mali, but also have real hopes given the Malian people's capacity for resilience.
