Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation wishes at the outset to thank the Russian
Federation for its initiative to organize today's debate
during its presidency of the Security Council. I wish
also to welcome the President of the Economic and
Social Council, the Chairman of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Ms. Carolyn McAskie, and to thank them, and the
other previous speakers, for their statements. Those
statements clearly indicated everything that is at stake
in ensuring that the Peacebuilding Commission is
successful in its mission and outlined the all challenges
that it must meet to achieve that success.

In our view, it is vital that flexible and effective
interaction between the Commission and the Security
Council be developed in practice; we hope that the
Council will regularly consider the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission. We hope too that the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council will devote particular attention to the new
body's work, as provided for in the resolutions that
established the Commission.

While we fully endorse the statement that will be
made by the presidency of the European Union, I wish
to speak of some particular aspects of the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

The Peacebuilding Commission's added value
derives from its capacity to deal in a concentrated
manner with problems that are specific to
peacebuilding processes, by tackling the most urgent
challenges. The participation in the Commission's
work of all relevant actors on the ground, in particular
States of the region and institutional and bilateral
donors, is fundamental in that regard. Here, my
delegation fully supports participation in the meetings
of the Peacebuilding Commission by the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund, as their
representatives have proposed today.

Most often, issues of institution-building -
related to such areas as the rule of law, good
governance and security-sector reform - are key post-
conflict priorities. In many cases, those areas fall
outside the realm of intervention and the capacity of
development actors. By their very nature, they require
close coordination of activities undertaken on the
ground. I am thinking in particular of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, which lie
at the intersection of peacekeeping and development
concerns.

By making it possible to identify goals and
priorities shared by all actors and to coordinate their
activities in accordance with a timetable for
intervention that is robust but adapted to immediate
priorities, the Peacebuilding Commission can become
an essential instrument for setting countries emerging
from crisis firmly on the path to peace and sustainable
development.

The first country-specific meetings, on Burundi
and Sierra Leone, have made it possible to start
identifying areas that are critical for the peacebuilding
processes in those countries on the basis of analyses
carried out by their national authorities. That is at the
core of the work of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
it must continue with a view to precisely identifying
priority actions and measures to be undertaken in areas
seen as crucial to the peacebuilding process. At the end
of the process, all actors in the field, first and foremost
the authorities of the countries concerned, should have
a road map that can form the basis for an appropriate
and lasting commitment by the international
community.

In that spirit, we consider that the Commission
should focus its efforts at this stage on preparations for
country-specific meetings concerning the countries on
its agenda. The Peacebuilding Support Office, which is
now operational, has a critical role to play here. We
consider that speedy and appropriate distribution to
Commission members of information relating to the
countries concerned is essential. An inventory of
actions undertaken in each of the areas critical for the
peacebuilding process has already been carried out. It
should now be the basis for identifying gaps and
improving coordination among all peacebuilding actors
in the two countries.

In addition to projects financed by the
Peacebuilding Fund, the Commission's work should
lead to better allocation of resources and enhanced
involvement by all actors, starting with the authorities
of the countries concerned. Those authorities should, of
course, be closely involved in the preparation and
implementation of the work of the Commission. Here, I
want to pay tribute to the endeavours carried out by the
authorities of Burundi and of Sierra Leone in liaison
with the United Nations and other actors.

My delegation wishes in conclusion to reaffirm
the importance it attaches to the goal of being able
collectively and in the very near future to achieve
tangible results for the countries being considered by
the Commission. I wish also to stress that at the
appropriate time the Security Council should fully
integrate those results into its work. The Council ought
to be able to share in the added value that the
Peacebuilding Commission should bring to our
collective effort to promote peace and security.

