Mr. Muita (Kenya): Let me begin by thanking
you, Mr. President, and the other members of the
Security Council for allowing me to participate in the
proceedings of the Council today. I also wish to extend
my appreciation to the Presidents and the Prosecutors
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), respectively, for their
comprehensive reports (S/2009/247 and S/2009/252)
submitted to the Council pursuant to the relevant
Security Council resolutions and for their stewardship
of the affairs of their respective judicial bodies.

In reference to the mention of Kenya, I would
like to report that my country has been and continues
to be an active player in the international criminal
justice system. I wish to reiterate that my delegation
stated last year that the ad hoc criminal Tribunals
established by the Council and the International
Criminal Court must provide and protect the proper
administration of justice by prosecuting those who
promote impunity. To that end and with regard to the
ICTR, Rwandan fugitives found within Kenyan
territory in the past were arrested and surrendered to
the ICTR. We have actually helped deliver the highest
number of genocide suspects to the Tribunal. That is a
demonstration of Kenya's commitment to the Court's
work and to the administration of international criminal
justice in general.

Concerning the fugitive Felicien Kabuga - who
is wanted by the ICTR for prosecution - regarding
whom the Prosecutor alluded to the possibility that the
fugitive is resident in Kenya, my delegation would like
to state again that the fugitive is not in Kenya. He was
in my country in the 1990s, but he is certainly not there
today. Kenya has no benefit in hiding the fugitive. In
any case, with the kind of reward on his head, no
Kenyan would allow him to run around the country
unreported.

The Government of Kenya has followed every
possible lead in this case and has come to a dead end,
and comprehensive reports to that effect have been
made to Arusha. The Prosecutor should widen his
search to include destinations where the money trail
leads and where the fugitive is said to own other

property.

Further, the Government of Kenya has been
engaged in consultations with the Prosecutor's Office
through the Joint Kenya-ICTR Task Force; in
particular, the Tribunal is aware that the Kenyan
authorities are vigorously defending in the Appeals
Court a decision of a lower court to freeze transactions
relating to property registered in the fugitive Felicien
Kabuga's name. Our commitment to the cause of the
ICTR is unquestionable, and should the fugitive ever
be found within Kenya's territory, he will be
apprehended and surrendered to the Tribunal.

Before I conclude, I wish to indicate that the case
for additional ad litem judges, as has been elaborated
by the President of the ICTR, is one that contains
merits and that therefore my delegation supports. I
wish to end by reassuring the Council of Kenya's
unwavering commitment to cooperate fully with the
Court in support of international criminal justice and
the eradication of impunity.

