Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to thank you, Foreign Secretary Jilani, for
presiding over today's important debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his presentation. Pakistan
has been one of the top contributors of uniformed
personnel to United Nations peacekeeping operations
in the post-Cold War era. The United States is grateful
for its contributions to United Nations peacekeeping,
and we are honoured to participate in this discussion
under its leadership.

Peacekeeping is one ofthe most important activities
undertaken by the United Nations. It has reduced the
incidence of inter- and intra-State conflict around the
globe. Many countries, from Namibia to El Salvador and
from Mozambique to Timor-Leste, have transitioned
from war to peace, thanks in no small measure to the
assistance they received from multidimensional United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Multidimensional
United Nations peacekeeping has achieved many
successes since the Security Council established the
first such operation, more than 50 years ago, in the
Congo. But United Nations peacekeeping must continue
to evolve to remain relevant in the years to come. I
would like to focus today on some features that the
United States would like to see in new multidimensional
peacekeeping operations, wherever they may be.

First is a diverse mix oftroop and police contributors,
drawn certainly from the regions concerned and from
other regions as well. The universal character of United
Nations peacekeeping missions is very important to its
legitimacy. United Nations troops must have the right
training and capabilities to be operationally effective.
To those ends, the Council should be more engaged
early on with the leadership of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Secretary-General
on the force-generation strategy. Force generation is a
political, not a technical, exercise, and must be treated
as such.

Second, mission staffing strategies should rely
on quality over quantity, especially with respect
to leadership and civilian experts. To win a host
population's confidence, a United Nations mission must
quickly deploy real expertise and skills that the host
country does not itself possess. Ten world-class experts
arriving at the outset of a mission are far better than
100 mediocre generalists trickling in over time. As
multidimensional peacekeeping evolves, the Secretary-
General's initiative on civilian capacity in the aftermath
of conflict should be fully embraced. Improved staffing
also means accelerating gender balance in missions and
the broader inclusion of women in all mission tasks and
units. We welcome the positive impact that all-female
units have had in Liberia and Haiti, and now in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Cote d'Ivoire,
and we want to see women playing a greater role, in
greater numbers, in activities and leadership across the
spectrum of peacekeeping activities.

Third, more military police and civilian personnel
should receive relevant guidance and training before
arriving at theatres. The Secretariat has made strides
in developing standards, training materials, specialized
guidance and policies on issues ranging from the
protection of civilians to gender and health. These
resources must be put to good use.

Fourth, mission leadership should prioritize
cooperation throughout the mission. Peacekeeping
operations have grown increasingly complex as
they have been asked to tackle a host of interrelated
challenges in order to address conflict. One of the
strengths of the United Nations is that it can deploy
a truly multidisciplinary response in a way that other
actors cannot; but that is an asset only if the whole is
greater than the sum of its parts, which requires deep
and sustained intra-mission cooperation. Mission
management should design orientation and training
programmes together, and devise truly mission-wide
strategies for key mandated tasks, such as the protection
of civilians. Jointness must become routine and
prioritized, from mission planning to tabletop exercises
to staffing operations and mission analysis centres.
United Nations peacekeeping missions and country
teams, moreover, must work hand in hand, including in
the design of quick-impact projects and other initiatives
to help generate local goodwill.

Fifth, we would like to see the entire mission
leadership - special representatives of the Secretary-
General and their deputies, force commanders,
police commissioners and directors of mission
support - taking action to ensure adherence to the
zero-tolerance policy for misconduct. That includes
swiftly investigating allegations of sexual exploitation
or abuse and repatriating offending units.

Sixth, we hope that troops, police and civilian
personnel in United Nations missions will begin
to receive world-class logistics and administrative
support, while the support component's physical
footprint is light and cost-effective. That is the promise
of the global field support strategy, and it must be
realized for the sake of the operational effectiveness
and fiscal responsibility of the United Nations.

Seventh, the special representatives of the
Secretary-General should promote multidisciplinary
cooperation, not only within the United Nations
system but also among multilateral and bilateral
assistance providers. We hope she - and I say "she"
deliberately i will foster information-sharing among
these actors and help forge a division of labour that
builds on their comparative strengths.

Eighth, peacekeeping can succeed only if there
is genuine peace to support. Peacekeeping missions
can help stabilize and catalyse recovery in countries
emerging from conflict, but the Security Council
must do its part to ensure that the political settlement
underlying the deployment of peacekeepers stays on
track. The commitment of the political leaders of the
host country to work with a mission is indispensable.

Last but not least, multidimensional United Nations
peacekeeping missions need the respect and gratitude of
the host nation. The steps I have just outlined can help
in that regard, as would efforts by mission personnel
to familiarize themselves with local language and
culture and empathize with the local population. But
sometimes respect can be won only when peacekeepers
refuse to turn a blind eye to flagrant transgressions;
when they demonstrate the will and wherewithal to use
force to defend themselves and enforce their mandate;
and when they tell the Security Council plainly what we
need to know, even if it is difficult.

Fortunately, the next operation will not start
from scratch. We have learned much in 50 years of
multidimensional peacekeeping, and we have the
progress hard-earned by past and current operations to
build upon.

