We thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open video-teleconference and for the opportunity to share our perspectives. We also thank the Secretary- General and the other briefers for highlighting some key issues on the protection of civilians from conflict situations around the world. We welcome the report (S/2020/366) of the Secretary-General that came out earlier this month. We cannot agree more with the report's renewed emphasis on respecting international law and ensuring accountability. The report highlights, inter alia, continued casualties among civilians, the displacement of people and the destruction of civilian objects in various parts of Myanmar, including in Rakhine state, to which we would particularly like to draw the Council's attention. In Bangladesh we value the notion of protecting civilians in armed conflict as a matter of principle. We have the haunting memory of the genocide committed against our people during our war of liberation in 1971. We are therefore inspired by the promise of "never again" anywhere in the world. As a demonstration of that unwavering commitment, we have been part of United Nations peacekeeping operations in some of the most difficult places in the world. We are aware of the growing and complex challenges related to the protection of civilians in operating environments. Nevertheless, our peacekeepers are committed to discharge the protection of civilians tasks mandated by the Council without any caveat. During the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, for example, our peacekeepers have taken up additional humanitarian responsibilities to support local efforts to contain the pandemic's spread. They are facilitating humanitarian assistance and medical care and raising awareness about health and hygiene. Where hopes and aspirations are on the brink, these courageous peacekeepers are leading by example and continuing to win the hearts and minds of the people they serve. They are also getting infected by the disease in the line of duty. It needs to be ensured that they receive the best possible medical care. We must factor in pandemic challenges in future planning and mandate-setting for peacekeeping missions. Additional capacities and adequate equipment will need to be built into mandates to ensure the safety requirement of peacekeepers in pandemics and health emergencies. We reiterate that protection-of-civilians mandates in peacekeeping contexts need to be backed by certain enabling factors, such as viable strategies and adequate resources. Over the years, the norms, strategies and guidelines for protecting civilians in peacekeeping operations have matured significantly. The latest 2019 Department of Peace Operations policy is an important addition to that normative framework. Yet there remain gaps between policies and practices. Our troops have been tackling those challenges with professionalism and the necessary degree of creativity. The Security Council has a responsibility to ensure that protection-of-civilians mandates are also supported by meaningful political processes to prevent conflicts and sustain peace. We therefore urge the Council to regularly review the mandates in close consultation with the host Governments, troop- and police-contributing countries and the Secretariat. On our part, we remain committed to further mainstreaming the protection of civilians in the predeployment training programmes designed for our troops and police. Furthermore, we are also championing the Action for Peacekeeping protection-of-civilians agenda along with other partners. Today's debate is taking place against the backdrop of the COVID-19 pandemic. The crisis has aggravated manifold the situation in conflict-affected countries and exacerbated further the vulnerability of marginalized populations. Keeping that in mind, we joined many other partners to strongly support the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. In many parts of the world it has strengthened the ongoing peace processes and prevented relapses into violence. However, in many other places the call is being totally ignored. Regrettably, in Myanmar the situation has worsened amid the pandemic. On 29 April, the outgoing Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar, Ms. Yanghee Lee, expressed serious concern over escalating violence in Rakhine and Chin states, stating that "Tw]hile the world is occupied with the COVID-19 pandemic, the Myanmar military continues to escalate its assault in Rakhine state, targeting the civilian population." The Myanmar authorities' actions are in total disregard for international humanitarian law and human rights law, to say the least. Even the International Court of Justice provisional measures of 23 January seem to have no positive impact on Myanmar's attitude and actions. Unfortunately, the suffering of those being persecuted remains unheeded by the international community. For the 1.1 million Rohingyas stranded in Bangladesh, those chilling developments further intensify their despair and hopelessness. Needless to mention, the incidents also severely undermine our efforts towards ensuring their safe, dignified and voluntary return to their own land and finding a durable solution to the crisis. The lingering Rohingya crisis has once again revealed the various facets of the challenges in ensuring the protection of civilians when the State concerned is unwilling to do so. Also, being a part of most of the highly challenging United Nations peacekeeping missions, we have gained a wealth of experience in implementing the protection-of-civilians mandate first-hand on the ground. Guided by the lessons learned, we wish to take this opportunity to stress the following points. First, States should take the primary responsibility for protecting civilians in their territories. Developing national policy frameworks, as rightly underlined by the Secretary-General, is critical in that regard. It is a long-term endeavour and an integral part of nation-building efforts. Prevention is at the heart of protection. States should therefore take steps to inculcate the values of peace, tolerance and harmony that contribute to long-term prevention and ensure peaceful coexistence among different religious and ethnic groups. Second, the vulnerable situation of civilians in post-conflict societies needs special attention. For peace to be sustained, people affected by conflict must be rehabilitated and reintegrated into mainstream society more effectively. At the same time, States need to invest more in building a culture of peace by addressing the root causes of conflicts, eliminating hate speech and ensuring equal opportunities for growth and prosperity for all. In doing so, it is also important to integrate the opinion of ethnic minorities and marginalized groups in the decision-making process. Third, for the effective protection of civilians in vulnerable settings, continued political support from the Security Council and commitment on the part of host Governments and the parties to the conflict are critical. In that regard, my delegation would like to re-emphasize the importance of the responsibility to prevent harm to civilians in armed conflict. Fourth, protection-of-civilians mandates in peacekeeping settings need to be fully supported by viable strategies, capacities, adequate resources and coordinated efforts by all actors on the ground. The new developments and trends make that more imperative. The United Nations country team and peacekeeping missions should further develop the capabilities for early warning signs, situational awareness and evidence-based reporting of facts and should work more closely with host Governments and other stakeholders to deter the possible escalation of violence. Fifth, unhindered safe passage for relevant humanitarian personnel and supplies to civilians in need must be ensured by all parties to armed conflicts. Medical facilities, educational institutions, especially schools, and places of worship should be left out of harm's way during violence and conflicts. Sixth, States should establish appropriate legislative and institutional arrangements to fulfil their disarmament commitments, including those on conventional weapons, such as landmines and other explosive devices. Such lethal weapons with the capacity to kill indiscriminately and large-area effects must not be used against civilians. Those who commit such violations must be held accountable. Seventh, the global norms for ending violence against women and children during armed conflict need to be translated into action. Bangladesh was associated with the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) as a non-permanent member of the Security Council. We are now one of the front-runners in terms of our contribution of women peacekeepers. We believe that uniformed women personnel can play a pivotal role in protecting women from violence and supporting them in crisis. We are therefore championing the Action for Peacekeeping women and peace and security agenda. In the same vein, we also see merit in redoubling our efforts to promote the youth, peace and security agenda in order to advance protection-of-civilians mandates in vulnerable settings. Last, ensuring accountability and justice for serious violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law is crucial to enhance compliance and prevent a culture of impunity for the commission of atrocity crimes against civilians. The Security Council should make appropriate use of the tools at its disposal to that end, including through duly considered options for imposing sanctions and referrals to international criminal justice mechanisms.
