Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let
me first say, Sir, how happy we are that you are presiding
over the important deliberations of the Council today. We
are also thankful to you for convening this important
meeting.

The situation in Kosovo has caused considerable
international outrage because of the excessive use of force
by Serbian police against the ethnic Albanians in Kosovo,
which has resulted in considerable loss of life and material
damage. This international outrage finds further grounds
and is duly increased because it is reminder of an unholy
and dark experience in Bosnia that has yet to be fully
resolved. The experience of Bosnia cannot and should not
be allowed to be repeated.

The Islamic Republic of Iran has repeatedly raised
deep concern about the deteriorating situation in Kosovo
and condemned the suppression of and the use of force
against the Kosovar Albanians by Serbian Special Police,
which has led to the death of many civilians, including
women and children. The use of force and violence must be
rejected, and the authorities in Belgrade should take the
necessary steps so that the rights of the Kosovar Albanian
community are fully guaranteed. Furthermore, the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia should
be persuaded that as far as the international community is
concerned, the solution to the problem can be found only
in a genuine and serious process of political negotiations
with the ethnic minority in Kosovo.

The Islamic Republic of Iran believes that the
solution to the problem in Kosovo lies in respecting the
territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
on the one hand, and finding an agreed formula for the
political future of the Kosovar Albanian community
through political dialogue on the other.

The twenty-fifth ministerial meeting of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, held in Qatar
from 15 to 17 March 1998, expressed deep concern about
the violation of the political and human rights of the
Kosovar Albanian community, which constitutes about 90
per cent of the entire population in Kosovo. The meeting
condemned the use of force by Serbian police against the
Albanian minority and called for the withdrawal of
military forces from Kosovo.

The Islamic Republic of Iran supports the resolution
just adopted in the context of the international efforts to
curb further bloodshed in Kosovo and bring a political
solution to the conflict. We call upon both sides to
exercise restraint and engage in serious political
negotiations without preconditions on the political status
of Kosovo.

