Mr. Jenea: We are discussing the crisis in
Myanmar in this Chamber for the first time in 2018. It
is now five months since the start of the violence that
has forced 688,000 Rohingya across the border, and the
outflow of people continues, although at a lower rate.
As ofS February, between 1,000 and 1,200 people were
reportedly waiting on a beach in Maungdaw, planning
to leave for Bangladesh. Since the last briefing by
Under-Secretary-General Feltman on 12 December
2017 (see S/PV.8133), the General Assembly adopted
resolution 72/248 on the human rights situation in
Myanmar by vote.

The Secretary-General has laid out three priorities
that provide an important framework for assessing the
situation. Regrettably, while there has been certain
progress, not all have been implemented thus far.

First, we need to end the violence and improve
the security situation. Although large-scale acts
of violence have subsided, concerns about threats
and intimidation against the remaining Rohingya
population from Bamar and Rakhine communities, as
well as from militia and security forces in Rakhine
state, persist. Bamar-Rakhine tensions remain high,
further fuelled by incidents, such as a clash between the
Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army and the military on
7 January, or the incident in Mrauk U on 16 January, in
which police shot and killed seven Rakhine nationalist
protestors, and later imprisoned two noted Rakhine
leaders. We remain concerned about the protection of
future returnees.

On 14 November 2017, the Government of Myanmar
reportedly transmitted to the Bangladesh authorities
a list of 1,300 of what it called suspected terrorists
and asked for their extradition. The Government also
published in the official newspaper the names and
photos of hundreds of suspected terrorists. These steps
have raised questions about due process and possible
intimidation of potential returnees.

Secondly, humanitarian access must be secured
immediately in the affected areas of Rakhine. Such
access continues to be severely curtailed. The majority
of humanitarian organizations that previously worked
in Rakhine are simply not allowed to enter the area.
A handful of organizations have been given travel
authorizations, but in a short-term and unpredictable
manner that impedes the systematic delivery of
assistance. The United Nations does not have sufficient
access to make a meaningful assessment of the
humanitarian or human rights situation. Thus, there is
little sense of whether the full range of humanitarian
needs of the population is being met and whether
the human rights of all people of the region are
being protected.

Thirdly, we must ensure the voluntary, safe,
dignified and sustainable return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to their places of origin
or choice. Let me acknowledge the fact that the
Governments of Bangladesh and Myanmar signed a
memorandum of understanding and established a joint
working group that reached an agreement on 16 January
on a number of issues in order to facilitate the return
process. It is also important to note that Myanmar has
made progress in its logistical preparations to receive
returning refugees.

On the issues related to repatriation, I will defer
to High Commissioner Grandi to provide more details.

The Secretary-General has underlined the
importance of implementing the recommendations of
the Rakhine Advisory Commission as a key element
of creating conditions for a safe and dignified return.
The Government has taken some high-level steps to
advance this process, including convening an advisory
board, led by Mr. Surakiart Sathirathai and comprising
distinguished national and international participants.
At the end of its deliberations, the board offered
preliminary recommendations to the Implementation
Committee, including the involvement of United
Nations an early stage, full humanitarian access as
soon as possible, wider media access and the formation
of an independent fact-finding commission.

In this context, I wish to reiterate that we urge
the Government to cooperate with the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and all United
Nations human rights mechanisms, in particular the
fact-finding mission mandated by the Human Rights
Council, and with the Special Rapporteur for Human
Rights in Myanmar. It is important that the work
of United Nations human rights mechanisms not be
undermined by other mechanisms.

As suggested by the final report of the Rakhine
Advisory Commission, we urge the Government to take
a leadership role in promoting intercommunal cohesion,
create an environment conducive to dialogue, foster the
values of tolerance and respect for basic human rights
between Rakhine and Rohingya communities, and
accelerate and align the citizenship verification process
in alignment with international standards and treaties.
Overall, addressing the root causes is fundamental
to ensuring a durable and genuine solution to this
crisis. We have consistently said that the problem is
statelessness. This must be addressed.

In line with the Council's presidential statement
of 6 November 2017 (S/PRST/20l7/22), the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, made her first official visit to
Myanmar from 14 to 17 December 2017 to address
reports of conflict-related sexual violence. In her
consultations, she advocated for the swift adoption of
a joint communique of the Government of Myanmar
and the United Nations on the prevention and response
to conflict-related sexual violence, in accordance with
resolution 2106 (2013).

While we discuss Rakhine, we also take this
opportunity to note other developments in Myanmar,
in particular the ongoing fighting as well as the
peacemaking efforts between the Government and
diverse ethnic armed organizations. We are concerned
that fighting in Kachin and northern Shan states has
escalated in recent months. This has cast a shadow
on peace negotiations and provoked a number of
serious human rights and humanitarian concerns.
Such concerns include the situation in Tanai, Kachin,
where many civilians have been killed or injured and
as many as 5,000 civilians are reportedly unable to
leave the area, where fighting is ongoing. And as in
Rakhine state, the Government has severely restricted
humanitarian access in many of the most critical areas.
The United Nations is therefore unable to verify the
numbers of people affected.

On a more positive note, two ethnic armed
organizations, the New Mon State Party and the Lahu
Democratic Union, signed the Nationwide Ceasefire
Agreement in Nay Pyi Taw today. The signing is the
first of its kind for the ruling National League for
Democracy Government and brings the total number
of ethnic armed groups that have signed the Agreement
to 10 out of 16.

Finally, I would like to address the unfortunate
arrest of two Reuters journalists, Wa Lone and Kyaw
Soe 00. The Secretary-General has called in clear
terms for the release of these journalists and urged the
authorities to respect the right to freedom of expression
and information. Allow me to reiterate those calls here
today. The ability to exercise their right to freedom of
expression and information is a barometer for respect for
human rights more broadly. Reuters has now published
the story these journalists were working on - a deeply
disturbing account of the execution of 10 Rohingya
men in the village of Inn Din, Maungdaw, in northern
Rakhine state. The Associated Press has also published
a report of five mass graves in Gudar Pyin village in
Buthidaung. These and other shocking reports of grave
abuses demand our attention and action for the sake of
lasting peace and justice.

