Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me also take the opportunity to commend
and thank the five Council members who will depart
at the end of the year - Germany, Colombia, India,
Portugal and South Africa - and to thank them for
their contributions and cooperation throughout the
two years. I also thank the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission for their
briefings.

I associate myself with the statement to be made on
behalf of the European Union.

Twenty years after the publication of the report by
the former Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-
Ghali, entitled "An agenda for peace" (S/24lll), the
United Nations has provided itself with many means to
meet the challenges of peacebuilding. Today we have
an opportunity to take stock of the initiatives pursued
in that domain.

Peacebuilding is indeed a real challenge for the
United Nations. It is essential that the international
community have effective tools to avoid a recurrence
or resurgence of violence in States made fragile by
conflict. Current events provide numerous examples of
the ongoing risks in post-conflict situations. Therefore,
the entire United Nations must make the best use of
the means at its disposal to meet the challenges of
peacebuilding.

I wish to address three issues presented as priorities
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/746).

First, the peacebuilding process must be inclusive.
No reconstruction effort is possible without genuine
national ownership of the peacebuilding goals. To be
sustainable, that reconstruction must be based on an
inclusive process. Yesterday the Council again saw, with
respect to the situation in the Central African Republic,
that it is essential that all stakeholders accept the terms
of the peacebuilding process and fully participate in it.
The processes must entail a broad political dialogue in
which the opposition, under a democratic framework,
has its full place.

Also, the lives of various segments of society
must be taken into account. Addressing post-conflict
peacebuilding must include enhancing the contribution
of women. Women must have access in a more
systematic manner, and on equal footing with men, in
the political, economic, social and cultural domains. In
that regard, we fully support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to ensure the active participation of
women in all aspects of peacebuilding. The goals ofhis
seven-point action plan must be implemented.

Secondly, institution-building efforts must be
strengthened. Institution-building is a key factor in the
success of peacebuilding. But beyond the institutions,
in the strict sense of the word, a broad enabling
environment for peacebuilding must be established.
That involves the implementation of security sector
reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes. It also requires support for
national reconciliation, establishing respect for rule of
law, and the reintegration of the economic fabric.

Setting up all of those elements presupposes
excellent coordination of all actors involved over
the long term in order to appropriately address the
transition process. As a priority, coordination of
all actors at all levels is crucial. The Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) - I commend its work here - can
play a liaison role among various members of the
international community, including States, international
organizations and financial institutions. We encourage
the PBC to step up efforts in those areas.

The second aspect of transition is that it must be
formulated with a view to the long term. Transition
covers a number of realities, for example, transition
from a peacekeeping operation to a special political
mission, or from a political mission to the withdrawal
of United Nations action. Setting up an appropriate
sequence entails defining the criteria. However, it also
involves expectations. For example, the transition plan
established under the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste was developed over the long term and
in close coordination with the local authorities. It is an
example of institutional reforms having been carefully
adjusted in preparation for the withdrawal.

Thirdly, international support must be lasting and
based on the principle of mutual responsibilities. We
know that peacebuilding involves long-term efforts. I
would like to highlight two initiatives that are sources
of hope for enduring peacebuilding, namely, the New
Deal for Engagement in Fragile States, and the review
of the civilian capacities initiative.

To start, the role of the international community
is to create the conditions for a country's recovery.
States receiving assistance should not continue to get it
indefinitely. To deal with that, priority should be given
to setting up contracts, such as the New Deal compact,
which was defined during the Fourth High-level Forum
on Aid Effectiveness, held in Busan. Such a contract
would define a State's commitments and therefore
enable its full involvement in the undertaking. In that
view, initiatives aimed at restoring a viable economic
fabric must be especially encouraged. The joint event
held in June by the Economic and Social Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission on partnerships for job
creation for young people was useful. However, what is
important, obviously, is the specific implementation of
those efforts on the ground.

Secondly, to ensure the durability of the international
community's commitment, certain considerations were
addressed, such as a review of civilian capacities. We
would encourage the Secretary-General to continue to
broaden and strengthen the use of civilian experts to
fully meet immediate capacity-building requirements
of States emerging from conflict.

The issue of developing partnerships is a key
element of the review. We believe that the long-term
commitment of all partners represents the best hope.
We note with interest the launching of the CAPMATCH
initiative.

In conclusion, I highlight that the robust
mobilization of many players on these crucial issues has
enabled the establishment of many impressive tools. It
is now up to us to use them effectively, relying as much
as possible on the synergies of the various available
instruments. In that way the coherence of international
action and the clarity of United Nations peacebuilding
interventions can be assured.

