Our discussion today is basically a repeat performance. The joint declaration has still not been adopted. We continue to see periodic spikes in violence, shelling and bombing. So, we have to be realistic and say that progress is practically non- existent. This is extremely frustrating. Nevertheless, we would encourage Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, to continue his work. I admire his persistence. Please continue to build on the so-called airlift of hope on the International Committee of the Red Cross-facilitated prisoner exchange. I do not have much to add to what Mark Lowcock and David Beasley, Executive Director of the World Food Programme (WFP), said with regard to the humanitarian situation. The population is being starved and the horrors inflicted by famine abound. We cannot find the right words to react to that. David Beasley talked about the countdown to a devastating famine. I thank him for his frank portrayal of the situation. Let me also take this opportunity to personally congratulate him and the WFP on receiving the Nobel Peace Prize. It is very well deserved. Germany is proud to be the second-largest donor to the WFP. I congratulate the WFP on getting the biometric data in Sana'a. We hope that the WFP can continue its work based on the data. I find it really unacceptable to hear about the bureaucratic hurdles. What the Houthis have done in the past in terms of blackmailing donors and humanitarian organizations is totally unacceptable. But it was also mentioned that there are bureaucratic hurdles with regard to the Government and the Southern Transitional Council. I would ask the Ambassador of Yemen to specifically address the criticism being levied against the Government with regard to the bureaucratic hurdles to humanitarian aid. On humanitarian funding, Germany has fulfilled our commitment, and we are the third-largest donor for Yemen. We have pledged and disbursed $148 million, in addition to a $100 million to the WFP and the United Nations Office for Project Services. All together, our humanitarian assistance, stabilization efforts and development cooperation add up to $370 million. There are others that have not complied with their commitments, particularly those in the region. I do not think it is acceptable that a country like the United Arab Emirates, which is also involved in the military conflict, has not committed to humanitarian aid this year. I would also ask our colleague Kelly Craft, Permanent Representative of the United States of America, with excellent relations to the United Arab Emirates, to please push them to commit to the same level as they did last year. Let me turn to Omer Badokhon, Founder and Executive Director of Solutions for Sustainable Society, who said a dignified life is not possible in Yemen. I find it wonderful that he has such ambitions for the country with regard to a circular green economy, biogas, conservation of wildlife and timber. This is what we should be talking about, but instead we have to talk about the dire humanitarian situation. He said that young people have to play a role, and I would add the need to have the participation of women. I thank Martin Lowcock for being steadfast on this. In his negotiations on the joint declaration, women must be included. During last month's briefing (see S/PV.8770), Mark Lowcock said that the Yemeni children were a testament of hope, citing the moving example of a school in Taiz where the children keep going to school without any learning material. Teachers continue to teach without having been paid for months, or even years. This is an example of hope. Just last week, we read about three children being severely injured by shelling, including a 6-year-old girl. The shelling happened precisely in Taiz. Maybe the injured children were pupils of the school he mentioned, maybe not. But these incidents show once more how horrifying the fighting and the ongoing violations of international humanitarian law are and what consequences they have. They literally killed the last remaining testament of hope for the country. The fighting and, especially, the killing of civilians has to stop.
