Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We welcome His
Excellency President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud and
greatly value the opportunity for the Council to hear
directly his perspectives on the situation in Somalia.
We also thank Mr. Keating and Ambassador Tete
Antonio for their updates.

Somalia was one of the defining issues when New
Zealand last served on the Security Council. Two
decades later, Somalia is in a much better position, but
it remains an important item on our agenda, with far-
reaching implications for regional peace and security
and the fight against terrorism.

We welcome the progress achieved through
the bravery and commitment of soldiers and other
personnel from the African Union (AU), neighbouring
countries, international partners and Somalia itself.
As a result, Al-Shabaab has been weakened. There
were no successful instances of piracy in the past year.
Most importantly, progress has been made towards a
functioning Federal Government, with the prospect of
a democratic transition this year. This has come at a
truly awful cost to Somalia, its neighbours and the AU,
and significant challenges lie ahead. Sustained political
attention will be required to deal with each of those
challenges, and the Council must maintain its focus
on Somalia.

We support the analysis presented by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Michael
Keating and wish to highlight five points.

First, we agree that this year's elections are critical.
They need to be Somali-led and ensure that the Somali
people are fully involved and feel ownership of the
political process. We welcome the agreement reached
at last week's Somali Leaders Forum in Mogadishu on
the details of the electoral model. We also take note of
President Mohamud's reminder that these elections will
be the first in 47 years. That is a truly remarkable event
and one that we all applaud.

Secondly, other political priorities require attention.
Dialogue between the Federal Government of Somalia
and regional administrations has been positive but needs
to go further. Key issues still need to be addressed,
including setting regional boundaries, completing the
constitutional review and determining the governance
of natural resources. The federal project relies on
strengthening institutions in the regions. Federal and
regional authorities need to make progress here to
avoid jeopardizing the political transition. Somali civil
society needs to have a bigger role. Furthermore, if
peace is to be sustainable, stabilization will be critical
in terms of effective service delivery for people in areas
under Somali Government control. There is still a long
way to go in these areas.

Thirdly, a well-functioning security sector is
fundamental to long-term stability in Somali. The
Federal Government needs to be supported to have
the sufficient capacity to both prevent a resurgence
of Al-Shabaab and other vectors of terrorism and to
provide checks on regional and clan-based conflict.
We welcome the efforts of international partners to
strengthen the Somali National Army and the police
force. However, there is an urgent need for closer
coordination. The efforts will be successful only if
partners programmes are made more coherent and
if the silos are broken down. Building a strong and
coherent army and police force will be essential to the
implementation of a successful exit strategy for the
international community.

Fourthly, 2016 will be a particularly important year
for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
The Al-Shabaab threat continues to be very real and
AMISOM's role remains critical. The implementation
of the commitments made by AMISOM's contributors
at the Djibouti summit will be of fundamental
importance, particularly with regard to commitments
concerning command and control.

Lastly, I note that New Zealand is deeply concerned
about the financing challenges facing AMISOM.
Continued international support for the Mission will be
essential if it is to fulfil its mandate. We acknowledge
the important funding that the European Union
continues to provide. With the reallocation of some
of that funding, it will be important to work with
partners in the region and further afield to ensure that
AMISOM's current funding challenges are addressed
in a manner that does not undermine its operations at
this critical juncture.

This situation also underlines the need to move
beyond our reliance on ad hoc financing for regionally
led peace operations in Africa. New Zealand is a strong
supporter of finding innovative solutions that can
provide more predictable funding for such missions.
That is something which we need to collectively
explore. We welcome efforts to mobilize funding
from within Africa and hope that the international
community, including the United Nations, can be
strategic and creative in working out how to properly
support the robust missions that the African Union is
prepared to lead.

In conclusion, we know that achieving what we
have outlined today will be difficult. We also know that,
while the Federal Government has a central role to play,
it cannot do this alone. The Council, the United Nations
system, the African Union and other partners need to
work closely with the Somali authorities in meeting
these challenges. But we also remember today the great
distance that Somalia has already travelled. We must
all continue to support the Somali Government and
people in their efforts to come together.

