The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of New
Zealand.

Today, the permanent members of the Security
Council, the European Union, Germany and Iran
have presented us with an agreement that, if fully
implemented, will provide a comprehensive and long-
term solution to the Iran nuclear issue. The truly historic
agreement reached in Vienna represents a triumph
of diplomacy and cooperation over confrontation
and mistrust. New Zealand commends all parties for
staying the course throughout what were complex and
challenging negotiations.

It is now crucial to ensure that the agreement is fully
and swiftly implemented and that small missteps and
misunderstandings not be allowed to derail the process.
We urge all parties to approach that task with the same
constructive intent that has led to this agreement,
and we encourage Iran to act swiftly to implement
all transparency measures and allow the International
Atomic Energy Agency access to the relevant sites.

Through the adoption today of resolution 2231
(2015), we give international legal force to the agreement
reached in Vienna and extend the obligations it contains
across the broader United Nations membership. New
Zealand endorses the comments of High Representative
Mogherini, who has said that this is a good deal for
everyone - for the parties who signed up to it and for
the rest of the international community. Sadly, there
are too few days when we can say that constructive
and patient diplomacy has succeeded in bridging the
differences and overcoming the mistrust that contain
the seeds of conflict. Today we mark an opportunity to
change the nature of the relationship between Iran and
the international community, and we remind ourselves
that with the right approach and with the commitment
of key stakeholders, even seemingly intractable issues
can be resolved through diplomacy and dialogue. As
the Council confronts the extraordinarily difficult
challenges related to the Middle East peace process,
Syria, Iraq, Yemen and Libya, that is a message we
should reflect on today.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.

