Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Permit me at the outset, Madam President, to
congratulate you on the very elegant way in which you
have been guiding the work of the Security Council
this month. My delegation is pleased to be able to
participate in today's debate on this most important
theme, which is of interest to us all in so many ways,
as reflected in the Security Council's ever-denser
agenda, more than 60 per cent of which is devoted to
the African continent.

In spite of the praiseworthy and sustained efforts
of Africa's States, the continent sadly continues to
suffer the torments of conflict. The nature of these
conflicts has changed from inter-State conflicts to
intra-State disputes, which are more complex and
deadly. Whether these are the result of ethnic, religious
causes or of a struggle for control of natural resources,
Africa continues - despite innate optimism and trust
in a better common future - to be the silent victim of
the use of increasingly sophisticated, destructive and
evil weapons.

According to the annual report of the Stockholm
International Peace Research Institute, worldwide
expenditures on weapons in 2009 rose to a record
$1.53l trillion: an increase of 49 per cent compared to
10-45510

2000 and 9 per cent compared to 2008 - in spite of
the world financial crisis on which so much attention is
being focused. By comparison, the annual
peacekeeping budget amounts to less than 0.5 per cent
of the worldwide arms budget. That shows that
peacekeeping is an effective and inexpensive tool for
the international community in conflict resolution. We
ought to support and strengthen the United Nations in
this field.

The increased expenditures on weapons are
related to increased income in States from the sale of
natural resources and, sometimes, relates to the
hegemonic temptations of a past era. These
developments in the sphere of conflict oblige us to
reassess our overall concept of security. Threats from
beyond the national territory have been replaced by
internal, global and more diffuse threats that take the
form of military rebellions, transnational organized
crime or terrorism, which strike more randomly and in
an indiscriminate way.

The success of our Organization lies in its
universality. No other player can claim to possess the
legitimacy and experience in the maintenance of
international peace and security that the United Nations
has gradually accumulated since its establishment.

New global security concepts must take into
account the new parameters of conflict and must
incorporate elements such as crisis management and
the settlement and transformation of conflicts. It is thus
necessary to consider the spectrum of crises as a
continuum, during which the international community
can intervene, making use of a variety of tools such as
preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. We cannot manage crises without using
tools for the peaceful settlement of disputes, as
provided for in Article 33 of the Charter, negotiation
being the most important among them.

In settling, stabilizing or transforming conflicts,
those tools for dispute settlement have demonstrated
their relevance and effectiveness with the political will
of the parties and the positive and constructive
commitment of neighbouring States, whose role is the
undeniable key to successful conflict settlement.

But despite the relevance and importance of these
methods of peaceful settlement of disputes, nothing
can replace a policy of anticipating and preventing
conflict. That approach is among the least used by the
international community. The preventive deployment
3
of Blue Helmets in Macedonia, in 1999, exemplifies
the successful use of timely prevention. But such
diplomacy is not sufficient in itself; it must be
complemented by structural preventive action aimed at
strengthening the foundations of viable States by
building institutions and implementing sustainable
development policies. In this framework, the
Peacebuilding Commission plays a very precious role
which deserves to be backed by the international
community and especially by the General Assembly
and the Security Council.

It is fundamental to instil a culture of prevention
at the heart of our Organization. To do this, it is
necessary to qualitatively strengthen the Mediation
Support Unit of the Department of Political Affairs. In
this regard, we welcome the efforts undertaken by
Mr. Lynn Pascoe and his ambitious programme to
transform the Department.

We also believe it pertinent to establish a high-
level group within the Secretariat responsible for the
prevention of conflicts that would include, in addition
to the Cabinet of the Secretary-General, the
Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Peacebuilding Support
Office and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, among others. Efforts should
also be undertaken in the training of United Nations
staff from those departments so that they can fully
understand the realities of the conflicts they are
expected to manage and concerning which they must
present reports to the Security Council on behalf of the
Secretary-General.

Africa has made significant progress towards
stability. However, such regions of the continent as the
Horn of Africa, the Great Lakes and the Sahelo-Sahara
continue to be targeted for destabilization. The recent
Small Arms Survey study by the Graduate Institute of
International and Developmental Studies in Geneva
noted no less than 11 non-State movements
representing threats to the security of the Sahelo-
Saharan region as a result of their high degree of
militarization. The absence of cross-border cooperation
and security coordination and collusion among various
trafficking operations have turned the Sahelo-Saharan
region into an arc of crisis and a grey area in which
these non-State actors operate in collusion with each
other. Indeed, the Security Council devoted a meeting
to that theme during the presidency of Burkina Faso
last year.
The Kingdom of Morocco, an Arab-African
country solidly anchored on the continent by its
historical heritage and a civilizational heritage, has
since its independence made the choice of afro-
positivism by backing the liberation movements of the
continent that made the independence of many African
countries possible. Aware of the many security
challenges affecting these States, Morocco has spared
no effort to back them in peacebuilding and has
participated in some 20 peacekeeping operations
throughout Africa. Far from limiting itself to
peacekeeping, and as a result of its status as a discreet
mediator, Morocco has led a number of mediation
efforts between brotherly African countries, especially
within the framework of the Mano River Union.

The prevention of conflicts unfortunately remains
the poor cousin among the crisis management
instruments available to the United Nations. Whether
through its good offices, mediation or the appointment
of special representatives, the institution of the
Secretary-General must be equipped to enable better
action by the United Nations. In this respect, Morocco
expresses its hope that the United Nations will develop,
through its presence in the field, an early warning
mechanism that would enable it to detect crisis-
inducing factors and to contain them before they
degenerate.

A Buddhist teaching holds that the water pot is
filled drop by drop. Javier Perez de Cuellar and
Boutros Boutros-Ghali started this work; Kofi Annan,
Bernard Millet and Jean-Marie Gue'henno continued it
by strengthening United Nations peacekeeping. It now
behoves us to work together on this heritage to enable
the United Nations to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war and to establish a global
culture of peace.

