Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, Madam, allow me to congratulate you on your
Government's initiative of organizing this thematic
debate on the links between energy, security and, in
particular, the effects of climate change on potential
causes of conflict and its impact on international
security and stability.

In the coming weeks, the thirty-seventh regular
session of the General Assembly of the Organization of
American States will be held in Panama, under the
theme "Energy for sustainable development". That is
further proof of the importance that the Government of
Panama attaches to matters related to climate change
and its consequences for society.

There is a strong, broadly recognized link
between the availability of sources of clean, affordable
and reliable energy and the sustainable development of
peoples. That issue also encompasses other aspects,
such as the growing costs of the competition for scarce
energy resources, the defence and security of sources,
and the right of States to meet their energy needs. It is
clear, however, that we still need greater understanding
of its impact on global warming, the environment and
international peace and security. That is why we must
strengthen national and regional capacities and
mechanisms at various levels in order to better
understand and address the situation.

Today, at the United Nations and various regional
organizations, political, social and scientific efforts are
being undertaken to understand the relationship
between the use of certain energy resources, climate
change and their consequences for human beings.
Greater synergy and cooperation among actors, based
on the unique characteristics of each region, will allow
us better to grasp the approaching challenges.

The causes and effects of climate change are of
such magnitude and varied impact that each and every
United Nations organ, including the Security Council,
is obligated to consider them under the respective
mandates assigned to each by the Charter.

Today's debate, being held at the invitation of the
Security Council with the participation of all States
Members of the Organization, should focus especially
on those aspects of the subject that could constitute
sources of international conflict and instability. On
previous occasions, the Council has held debates on its
role in matters of competence shared among the other
United Nations organs. For example, in 2000 we held a
debate on the impact of HIV/AIDS on peace and
security on the African continent. We sought then to
provide visibility to the problem. Although the debate
led to no direct action, it demonstrated the consensus
of the international community on setting objectives.
No one can deny the positive effect of actions
undertaken because of that and other debates.

It is now undeniable that the use of fossil fuels to
produce energy contributes to global warming. It is
equally undeniable that global warming will exacerbate
poverty and national tragedies, which are breeding
grounds for civil war and, sometimes imperceptibly,
for conflicts that affect international peace and
security.

Although the impact of climate change on daily
life may be subtle, it has powerful effects. The gradual
accumulation of consequences is precisely its most
dangerous quality, because, as the poet T.S. Eliot
wrote, "This is the way the world ends/ Not with a
bang but a whimper".

