Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, Sir, I wish to express my delegation's pleasure
at seeing you preside over this meeting. We thank you
for including the item of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict on the Council's agenda. Before I begin
to read my country's position on that subject, I should
like to express, on behalf of the people and
Government of Mexico, our condolences and solidarity
to the families of the victims and to the people and
Government of the Russian Federation because of the
attack suffered in Moscow today.

With regard to the item under consideration, my
delegation wishes to thank Mr. Ian Egeland, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for the information he
has just provided us and for the updated version of the
aide-memoire. Mexico participated actively in the
negotiations on the aide-memoire's original version, as
well as on its updating, because we are convinced that
the Council must have instruments that will help it to
include the protection of civilians in armed conflict as
a priority issue in its deliberations. Some positive
progress has been made in that regard; however, the
Council must intensify this exercise in all its
deliberations.

It is also necessary that the Council send a clear
and firm message that the Geneva Conventions -
particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention, which
establishes that civilians are not a legitimate target, that
deliberate attacks against them cannot be tolerated, that
the parties to a conflict must take all possible measures
to limit suffering and damage caused to civilians, and
that States must bring to justice those responsible for
grave violations of international law, particularly
international humanitarian law - must be complied
with under all circumstances. Moreover, it is necessary
that we guarantee safe and unimpeded access of
humanitarian personnel to persons needing assistance,
particularly those who are most vulnerable. In the
debate on this item held in the Council a year ago, we
expressed our concern about the aggression against
humanitarian organizations, including non-
governmental organizations. The increase in deliberate
attacks and the direct assault on the inherent neutrality
and impartiality of humanitarians are particularly
worrying.

Ultimately, attacks against humanitarian
personnel are attacks against civilians and therefore
constitute war crimes, since they aim to deprive the
most vulnerable people of the assistance that is so
necessary to their survival, as well as to increase their
suffering.

That is why Mexico submitted resolution 1502
(2003) on the protection of humanitarian personnel,
which was unanimously adopted in August.

The Council now has a responsibility to ensure
that adequate measures are taken to guarantee the
safety and protection of humanitarian personnel,
thereby ensuring the protection of civilians and
alleviating their suffering.

Mexico reiterates its resolute condemnation of all
terrorist acts, methods and practices. Such acts, in all
their forms and manifestations, are criminal and cannot
be justified, whatever the motive and by whomsoever
they are committed, whether in times of peace or
during armed conflict. We want to be very clear about
that.

We believe that States must respond to terrorist
acts on the basis of the values that sustain the
democratic systems of our Governments and of this
Organization: the protection of and respect for the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of all people.
Among other measures, Mexico again introduced -
during the current session of the General Assembly -
a draft resolution on protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism. The
draft resolution welcomes the dialogue between the
Security Council, its Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the bodies entrusted with promoting and protecting
human rights, and encourages the Council and the
Committee to strengthen cooperation with the bodies of
the competent human rights organizations, in particular
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, so as to guarantee the integration of
the promotion and protection of human rights in the
work carried out in accordance with the relevant
resolutions.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict
requires the adoption of particular measures for the
benefit of women, children and the elderly - groups
that are particularly affected by conflict. Unfortunately,
despite the efforts that have been made to date,
exploitation and sexual aggression continue to be
widely used as a tool of war. Further measures must
therefore be adopted to punish those responsible for
such acts. Resolution 1460 (2003) on children and
armed conflict - the negotiations on which my
delegation participated actively - represented an
important step forward. We invite the members of the
Council to reflect, during the negotiations to be held in
January, on the importance that the international
community accords to the adoption of measures to
prevent the use of children in armed conflict.

Adequate attention must also be accorded to
threats facing women in armed conflict. This body
must promote a gender perspective in the peacekeeping
operations that it authorizes.

In all of these areas - the use of children in
armed conflict, sexual abuse and attacks against
humanitarian personnel - the International Criminal
Court has a fundamental role to play. The Rome Statute
is a reminder for the international community that
those who commit such acts will not go unpunished.
States must unambiguously reaffirm their commitment
to combat impunity and bring to justice those
responsible for acts of genocide, war crimes and other
crimes against humanity and serious violations of
international humanitarian law. We must reaffirm the
rule of law and promote, among the parties to conflict,
respect for international humanitarian law, human
rights and refugee law.

We are convinced that the most effective means
of protecting civilians in armed conflict is to regulate
the traffic in small arms, light weapons, explosives and
munitions, as well as the use of intermediaries, with a
view to putting an end to illegal flows of such
weapons. It has become clear in a number of cases that
the weapons used to attack civilians in armed conflict
are re-used in other conflicts.

Punitive measures will not suffice, however, if we
wish to put an end to conflict. We must promote an
environment in which combatants and those who
benefit from the commercial exploitation of conflicts
find incentives to demobilize and put an end to their
illicit activities. A regional approach must therefore be
adopted to any measures proposed for disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement. When
basic economic needs are not met, political progress is
insufficient to halt the resurgence of violence.

Mexico is convinced that the protection of
civilians in armed conflict will require ongoing training
for security forces in the field of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, including
in times of peace. That is why my delegation, working
together with the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, is organizing a regional seminar
on basic protection for civilians in Latin America and
the Caribbean, to take place in February. Thus, my
delegation is supporting the adoption of measures
aimed at strengthening the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

Finally, we have taken note of the 10
recommendations to operationalize the road map, and
we hope that they will be translated into reality.

