Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Ijoin others in thanking
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his briefing.

We welcome the efforts of the United Nations,
its system and the International Committee of the
Red Cross to render immediate life-saving services,
conduct hundreds of medical evacuations and send
convoys to the besieged and hard-to-reach areas,
especially eastern Ghouta, despite the potential danger
to the lives of their personnel. We therefore urge the
members of the Security Council to assist the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in
operationalizing those emergency programmes and
to ensure the protection of medical and humanitarian
workers. Likewise, we also urge the parties to support
United Nations structures in fulfilling their mandates.

We echo the United Nations calls to all parties
to facilitate unconditional, unimpeded and sustained
access to all people in need throughout the country and
to take the necessary measures to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure, including schools and medical
facilities, as required by international law and human
rights standards.

Kazakhstan considers that it is equally important
to further promote the Syrian settlement and believes
that the Astana process has great potential for guiding
intra-Syrian talks towards long-term peace. In that
context, we propose that all sides, including stakeholders,
provide all-round assistance, making use of the positive
developments to improve the humanitarian situation on
the ground.

Astana continues to support resolution 2254 (2015),
as it always has, and repeatedly calls on the International
Syria Support Group and other countries to help the
conflicting parties to implement the measures stipulated
in the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and the
Vienna statements.

We express concern over the existing difficulties
in Syria, which seriously impede the implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018), and we call on the international
community to influence the conflicting parties to
cooperate with the United Nations. The only way
to truly resolve the crisis is through negotiations,
predicated on mutual trust and understanding, together
with confidence-building measures.

In practical terms, we are convinced that expelling
terrorist groups from eastern Ghouta may calm the
situation in that sector. Let us be frank: removing the
Al-Nusra Front and other affiliated terrorist groups from
the area, as stated in a letter from three parties, must be
pursued in order to end hostilities. The implementation
of resolution 2401 (2018) is a collective responsibility,
with each Council member playing a significant role.

Finally, Kazakhstan supports solutions in Syria
on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communique, as well as the agreements on the
de-escalation zones reached during the Astana process.

