Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We commend
your delegation, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate and for placing the issue of accountability at the
core of your concept paper (S/2013/75, annex). Indeed,
the Council is increasingly called to task in that area.
Much emphasis in this discussion has been placed on
the Council's competence to refer situations to the
International Criminal Court (ICC). We appreciate the
recent discussions about how to improve the Council's
referral practice, including in the area of financing and
exemption clauses. The Council is taking an important
step in the right direction today by committing to
follow-up action in the case of referrals.

As illustrated in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2012/376), however, the Council's role in promoting
accountability and eliminating impunity for the most
serious crimes under international law goes far beyond
ICC referrals, which will always remain the exception.
Promoting accountability implies in particular that the
Council must neither mandate nor endorse amnesties
or one-sided exemptions from criminal jurisdiction,
which may seem expeditious in the short term but are
ultimately often detrimental to both peace and justice,
as the developments in Yemen have shown.

The Council should also put greater emphasis on
accountability at the national level, including through
capacity-building, in accordance with the principle of
primary domestic competence in that respect. While
accountability at the domestic level must be the goal,
international components can play a key role, and there
is much room for new ideas, including mixed and hybrid
models that give assistance to States. The International
Commission against Impunity in Guatemala is an
example of that. It illustrates that the Council, while
certainly a crucial actor in that respect, is not the only
one. We support an ongoing dialogue to further develop
the relationship between the Council and the ICC and
hope that the Council will soon be able to accept the
invitation from the Dutch Government to visit the legal
institutions in The Hague.

The situation in Syria poses a very serious
challenge to the protection of civilians agenda and the
credibility of the Security Council. Serious violations
of human rights, amounting to crimes against humanity
and large-scale war crimes, continue to be committed,
as documented by the independent international
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.
Liechtenstein has therefore joined 57 other States of all
regions to call on the Council to refer the situation in
Syria to the International Criminal Court. We repeat
that call today, which was supported earlier by both
the Secretary-General and the High Commissioner
for Human Rights. In addition, we believe that it
is crucial to discuss accountability issues with the
Syrian national coalition, primarily in order to
demand that those who have taken up arms to fight the
current regime fully respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law, but also to encourage
any future Government to submit the situation in
Syria to the jurisdiction of the ICC, in accordance
with article 12, paragraph 3, of the Rome Statute. That
would demonstrate the opposition's commitment to
accountability and to the protection of civilians and,
over time, would end impunity for those crimes in
Syria.

In any armed conflict, the warring parties must
assess the impact of their combat operations on the
civilian population. Keeping track of all civilian
harm in a centralized database and analysing it to
improve tactical directives, the establishment of rules
of engagement and the training of troops can help to
minimize civilian harm and ensure compliance with
international law. We welcome the establishment
of a tracking system initiated by the International
Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, which, when
combined with tactical directives focused on civilian
protection, has reduced Civilian casualty rates. Using
such data, warring parties can acknowledge civilian
harm and offer amends to those who have suffered
losses in the appropriate form.

The use of explosive weapons in populated areas
and the existence of remnants of explosive ordnance
pose a deadly threat to civilians. To minimize civilian
harm, parties to a conflict and States supplying arms
should track weapons and stockpiles and secure them
after conflicts have ended in order to limit their
transfer to other conflicts. We call on the international
community to assist States in post-conflict situations,
such as Libya, to effectively secure stockpiles, clear
ordnance, institute risk education and establish victims'
assistance programmes.

