Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): I congratulate you,
Madam President, and the delegation of Argentina, on
your leadership of the Security Council this month. I
thank you for organizing and presiding over this high-
level debate on this important topic. I also thank the
Secretary-General and the representatives of the African
Union (AU), the European Union, the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States, the League of
Arab States and the Union of South American Nations
for their insightful briefings.

This debate is taking place at a time when the
international community is facing and grappling with
a number of serious peace and security challenges,
including violent conflicts, terrorism, transnational
organized crime, drug trafficking and the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons. While we recognize
that the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security is vested in the
Security Council, the emphasis should be on quick
and strong action through collective efforts. It is also
important for the Security Council to continuously
evaluate and reflect on whether its diagnoses of conflict
situations and the solutions prescribed are correct and
not defective.

My delegation would like to underscore the
importance of strengthening strategic partnerships
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations on issues related to the maintenance of
peace and security, human rights and development.
We would like to commend in that regard the Security
Council's continuous prioritization of its engagement
with regional and subregional organizations to exchange
views on practical ways to strengthen that partnership.
The United Nations therefore should optimize the
contribution made by such organizations, which have
the advantage of proximity and the capability to
mobilize and respond quickly.

We are convinced that fostering strategic
partnerships will bolster the effectiveness of the United
Nations and of regional and subregional organizations,
with immense benefits for the nationals of the Member
States. I would like to focus on three fundamental
elements that we consider crucial to the success of that
cooperation.

First, it is essential for the United Nations and its
partners to provide effective, predictable and timely
support to regional and subregional organizations
in conflict prevention and resolution, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development. These organizations
have played a pivotal role in addressing peace
and security challenges. For instance, the African
Union and subregional organizations such as the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the East African Community, the Southern
African Development Community and the Economic
Community of West African States have undertaken a
number of successful peace and security initiatives on
the continent. They have contributed in terms of troops,
logistics, political leadership and finances, according
to the capacity of their member States.

However, in many cases regional and subregional
organizations lack the requisite resources and capacity
to do so, as the experiences of the African Union
Mission in Somalia and the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali have shown. We would like
to stress that when the African Union or any other
regional or subregional organization undertakes
peacekeeping or peace-enforcement initiatives, they
shoulder the responsibility of the Security Council
and should therefore be adequately supported. The
critical issue of financing AU peacekeeping missions
authorized by the Security Council - which remains
unresolved almost five years since the AU-United
Nations panel formerly led by Mr. Romano Prodi made
an unequivocal recommendation to consider the use of
assessed contributions on a case-by-case basis - should
be finalized.

Secondly, it is important to strengthen further
cooperation between and among regional and
subregional organizations. The AU-European Union
Partnership on Peace and Security in support of the
African Peace Facility, as a case in point, has been
instrumental in enhancing the AU peace support
operations, capacity-building and early-response
mechanisms.

We call for regular interaction, coordination
and consultation between the United Nations
Secretariat and the secretariats and Commissions of
regional and subregional organizations on matters of
common interest. That will enable them to augment
complementarities and avoid duplication of efforts. We
further call for transparency. The Council should strive
to be more even-handed and transparent in its approach
and decisions so as to dispel the perception that on
some issues under its consideration, vested interests
override fairness.

Thirdly, and in conclusion, the Security Council
should take an interest in issues of human security,
including social and economic development. There is
a great need to stress the linkage between peace and
security, and economic development. We are convinced
that supporting developmental projects will ably
consolidate the peace and security efforts realized so
far by the regional and subregional organizations.

