Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Thank you very
much, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting. We
thank the Secretary-General for his latest report
(S/2009/504) on the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), and we are also grateful to
Mr. Atul Khare, the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, for his briefing today. We also
welcome the personal presence and participation here
of Mr. Guterres, the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-
Leste.

South Africa is pleased with the progress made by
Timor-Leste since the 2006 crisis. Both the people and
the political leadership of Timor-Leste have risen to
overcome those events, and have ultimately made
many strides towards restoring normalcy and bringing
sustainable peace and stability to their country. We
particularly applaud the personal efforts and leadership
of President Ramos-Horta. South Africa welcomes the
positive developments in Timor-Leste as reflected in
the current report of the Secretary-General, which
include progress in security, dialogue and
reconciliation, as well as in amicably resolving the
issues of the petitioners and internally displaced
persons. My delegation supports continued efforts to
foster dialogue and national reconciliation at both the
national and the local levels among various
stakeholders in Timor-Leste.

We congratulate the Government and people of
Timor-Leste on their celebration of the important
milestone of the tenth anniversary of the popular
referendum, as noted in paragraph 3 of the report. My
delegation is also encouraged that most of the
country's critical challenges, such as the issue of the
petitioners and internally displaced persons, have been
resolved in an amicable manner, and we welcome the
efforts made by the Government of Timor-Leste to
address the outstanding challenges.
South Africa underlines the continued importance
of a holistic and comprehensive approach to the review
and reform of the security sector in Timor-Leste under
the full national ownership of the country. We
encourage the Government of Timor-Leste to continue
to intensify and enhance its efforts towards developing
a national security policy. My delegation also reiterates
its backing for the protection and promotion of
democratic governance, human rights and justice in
Timor-Leste. We support the increased efforts to
strengthen the country's security and justice institutions.
In this context, we note with appreciation the gradual
resumption of primary policing responsibilities in some
districts by the national police.

We believe that the significant strides made thus
far in Timor-Leste now require that its people, in
partnership with the international community, must
focus on the economic development of the country.
Peace must be anchored in development. We therefore
support the measures taken by the Timorese Government
to further improve basic education and health and to
enhance rural development. The bilateral and
multilateral partners should align their support and
programmes with the Government's development
strategies and priorities.

We continue to reiterate our view that the
international community must make a long-term
commitment to assist the Government of Timor-Leste
to achieve sustainable peace and prosperity. It is also
crucial that bilateral and multilateral partners continue
to assist the country to develop and strengthen its
institutions and further build capacities in various
sectors, in line with the country's prosperities. For their
part, the leadership of Timor-Leste should continue to
seize the opportunity to work with all segments of
society in building national unity, reconciliation,
promotion of human rights, justice and peace.

I wish to conclude by paying tribute to
Mr. Atul Khare for his excellent service in UNMIT
and, above all, for his dedication to the people of
Timor-Leste. We wish to commend the invaluable work
of UNMIT under his leadership.

South Africa, working with other partners, is
ready to join the international community to assist the
people of Timor-Leste in their effort to consolidate the
progress made so far. We are convinced that Timor-
Leste can succeed only to the extent to which the
international community provides political support and
much-needed resources for development.

