Mr. Lucas (Angola): I would like to join
previous speakers in expressing our gratitude to
Ambassador Mihnea Motoc, Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), for his first report on the activities of, and
results achieved by, the Committee since its inception.

By adopting resolution 1540 (2004), the Security
Council decidedly addressed the critical aspect of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the
risk that terrorists and other non-State actors may
acquire, develop, traffic in or use nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons and their means of delivery. My
country fully shares those goals, based on the
universally affirmed assumption that the efforts to
fulfil the objective of denying weapons of mass
destruction to terrorists must be matched by
strengthening the existing international regimes aimed
at disarmament and the non-proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons.

We have taken note of the report on the work of
the 1540 Committee. The adoption of guidelines for
the conduct of the Committee's work and the provision
of guidance to Member States in the preparation of
national reports were significant steps forward,
enabling the Committee to start to carry out its tasks.
Furthermore, the report states that by recruiting experts
in accordance with the relevant provisions of resolution
1540 (2004) and the guidelines adopted by the
Committee, the Committee is now equipped to enter
the substantial stage of its work. We hope that the
principle of equitable geographical representation will
be strictly enforced in the recruitment of other experts
in the necessary areas of expertise of the work of the
Committee.

Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) calls
upon all States to present to the Committee national
reports on the steps they have taken, or intend to take,
to implement the resolution. The prompt response by
many Member States, translated into the submission of
more than 80 reports to the Committee, demonstrates
the concern for and importance attached to
international cooperation to address the threat of
weapons of mass destruction falling into the hands of
terrorists and other non-State actors. The very large
number of States that did not present their reports
demonstrates the difficulties that many States
encounter in complying with the provisions of the
resolution. As mentioned in the report submitted to the
Committee, Angola has taken a number of legislative
and administrative measures to comply with the
binding legal obligations of the treaties to which it is
party and with other commitments in the context of
preventing the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons.

In conclusion, we acknowledge that only
international cooperation can provide the foundation
upon which countries can strengthen their capacities to
implement the goals set out in resolution 1540 (2004).
We would like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
commitment to the full implementation of the
resolution as well as to the work of the Committee,
which we consider of great importance in addressing
such dangerous, real and present threats to
international peace and security.

