The President: Before I turn to non-members of
the Council, let me just say a word in my national
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

Sweden will make some general points on policy,
to which we subscribe, when its representative speaks
for the European Union.

I just want to make one point on law and order,
which we fully subscribe to as a full priority of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) - and rightly so. I note Mr.
Guehenno's comment that the number of international
judges and prosecutors needs to be doubled. The
United Kingdom is very ready to try to contribute to
that. But we need a direct formal request, please, and
we will act on that. The Secretariat also needs to look
at the funding aspects of this as soon as possible. We
would be grateful for some guidance on that.

Everybody has focused on the elections, and we
do too. But I will not speak in detail. There is
obviously a political risk that if you have an election
campaign, the wider questions of the future status of
Kosovo are going to be opened up. That, of course, is
not a reason for not having elections. We have got to
move through the stages of bringing Kosovo back to
normal political life, and we have to take those risks.
But all of us will be watching very closely to see to it
that Security Council resolutions are fulfilled and
implemented and that the community leaders
understand the limits under which they are working,
that any changes for the future have got to be agreed,
obviously, by the whole community of those who are
closely involved.

Finally, we are very pleased that the Special
Representative has visited Belgrade and that he has had
good discussions with President Kostunica and others.
Foreign Minister Cook was there the day before the
Special Representative; he also had very constructive
discussions with the leaders in Belgrade. I think the
tone is beginning to change, and that brings us to the
hope that both sides of this question are beginning to
understand the need for ethnic reconciliation. I hope
that can be taken forward under the new leadership in
Belgrade.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

Turning to non-members of the Council to speak
now, I give the floor to the representative of
Yugoslavia.

