Mr. Christian (Ghana): My delegation thanks
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ahmedou Ould Abdallah for his update, as well as for
his efforts towards resolving the Somali crisis.

Ghana is concerned that the continuing political
stalemate characterized by differences within the
Transitional Federal Institutions and divisions between
the Government and opposition forces, coupled with
the escalation of the insurgency in Somalia, has
delayed the adoption of a road map for the
implementation of crucial benchmarks in the
Transitional Federal Charter.

My delegation calls on the parties in Somalia,
both Government and opposition, to respect the
outcome of the National Reconciliation Congress held
in Mogadishu and to endeavour to work together in
good faith to implement its outcomes, including the
urgent need to disarm, complete the constitutional
process, and conduct free and fair elections by the end
of the five-year transitional period. To that end, we call
on the opposition parties that boycotted the
reconciliation Congress to come on board. The
Transitional Federal Government should equally reach
out to the opposition for the sake of the unity and
peace of the people of Somalia and their country's
territorial integrity.

In keeping with the understanding reached at the
conference of key international donors held in
Stockholm in September 2007, Ghana would wish to
stress the desirability of adopting a coordinated and
harmonized approach to providing support and
assistance in addressing the volatile political and
security crisis and the attendant socio-economic
conditions and humanitarian catastrophe in Somalia.

We condemn the attacks on the Ugandan
contingents of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and commend them for their sacrifices. My
delegation reiterates its appeal to the international
community to support AMISOM. with the necessary
financial and logistical resources to facilitate the

deployment of pledged contingents. We share the
observation of the Secretary-General that a
strengthened AMISOM. will expedite the withdrawal of
foreign forces. Nonetheless, the Security Council and
the Secretariat should continue to accord priority
attention to the question of developing a contingency
plan for the deployment of a robust United Nations
peacekeeping force to replace AMISOM, given the
scale and magnitude of the security challenges
confronting Somalia now.

We commend the humanitarian work of the
United Nations and other international humanitarian
agencies, intergovernmental and non-governmental
alike, for their valuable services in helping the
displaced and other victims of the dire humanitarian
crisis in Somalia. We urge all parties to facilitate
access through humanitarian corridors and to respect
the rules of international humanitarian law.

We condemn the catalogue of human rights
abuses and urge the Transitional Federal Government
openly to condemn such abuses to demonstrate its
commitment to the rule of law. Finally, we welcome
the re-establishment of the Monitoring Group, which
helps to check violations of the arms embargo, and
urge all States to continue to cooperate with the Group
towards the attainment of its desired objectives.

