Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
The French delegation voted in favour of the resolution just
adopted by the Council. I wish to point out that France
welcomed the steps taken by the authors of the draft from
the time it was first submitted to the Council. Indeed, this
draft reiterated a number of concerns that had been
previously expressed, in particular by the European Union
in its statement of 19 August last.

France has been expressing these concerns directly to
Major Buyoya since 25 July, emphasizing certain points:
first of all, that a dialogue should be organized very quickly
that would bring together all the political forces, bar none,
in order to negotiate an institutional and democratic
consensus; and, secondly, that political votes of confidence
should be given very rapidly to all the political elements in
the country, that commitments to respect human rights
must be made, and that the major State bodies and
institutions must be gradually but very concretely opened
up to all ethnic groups. Only a political solution can settle
the crisis in Burundi, because any explosion of violence
would almost inevitably lead to external intervention.

In the immediate future, the Army's behaviour must
be beyond reproach, and security guarantees must be
given to the former leaders, deputies and members of
FRODEBU. As all the problems affecting the region
require a comprehensive settlement, it is important and
urgent that a conference be held under the auspices of the
United Nations, and in cooperation with the Organization
of African Unity (OAU), that would deal in a lasting
manner with the crises in the Great Lakes region.

The recent resumption of dialogue between Major
Buyoya and former President Nyerere is an initial
encouraging response to the requests made by the
international community. This first step must be followed
by other concrete measures, which are set out in the
resolution the Council has just adopted, in particular, the
prompt opening of negotiations between all the parties,
without exception. That is why the French delegation
approved of the idea that the Council should reconsider
this item within 60 days, and if this last requirement is
not met, that it could consider the implementation of
binding measures. It seems important to us that such
measures, if we must resort to them, be defined in such
a way as not to increase the suffering of the population,
but, rather, to help stem Violence and punish those
responsible for such Violence.

Regarding measures taken by the countries in the
region at the Arusha meeting on 31 July, my delegation
wishes to reiterate the grave concern it has already
expressed - concern shared by our partners in the
European Union and by many international humanitarian
organizations - over their humanitarian impact,
especially on the most disadvantaged sectors of the
population. This question should be carefully considered
on an urgent basis. It is essential, in particular, to allow
international and non-governmental organizations to
continue their work in favour of these sectors.

