Mr. Tillander: Let me first express my appreciation
to the presidency of the Security Council for its
invitation to me to give the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) perspectives on key peacebuilding challenges
facing Liberia.

I will focus my remarks today, on justice and
security, national reconciliation, and land tenure and
natural resources, and I will also discuss mobilization
of support and resources and the need to accelerate
capacity-building in view of the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL) transition.

The PBC country configuration for Liberia - with
its approximately 40 Member States - offers support
based on the statement of mutual commitments, and
in close collaboration with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and UNMIL. As we are now
in the process of finalizing the third review of the
statement, we can conclude that while some progress has
been made on building capacity in justice and security,
and while some aspects of national reconciliation
have moved forward, many commitments still remain
unfulfilled.

If Liberia is to implement its own plans and stated
policy goals, there is a need for sustained Government
attention and focus on key peacebuilding challenges.
While the international community can certainly play
an important supportive role, there is no substitute for
Liberian ownership, political will and leadership. The
good offices of the United Nations and partners can
support continued Liberian attention to peacebuilding
priorities through dialogue and the marshaling of
support and resources.

One area ofparticular concern isjustice and the rule
of law. Progress here has been very slow, as is evident
not only in police training, but also in the slow pace
of reform of the judiciary, corrections and other areas.
As the UNMIL drawdown continues, it is necessary
for Liberian institutions to increase their capacity to
provide satisfactory standards of justice, security and
other related services across the country. What can then
be done to accelerate progress?

One example was offered during my most recent
visit as the Minister of Finance, in connection with the
discussion on the statement of mutual commitments,
initiated a series of meetings with all involved, aimed
at ensuring that police training will get the decisions,
commitments and budget necessary to move ahead.
This high-level coordinated engagement needs to
continue, and implementation must follow. Sustained
attention is necessary. If that happens, police training
may improve. There is no reason why that should not
be possible, but the experience of the past 18 months
has not been encouraging in this regard. Hopefully, we

should now see a change.

The sustainability ofprogress is a concern, as is the
need to ensure a balanced strengthening of the entire
rule-of-law chain. As I observed during my recent visit
to Liberia, relations between the State and citizens are
fragile and the sense ofmutual trust is weak. To improve
public trust, political andjudicial services must focus on
quality as well as quantity, and ensure stronger public
oversight. A comprehensive and coordinated approach
is necessary, effectively linking short-term measures to
long-term development plans. UNMIL and the United
Nations country team should continue to work hand
in hand and increase their integration. For the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), no other
task is more important than this, and its contribution
must be effective, efficient and timely. That is especially
true in view of the UNMIL drawdown and the need to
coordinate a comprehensive and integrated approach to
rule of law.

The regional justice and security hubs aim to
facilitate decentralization and better access to justice
for all levels of society in every region of the country.
The first hub in Gbarnga is now providing services to
the three counties. Its impact can be felt to varying
degrees throughout the counties concerned and is
being assessed and evaluated to guide future efforts. In
particular, the quicker deployment of police officers to
emergency situations in the hub counties has prevented
conflicts from escalating. One major challenge has
been public outreach to inform people in all three hub
counties about the services that the hub is offering.
Unfortunately, as surveys have shown, the hub is known
mostly to people living in the Gbarnga region.

Based on lessons learned from the first hub,
including the public outreach component, services are
beginning to be delivered from the second and third
hubs, but this time the focus has been on services rather
than infrastructure for quicker roll-out. These are
positive developments, in the right direction, although
they are not fast enough, especially in view of the
UNMIL drawdown.

Several bilateral partners are already involved in
justice and security. Some, including the European
Union, are in the process of stepping up support and
considering substantial levels and with long-term
commitment. If this is to be possible and have the
intended effects, Government commitment must
be strong and evident through sufficient budget
allocations, commitment to reform, and political will.
Bilateral donors would be more eager to engage when
linked to clear Government leadership and strategy.

On national reconciliation, and as stated by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Landgren,
the Government of Liberia launched the Palava
Hut programme, the national history project and
the national symbols project. Discussion on South-
South cooperation may lead to inspiring exchanges of
experiences from other countries, but in most of those
areas implementation remains very slow. The Liberian
Government must ensure that the institutions responsible
for the different areas have the determination, mandate
and resources necessary, and that implementation is
accelerated within the coordinated framework of the
road map for reconciliation. There is a need for action
to deal with the past, truth-telling, atonement and
reconciliation, to ensure women's participation, and
to follow up the recommendations of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission. The Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF) has provided considerable support already, and
it is encouraging that the Government has stated that
it will commit additional resources to implementation.
That will be absolutely essential. There is also a need
for a costed and coordinated implementation plan.
The PBC is prepared to support Government-led
efforts to marshal support and resources for national
reconciliation.

Land and natural resources are essential to
peacebuilding efforts. If managed correctly, they may
contribute to peace consolidation and sustainable
economic growth. During my last visit, I had the
opportunity to see some of the progress made in land-
dispute resolution, supported by the United Nations
Human Settlements Programme, the World Bank and
the United States. The land law and the establishment of
a land agency could become important tools for further
progress in dealing with conflicting claims to land by
communities, concessions and individuals. This is also
one of the issues raised in the letter I received from
the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1521 (2003), and one of several issues I raised
with the President and Ministers during my recent visit.
Government representatives acknowledged that more
is needed to deal with the challenges and to ensure a
sustainable management of land and natural resources.
The World Bank and UNDP are now stepping up efforts
and support in this area, including with support from
the PBF and the encouragement of the PBC.

In line with its stated intention to fight corruption,
the Government of Liberia has recently taken actions
to take perpetrators to court. This is welcome, but
more needs to be done to ensure that corruption does
not go unpunished. Oversight mechanisms need to
be strengthened across all public institutions. The
judiciary needs to be strengthened, and the Liberia
Anti-Corruption Commission should be given the means
and tools to ensure accountability, in complementarity
with the criminal justice system.

Civil society plays an important role in channeling
the views of groups, individuals and local communities,
thereby supporting a free flow of information that will
help decision-makers in the private and public sectors
to better understand the nature of the challenges and
to promote mechanisms that will help resolve disputes,
or maybe even deal with them before they appear. It
is important to secure the political space from which
these organizations operate.

Nowhere is this more obvious than on gender issues,
where women can play a key role in promoting peace
and reconciliation with strong and sustained support
from Ministers concerned, UN Women and UNMIL.
With the PBF increasing its allocation for gender-
related activities in Liberia above the 15-per cent
target set by the Secretary-General, the Government
and partners have every reason to step up their efforts
to ensure that women can play the necessary role in
building sustainable peace in Liberia.

The Liberian agenda for transformation, together
with the Government's commitment to elaborating
a new deal compact, should provide a continued and
strengthened focus on all five State-building and
peacebuilding goals, including those covered by the
statement of mutual commitments. The PBC should
contribute to this effort and ensure that its work
supports national ownership and is aligned with such
jointly elaborated mechanisms.

