Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Guehenno and Ambassadors Braun and
Nishimura for their briefings. And I thank the German
presidency for this excellent initiative. The role of
Germany and Japan, as lead nations for police and for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, is very
notable. Security and the strengthening of the central
authority remain two of the main challenges that
Afghanistan must face. This morning, the Council
heard about the progress that has been made in those
areas. But it also heard about all that remains to be
done to ensure security throughout the territory.

Before asking a few questions, I would just like
to recall that in the efforts that the international
community must continue to make on security-sector
reform in Afghanistan, France, together with the
United States, is making a special effort in the area of
training the unified Afghan army. In 2002, France
trained two battalions. A third battalion is now being
trained. By the end of 2003, 7,000 soldiers will have
undergone basic training. My country will also begin
special training for officers. We will thus train 270
officers in the course of this year. As we pursue our
work, we plan to train Afghan officers in our military
colleges.

I have one question for Mr. Guehenno. He told us
that President Karzai is currently preparing a decree on
the reform of the police and the border police in line
with the 1 December decree establishing the Afghan
national army. That is indeed an essential issue. Could
we have some information about the general features of
that decree and about what possible difficulties might
be encountered in the course of implementing that
decree? What will be the concrete steps to implement
that decree? That is a question for Mr. Braun, as well.

Ambassador Nishimura told us that the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
must begin in those areas where it is most likely to be
successful in order to get some momentum under way.
I would like to ask Ambassador Nishimura whether he
could tell the Council in which areas there is the
greatest hope for generating such momentum.

Finally, I wish to say that next month we will be
preparing a draft resolution to renew and to improve
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). The draft resolution will be
a further opportunity for the Security Council to devote
its attention to the question of security in Afghanistan,
on which - as was said repeatedly this morning - the
success of Afghan reconstruction in future years will
depend.

