Monsignor Kassas (Holy See) (spoke in Arabic):
The Holy See thanks the Spanish presidency for
organizing this important debate.
The involvement of non-State actors in wars and
conflicts has increased lately and had a horrendous
effect on civilian populations, most especially women,
children, the elderly and the disabled. Non-State
actors use weapons of mass destruction (WMD) with
impunity and in total lawlessness, showing little or no
regard for civilian immunity, proportionality or the
distinction between combatants and non-combatants.
The staggering number of refugees and forced
migrants worldwide bears witness today to the
devastation wrought by WMDs and frightfully potent
conventional weapons.

My delegation reiterates the Holy See's consistent
and firm opposition to the production and use of
weapons of mass destruction. Any act or weapon
that aims indiscriminately to destroy entire cities
or extensive areas, together with their inhabitants,
is contrary to all international humanitarian law and
all civilizational ideals, and merits unequivocal,
unqualified and unhesitating condemnation.

The Holy See notes with grave concern that
technological advances in the destructive power of
weapons systems produce ever more frightening
catastrophes for innocent civilian populations. Just a
little more than a week ago, Pope Francis observed:

"We say the words 'No more war!', but at the same
time we manufacture weapons and sell them to
those who are fighting".

This gifting and selling of arms take place at
different levels. Some States supply arms to client
States even in the knowledge that they will be used
to perpetrate mass atrocities, suppress fundamental
human rights and turn back the development of entire
peoples and nations. Transactions are often carried
out through international crime syndicates, which,
as Pope Francis stated last week, is "an easy way to
grow rich, but the price is very steep: blood". Fighting
and defeating the illegal and criminal arms trade is
fundamental to preventing non-State actors from
possessing and using weapons of mass destruction
and thus to prevent the atrocities they would commit
with those weapons. Strengthening relevant laws and
conventions at the multilateral, bilateral and national
levels is a necessary step in the right direction.

Business as usual with regard to policies concerning
weapons of mass destruction and all weapons systems
must be replaced with a new global ethic. Profits,
geopolitical advantage at any cost and the logic of fear
and mistrust must be replaced by addressing the wider
security, political, economic and cultural dynamics that
lead State and non-State actors alike to seek security,
legitimacy and power in the production of weapons,
rather than in expending their resources to promote
socioeconomic development, diplomacy, political
participation and respect for fundamental human rights.

The Holy See has repeatedly called on weapons-
producing nations to severely limit and control the
manufacture and sale of weapons and ammunition to
unstable countries and regions of the world where the
likelihood of their illegal use, or their falling into the
hands of non-State actors, is a real and present danger.
The proliferation of weapons, regardless of whether
they are weapons of mass destruction or merely
conventional, simply aggravates situations of conflict
and results in unimaginable human suffering and
material costs, profoundly undermining development
and the search for lasting peace.

Non-proliferation, arms control and disarmament
underpin global security, respect for human rights
and sustainable development. Without such principles,
the achievements of the much vaunted 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development would be in serious
jeopardy. Without them, catastrophes that could have
been prevented will continue to occur. Without greater
international and regional cooperation, in particular,
among weapons manufacturing States, to control and
limit the movement of weapons of mass destruction, it
is simply an illusion to speak ofa global strategy to stop
the proliferation of such weapons.

