Mr. Kolby (Norway): According to one estimate, 5.5
million people have died in war during the 1990s. Many
more have had their lives ruined. The vast majority of these
conflicts occur in the developing world, where many
countries also have taken on a heavy burden by accepting
refugees from conflicts in neighbouring nations, often
without receiving due credit for their efforts. Norway has
no doubt that the international community needs to pay far
more attention and direct far more resources to resolving
the many conflicts hampering development, creating
human suffering and burdening the response capacity of
developing nations, not least in Africa.

We are convinced that preventing conflicts clearly
contributes to lasting and sustainable development, just as
poverty alleviation and social progress may reduce the
risk of war and conflicts. It goes without saying that the
United Nations and the Security Council have a pivotal
role to play in this regard.

I would therefore like to express Norway's
appreciation, Mr. President, for your timely initiative and
for the opportunity to participate in this important debate
on the role of the Security Council in the prevention of
armed conflicts. Norway welcomes the measure of
transparency and openness involved in allowing non-
Council members to present their views and to inspire
fresh ideas in open thematic debates like this one. We
encourage the Council to further expand the practice of
meeting in open formats rather than behind closed doors.

There can be no doubt about Norway's commitment
to upholding the primary role and responsibility of the
Security Council in the maintenance and promotion of
international peace and security. The Security Council,
acting on behalf of the universal membership of the
United Nations, has been given the pre-eminent position
and obligation to take effective and collective measures
for the prevention and removal of threats to peace, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter.

Early consideration and preventive action by the
Security Council in disputes or potential conflict
situations should thus remain the primary instrument of
the international community's conflict prevention efforts
as we enter a new century. The higher the readiness of
the Council for preventive action, the more likely it is that
disputes can be settled peacefully, in accordance with
Article 33 of the Charter.

 

The role of the Secretary-General is vital in this
regard. The Secretary-General, being provided the
possibility, in Article 99 of the Charter, to bring to the
attention of the Council any matter which in his opinion
may threaten the maintenance of international peace and
security, has a crucial early warning function in crisis
situations. Norway shares the view that the preventive
capacity of the Secretary-General should be strengthened
further, including through the allocation of human and
financial resources. To assist in this regard, Norway has
contributed to the Trust Fund for Preventive Action, with
a total of $4 million since 1996. In addition, in the same
period, Norway has also contributed some $4 million to
other trust funds and activities of the United Nations
Secretariat related to conflict prevention worldwide.

Preventive diplomacy and peacemaking are highly
cost-effective activities for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The financing of this activity should no
longer be dependent on exchange rate gains, vacancy rate
management and trust funds. Norway therefore welcomes
the inclusion in the Programme Budget for 2000 and 2001
of funds for special political missions, which Norway
considers to be of great importance.
Preventive deployment and preventive disarmament are
other strategies that have proved successful in later years.
Norway participated from the beginning with peacekeeping
troops in the United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP) in Macedonia, the first preventive United
Nations deployment mission ever. Norway supports efforts
to combat the illicit proliferation of small arms and the
various initiatives to curtail this lethal trade that are
currently being pursued within the United Nations and
elsewhere.

Norway believes in continued efforts to counter the
culture of impunity for serious violations of humanitarian
law. The International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia represent important new building
blocks in international jurisprudence with regard to the
prosecution of the most serious international crimes. The
experience obtained is also a stepping stone towards the
establishment of the International Criminal Court, in
accordance with the Rome Statute. Norway urges all States
to ratify the Rome Statute in order to ensure early
establishment of the Court. The existence of a permanent,
global institution of this kind will significantly enhance
deterrence against the most heinous international crimes.

As current Chairman-in-office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, Norway has worked to
develop further cooperation with the United Nations.
Close and cooperative relations between the United
Nations and regional organizations in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter is of paramount importance
to successful conflict prevention internationally.

Norway has a long tradition of assisting efforts at
development and poverty alleviation in developing
countries, both bilaterally and through the United Nations.
Furthermore, we are actively involved in efforts to
provide humanitarian relief and assistance in solidarity
with the victims of natural disasters, wars, and other
violent conflicts. And we have been engaged in various
peace and reconciliation processes in conflict areas around
the world.

Increasingly, we have realized the need for an
integrated approach to our peace and development efforts.
Conflict prevention, humanitarian aid and development
assistance must go hand in hand. We must deal with the
root causes of conflict, not just the symptoms. Effective
crisis management and long-term conflict prevention must
include assistance in promoting lasting and sustainable
development, combating poverty and relieving poor
countries of their unsustainable debt burden, as well as
efforts to promote democratic and economic reforms,
good governance and human rights.
Norway has adopted a national strategy combining
humanitarian assistance, including demining, with conflict
prevention, peace and reconciliation, and development.
We will be proactive in the further development of
coordinated efforts. We must involve bilateral donors,
multilateral organizations like the United Nations and its
agencies, regional organizations, and national
Governments in constructive partnerships.

Unless we can devise approaches to prevent conflicts
and foster reconciliation, our development efforts will be
undermined or even reversed. Building a culture of
prevention is not easy. But the approach taken by the
Secretary-General, notably in his report on Africa, is
without doubt a most constructive way forward. Poverty,
underdevelopment and violent conflicts are closely linked.
We cannot address one without addressing the
System Name: W:\WP51DOC\FINAL\9986581E
System Filetype: WP5.1
Document Name: 9986581e
Document Type:

Creation Date: 11-30-99 08:12p
Revision Date: 11-30-99 11:22p
 

Author: ed (F)

Typist:

Subject: SfPV.4072 (Resumption 1)
Account: 28 pp.

Keywords:

Abstract:
C:\WP51\WP)WP[DS.000581EH-'
