Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): I would like to
warmly welcome Mr. Kouchner and thank him for his
very informative briefing.

Almost a year has passed since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1244 (1999), whereby it
decided to set up the international civil and security
presences in Kosovo for an initial period of 12 months
with the View to bringing peace and stability,
democracy and prosperity to the province, as well as to
the whole region. Although that resolution did not
bring about a final solution to the Kosovo problem, it
laid down the framework for the transition process of
finding that solution by launching a unique peace
operation that is unprecedented in the history of the
United Nations.

Over the past period, the United Nations Interim
Administrative Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
international security force (KFOR) have done a lot in
pursuit of their mandates. As outlined in paragraph 3 of
the Secretary-General's report (S/2000/538), "Kosovo
today is definitely a better place than the international
community found it 12 short months ago". As a
member of the recent Security Council mission to
Kosovo, I had ample opportunity to witness the
significant progress achieved by KFOR and UNMIK in
bringing normalcy to life in the province. Therefore, as
we have stated on previous occasions, the courage and
dedication of UNMIK and KFOR personnel, as well as
their efforts, should be fully appreciated.

At the same time, while recognizing the
undeniable progress achieved by UNMIK and KFOR in
tackling the challenges of Kosovo, we should also
openly admit a number of setbacks in efforts to avoid
the most gloomy scenarios for the future of the
province and the entire Balkans and to ensure the full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). Bearing this
in mind, I think that we should not engage in another
exchange of political declarations, interpreting in
various ways the state of affairs in Kosovo, which, I
must admit, continues to be of great concern to my
country too.

To be able to provide clear guidelines for
UNMIK, to define a mid- and a long-term strategy for
it, I believe, we need to focus on concrete steps to
contribute to the real improvement of the situation on
the ground, which is to be considered in a time
perspective. To address this issue it is essential to
answer some crucial questions. Specifically: Are we
satisfied with the results of the one-year presence of
UNMIK and KFOR in Kosovo? What can be done in
the immediate future to improve the situation? And
what is the ultimate goal in the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999)?

In our view, the current situation in Kosovo
should be looked at, first and foremost, from the
standpoint of accomplishing the main responsibilities
of the international security and civil presences, that is,
to promote the atmosphere of safety and security, to
create a climate of law and order, to enable all refugees
and internally displaced persons to return freely to their
homes and to protect their individual rights.

In this regard, we feel that the considerable
progress made in establishing joint interim
administration structures, in providing humanitarian
assistance, promoting the sectoral economic
development and democratization and in undertaking
preparations for civil registration and municipal
elections seems to be much less impressive when seen
against the current precarious security situation in the
province.

The prevailing atmosphere of ethnically related
violence and the crime rate, daily intimidations,
assaults and threats against non-Albanians, especially
Kosovo Serbs, jeopardize all efforts of the international
community, be it participation of minority communities
in municipal structures, be it their participation in the
civil registration and municipal election process, be it
the establishment of the judicial system and the rule of
law. Undoubtedly, proper security of national
minorities and effective protection of their basic human
rights are the prerequisites for further progress in the
long-term process of settling the Kosovo problem.

In this context, we were deeply alarmed by the
recent upsurge of violence against Kosovo Serbs over
the past month. The most worrisome is the assessment
by the Secretary-General, in paragraph 21 of his report
(S/2000/538), that these attacks "appear to be
orchestrated and have had an unsettling effect on
Kosovo Serbs' confidence". The vivid proof of this
assessment is the decision by the Serb National
Council of Gracanica to absent themselves from
meetings of the Interim Administrative Council (IAC)
and the Kosovo Transitional Council (KTC) for one
week, as well as to send a delegation to the United
Nations Security Council to seek additional appropriate
guarantees to ensure security and human rights of
Kosovo Serbs. We believe that the Council should heed
and react adequately to this desperate call on the part
of the most cooperative representatives of the Kosovo
Serbs.

In this regard, welcoming all the security
measures undertaken so far by KFOR and the UNMIK
police with the purpose to enhance the long-term
security of minority communities, we call upon them to
make full use of their broad mandates to stop the
current wave of ongoing terror against national
minorities. A strategy of stabilization similar to that
utilized in Mitrovica, such as the creation of a
"confidence area", should be implemented everywhere
throughout the province, especially in the small areas
of Serb enclaves. It is necessary to prevent the feasible
perspective of an ethnical division of the province
along the Ibar River. In this respect, we also strongly
believe that KFOR and UNMIK activities should be
carried out absolutely impartially. At the same time,
ensuring safety and security of the international
civilian and military personnel should remain a priority
for the KFOR and UNMIK leadership, as well as for
the population of Kosovo.

In this context, we also assess positively the
recent measures by Mr. Kouchner to stop the media's
practice of publicly identifying and charging Serb
residents as war criminals, as well as the recent
regulation on appointment and removal of international
judges and persecutors throughout the entire province.
Mindful of the urgent need to enhance the
security situation in the province, my Government
intends to send to Kosovo its 115-strong specialized
police unit next month. I would also like to confirm the
preparation for deployment in July of the joint Polish-
Ukrainian peacekeeping battalion earmarked for the
KFOR operation.

In implementing resolution 1244 (1999), we also
deem it crucial to ensure the safe return to Kosovo of
the over 200,000 non-Albanians who currently remain
in Serbia, Montenegro and in neighbouring countries.
We hope that the recently established Joint Committee
on Returns will play a constructive role in this matter.
It is also self-evident that abstention from participation
of Kosovo Serbs in the civil registration and municipal
elections might raise a lot of unnecessary questions
about their results and challenge the political
credibility of the United Nations.

Now, Mr. President, allow me again to touch
upon another key issue of the Kosovo problem relating
to the mid- and long-term strategy of UNMIK and
KFOR; that is, a clear definition of substantial
autonomy and meaningful self-administration of
Kosovo in terms of resolution 1244 (1999). By the
way, this issue was raised several times before by Mr.
Kouchner himself.

In our View, as long as the Security Council shies
away from settling this core issue or dampens it in its
fine rhetoric, there will always be a threat that the
efforts of UNMIK and KFOR will be
counterproductive. If we do not address this issue
directly, we will be keeping UNMIK and KFOR in the
dark, turning them into some kind of fire brigade
fighting a forest fire during a drought. Furthermore, we
will be creating groundless illusions, both among the
local population of Kosovo and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia authorities. Do we need this ambiguity?

As far as my country is concerned, our only
understanding of the relevant provisions of resolution
1244 (1999) and its annexes is that the people of
Kosovo can enjoy a substantial autonomy within the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, whose sovereignty and
territorial integrity should be fully respected. We
believe that all further actions by UNMIK and KFOR
should be undertaken in full conformity with these
principles and be assessed from the common positions
of the Security Council members.

In this respect, we would prefer the issue of
substantial autonomy for Kosovo to be addressed and
decided sooner or later in the framework of the
Council, which should never play the role of an
involved observer. It is the Security Council that
shoulders the primary responsibility for the future of
Kosovo.

One more aspect of resolution 1244 (1999) which
is awaiting fulfilment is the promotion of a political
process designed to determine Kosovo's future status.
However unrealistic this idea might seem today, we
cannot avoid the prospect of an agreement being
reached on Kosovo's final status between the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the Kosovo Albanians through direct or proximity talks
under international auspices.

In our View, it is the only foreseeable way to
settle the issue in a civilized manner. Other scenarios
might undermine the fragile atmosphere of peace in the
whole region, as well as the role of the Security
Council itself.

Finally, we have to admit that over the past year
the presence of UNMIK and KFOR in Kosovo has
remained critical and should be continued. While
recognizing that there is no need today to adopt a new
resolution on Kosovo, we emphasize the importance of
implementing resolution 1244 (1999) in full, having
agreed on certain aspects, at the conceptual and
practical levels, of the United Nations strategies in
Kosovo.

In conclusion, I wish every success to Mr.
Kouchner and his able team and to UNMIK and KFOR
personnel in carrying out their extremely difficult tasks
in pursuit of our common responsibility to establish a
lasting multi-ethnic peace, stability and civic order in
Kosovo.

