Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive, but again very worrying
and alarming, update.

Like many around this table, we share a sense of
urgency, especially following the adoption of resolution
2401 (2018). We also see how difficult it is to implement
resolution 2401 (2018) on the ground. Small steps,
such as sending an aid convoy to eastern Ghouta last
Monday, are still mere drops in the ocean of people's
needs. Even with a unanimously adopted resolution, we
are still lacking any substantial change on the ground
and the fighting is far from being over. We therefore
call for the implementation of resolution 2401 (2018).

We understand that the solution is not entirely in our
hands, but still we should try to do our utmost to find
possible ways to ensure that the life-saving aid convoys
might reach those in need and medical evacuations
might begin. Unfortunately, the situation in eastern
Ghouta, but also in Idlib and Aleppo provinces, does not
allow the suffering of ordinary Syrians to be alleviated.

Let me once again stress our full support for the
Secretary-General, as well as his Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura, in finding a political solution to the Syrian
crisis. A political solution to the conflict remains the
only viable way to end the suffering of Syrian people.

Let me also underline that the role of the Security
Council remains crucial, but it is up to the Syrian people
to decide their own future.

We agree that fighting against terrorist groups
designated as such by the Security Council is crucial,
but, at the same time, such designations cannotjustify the
attacks on innocent civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including health facilities. Those attacks must stop and
parties to the conflict must strictly comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law. In
that context, let me once again strongly underline that
any response to violence should be proportionate.

We need full compliance with the ceasefire agreed
in resolution 2401 (2018). The Russian proposal for a
daily five-hour pause is simply not enough to allow
humanitarian workers to deliver aid and to evacuate
those who cannot be treated on the ground. The
international community, and especially the Council,
bear a huge responsibility to protect civilians. Allow me
to share a couple of concrete ideas, which I hope will be
useful, on how to improve the situation on the ground.
As the Security Council, we should demand
United Nations access in order to monitor designated
de-escalation zones to ensure the well-being of
civilians. All States Members of the United Nations
should fully cooperate with the International, Impartial
and Independent Mechanism set up last year and
facilitate its work. Parties engaged in the conflict
must cease enabling the crimes on the ground and
withhold all their support to armed groups that target
civilians. Parties conducting air strikes against terrorist
groups must ensure that all necessary precautionary
measures are taken into consideration in order to avoid
civilian casualties and that all military operations
are fully consistent with international law. All
potential violations, including possible war crimes,
must be investigated, and the perpetrators must be
held accountable.

In conclusion, let me underline that, from our
perspective, we in New York sometimes lack feedback
on our actions. With regard to actions taken at
Headquarters, it is for the Syrian people themselves
to tell us what would be the most effective way to
support them.

