Mr. Arbeiter (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank China for organizing today's open
debate on strengthening peacekeeping operations
in Africa.

On behalf of Canada, I also express my sincere
condolences to the families of the Malawian and
Tanzanian Blue Helmets and Congolese soldiers
recently killed in an operation of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) against the Allied
Democratic Forces in the Beni area.

The Council has often been called on to address
complex and enduring conflicts in Africa, including in
Somalia, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mali and South Sudan. These
conflicts continue to cause enormous loss of life,
population displacement and economic hardship.
Another reality, however, is sometimes forgotten.
African States play a leading role in international
efforts to manage and resolve conflicts and crises, and
we particularly have in mind United Nations successes
in countries such as Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia. It
is important to emphasize the determination and
perseverance of the African Union (AU), its member
States and African subregional organizations, which
have resulted in so many lessons learned and so much
strategic patience and cooperation. Needless to say,
the partnerships that have been established attest to
what we can achieve together. The strengthening of
peacekeeping operations in Africa is not merely a
question of resources, resolve or means but rather of our
ability to join forces in order to innovate and maximize
our impact. Enabling African States to act collectively
through the United Nations, the African Union and
other African regional organizations is a practical step.

That is why Canada supports the full implementation
of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. In
addition to the annual joint consultative meeting on
peace and security between the African Union Peace
and Security Council and the Security Council, we
believe firmly that there are other opportunities to
strengthen cooperation and collaboration between
the two Councils, including through joint field visits.
Together we can accomplish more. We therefore
encourage efforts to find more predictable, flexible and
sustainable funding mechanisms for African-led peace
operations. In that regard, we commend AU member
States for the leadership that they have shown in
mobilizing African-sourced funding under the auspices
of the African Union Peace Fund. We also look forward
to the Security Council's forthcoming discussion and
debate on the subject and hope to see concrete progress
on developing such mechanisms.

(spoke in English)

If we are to get results, all Member States have to
pull their weight. That is why Canada has committed new
resources to United Nations peacekeeping, including
the provision of a helicopter task force to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). The task force has been
used during essential medical evacuations of injured
peacekeepers and civilians doing critical work in very
dangerous and isolated environments. We have also
deployed police to MINUSMA, leveraging the long
experience of Canadian police in United Nations peace
operations. Those contributions build on our long-
standing and ongoing engagements in Africa, including
in MONUSCO and the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, and we are working with the United Nations
to provide additional critical enablers, including the
deployment of a tactical airlift detachment to the
Regional Service Centre in Uganda in 2019 to provide
critical logistical support to missions across Africa.

Recognizing the vast experience of African
troop- and police-contributing countries, we are
building new partnerships and sharing our experiences
and capabilities, and also learning from those of
others. For example, we are partnering with Ghana
and Zambia under the Elsie Initiative on Women in
Peace Operations. Together we will test innovative
approaches for reducing barriers to uniformed women's
meaningful participation in United Nations peace
operations. In that regard, we would like to congratulate
Superintendent Phyllis Osei of Ghana, who yesterday
received the United Nations Female Police Officer of
the Year Award for her work in Somalia.

We have partnered with Senegal and Ghana to
deliver the United Nations senior mission leaders
course. We have partnered with the Ecole de maintien
de la paix Alioune Blondin Beye in Bamako to deliver
essential training to peacekeepers. We have partnered
with UNICEF and the Romeo Dallaire Child Soldiers
Initiative to strengthen mission capacities to end the
use of child soldiers in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Somalia and the Sudan, including working
in collaboration with the African Union Mission in
Somalia and the African Union. We have partnered with
Mali to support the implementation of the Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and related
stabilization efforts. Ahead of the next United Nations
ministerial meeting on peacekeeping, we are partnering
with Ethiopia to organize a preparatory meeting on
women, peace and security and peacekeeping on
28 and 29 January 2019. Together with our co-host,
we welcome the participation of all Member States in
that important exercise. We believe that those kinds of
partnerships enable each of us to put our strengths and
experiences forward in order to build a safer and more
peaceful world.

Partnership, working in concert with multilateral
institutions and in defence of our rules-based
international order, is at the heart of Canada's approach
to international peace and security. It is the approach
that we take to peacekeeping in Africa and one that
we hope to bring to the Security Council should we
be elected to a non-permanent seat for the term from
2021 to 2022. Together we can develop a more secure,
inclusive and prosperous world.

