Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank Equatorial Guinea
for the excellent work it carried out as President of the
Security Council for the month of February. I also wish
to congratulate France on assuming the presidency for
the month of March and assure you, Mr. President, of
China's full cooperation.

China welcomes the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and Minister for Foreign and European Affairs
of Slovakia, His Excellency Mr. Miroslav Lajcak, and
thanks him for his comprehensive briefing.

At present, the international situation is
undergoing more rapid and profound changes, with
increasing factors causing instability and uncertainty.
Unilateralism and protectionism are on the rise, which
jeopardize international order in the global governance
system. The world needs multilateralism more than
ever. The United Nations is the standard-bearer of
multilateralism, while the Security Council makes up
the core of the international collective security system.

Enhancing international cooperation, with the
United Nations at the centre, is a general trend in
our common aspiration. China supports the United
Nations in deepening its cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, with the
view to jointly maintaining international peace and
security. Such cooperation should resolutely follow the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter,
vigorously facilitate the settlement of regional hotspot
issues through dialogue and consultations, actively
promote preventive diplomacy and diffuse tension
through peaceful means. Such activities by regional and
subregional organizations must be in conformity with
international law and the basic norms of international
relations, in particular respect for national sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.

The OSCE is an important partner of the United
Nations. In recent years, the OSCE has been actively
conducting preventive diplomacy, promoting regional
security and mutual trust and mediating regional
disputes. Since Slovakia assumed the chairmanship,
the OSCE has been giving priority to preventing
and mitigating challenges, thereby providing for a
safer future and enhancing multilateralism. China
commends such efforts. China supports results-oriented
cooperation between the Council and the OSCE in the
areas of peace and security, and hopes that the OSCE
will continue to play an active and constructive role in
safeguarding regional peace, security and stability.

On the question of Ukraine, the parties concerned,
including the OSCE, have made positive efforts
towards a peaceful resolution, which China welcomes.
We hope that the situation in Ukraine will be stabilized
as soon as possible and that the parties concerned will
effectively implement resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Minsk agreements, stick to the general direction of
political settlement and seek a comprehensive solution
through dialogue and consultations.

