Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Like
other African countries members of the Security
Council, I should like at the outset to thank you,
Mr. President, as well as those delegations that kindly
congratulated and conveyed their best wishes to
African countries on the creation yesterday of the
African Union.

I should like also to thank you, Sir, for having
taken the very commendable initiative of organizing
this public meeting. Some would say that this is a
public meeting on the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH). Others would highlight the preservation of
the integrity of the Rome Statute. For Cameroon, this
public meeting is devoted to peace andjustice.

One of the guiding principles of Cameroon's
actions in the context of the international community is
the maintenance of international peace and security.
My country has always been committed to equitable
and negotiated solutions and to any culture that
advocates peace and security while promoting
development.

International peace and security were threatened
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Security Council
decided to dispatch UNMIBH to the region, where it
has done outstanding work. We have repeatedly had
occasion to convey our congratulations to the men and
women participating in that operation. More than once
we have reiterated our support for them.

Today we deem it essential to bring to completion
the tremendous work that has already been done in
Bosnia and Herzegovina - work that is nearing its end
with the upcoming transfer of authority from the
United Nations to the European Union. It is also
essential, we believe, to ensure the maintenance of
conditions that are conducive to a negotiated solution
in Prevlaka. That is why Cameroon echoes the wish
expressed by the Secretary-General and very much
hopes that UNMIBH's mandate will be extended until
31 December 2002. Such an extension would be the
harbinger of a better future not only for the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region of the Balkans,
but also for any other peacekeeping operation in the
world.

Regrettably, the question of extending
UNMIBH's mandate has not commanded a consensus
within the Council. We are therefore having to consider
alternative solutions and to go from technical rollover
to technical rollover.

Can those who act on behalf of the Security
Council, those to whom the mission was entrusted to
restore the shattered peace - can these soldiers of
peace be brought before the International Criminal
Court (ICC)? The answer to this is very clear. Those
soldiers have the crucial duty of giving a human face to
peacekeeping. They are doing this not for the sake of
peace itself but for children, women and men. They do
so in respect for life. These are safeguards enough to
avoid unforeseen mistakes.

In this respect, we welcome the achievements that
have been registered by peacekeeping operations thus
far, and we agree with what the Secretary-General said
in his letter addressed to the United States authorities,
which had expressed concern as to the jurisdiction of
the ICC with regard to Blue Helmets, for whom they
are requesting an exemption from jurisdiction.

It should be recalled that the role of the United
States in the maintenance of international peace and
security is, quite simply, irreplaceable. The United
States material contributions, as well as its human
resource and financial contributions and the sacrifices
made in terms of human lives are sometimes enormous,
and these must be borne in mind if the current and
future work of the United Nations in the area of the
maintenance of international peace and security is to be
viable.

My delegation understands perfectly well that the
United States of America has some questions about the
additional risk of any politicized prosecution of their
personnel in the service of the United Nations by a
Court whose Statute they did not ratify, and
understands also that they are looking at ways and
means of addressing such a risk.

In the evening of 17 July 1998 in Rome,
Cameroon was among the first 11 countries to sign the
Rome Statute of the ICC. Throughout the entire
process of the establishment of the ICC, Cameroon
worked together with other countries to ensure that the
Rome Statute would address three crucial concerns: the
independence and universality of the Court; its
impartiality; and cooperation between the Court and
the Security Council.

The process of ratification of the Statute is now
under way in Cameroon, and the three concerns I have
just mentioned are still relevant.

For about two weeks now, it has been clear that
the United States, which has global responsibilities
throughout the world, has established a very strong
linkage between its contributions to United Nations
peacekeeping operations and a solution to its concerns.

My delegation has already said that it is prepared
to make a contribution to finding a pragmatic,
consensus-based solution to this problem, which is
having a negative effect on the unity of the Security
Council, threatening United Nations peacekeeping
operations and casting a pall over the ICC, whose entry
into force the world welcomed just a few days ago.

We must make every effort to prevent the Court
from being weakened and to make it effective and
efficient. We believe that its contribution to the
maintenance of peace is inestimable, because it
reminds those who exercise power that the point of
their actions is the human being, the right to life and
respect for the integrity of the human person. There
must be no clash between the International Criminal
Court and the Security Council: both are working for
peace.

Many approaches to a solution have been
submitted, generally based on article 16 of the Rome
Statute. In that context, we followed with interest the
statement made earlier by Ambassador Levitte
concerning the range of safeguards that the Rome
Statute could offer in response to the concerns of the
United States delegation. We think that articles 16 and
98, as well as the principle of complementarity, can
constitute the basis for a solution to reconcile the
integrity of the Rome Statute and the keen and
profound concerns of the United States.

This public debate has been indispensable,
because it has provided us with more information to
enrich our ongoing discussion in the Security Council
and in our respective capitals. Wisdom and pragmatism
require that we: devote the necessary attention to the
concerns expressed by the United States delegation;
scrupulously respect the integrity of the Rome Statute
and, beyond that, the international legal system;
safeguard United Nations peacekeeping operations;
and, as is only right, reconcile peace and justice. We
are convinced that if there is real political will on all
sides, we will find a path of consensus.

Cameroon would like to appeal to the United
States, to the other members of the Security Council, to
the great family of the United Nations and to the
international community to work together to preserve
and consolidate the noble ideals of peace, justice and
security, without which our world would have no basis
or reference to enable it to survive.
