Ms. Sohn Sung-Youn (Republic of Korea): I thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing on the recent
developments in the Darfur situation.

The overall situation in Darfur continues to
deteriorate. Since the clashes in Jebel Amir last January,
hostilities involving numerous rebel groups have
increased throughout the Darfur region and beyond.
Serious violations of human rights law, including
violence against civilians, arbitrary detention, torture
and sexual assaults continue to be reported in Darfur.
The alleged involvement of the Sudanese National
Intelligence and Security Services in some of those
cases deserves our attention. In order to achieve stability
in the Darfur region, all such allegations need to be
clarified and violators of human rights and international
humanitarian law must be held accountable.

With regard to the recent judicial activities of the
ICC, we welcome progress in the Banda and Jerbo
case, specifically Trial Chamber IV's decision that
the trial against rebels, Mr. Banda and Mr. Jerbo,
should commence on 5 May 2014 for the attacks on
peacekeeping troops in Haskanita.

Concerning its ongoing investigations, we
appreciate the Office of the Prosecutor's efforts to
investigate allegations of criminal activity, as well
as crimes being committed in Darfur. We remain
concerned about the mounting violence in Darfur and
about reports describing the deliberate targeting of
civilians, sexual and gender-based violence, attacks
on peacekeepers and other crimes. We hope that the
Prosecutor's ongoing investigations can corroborate the
allegations and that any resulting new criminal cases
will renderjustice to the victims of such serious crimes.

On the issue of non-cooperation by the Sudan
and other parties, it is incumbent upon the Sudan to
cooperate fully with the ICC and its investigations,
in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005), which
was adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations. We take full note of the fact that the
Prosecutor has called on the Security Council to ensure
the Sudan's compliance with that resolution. We believe
that the Council should consider what actions it can
take to assist the ICC in that regard. We also note that
the Prosecutor has called upon ICC States parties to
take the necessary actions to promote cooperation on
the arrest of individuals wanted by the Court in relation
to the Darfur situation.

In conclusion, we look forward to a full investigation
of allegations of all serious crimes committed in
Darfur. We encourage the Prosecutor to continue her
investigative efforts. The Korean Government stands
ready to strongly support the ICC and its activities. We
also believe that the Security Council should continue
to closely monitor the Darfur situation, which it has
referred to the ICC.

