The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Jordan.

Jordan welcomes the adoption by the Security
Council ofresolution 2216 (2015), which we put forward
today. It reflects Jordan's ongoing desire for the return
of stability and security to the sisterly country of Yemen

as soon as possible. The irresponsible practices of the
Houthis and their supporters, and the continuation of
their unilateral actions, along with their non-compliance
with Security Council resolutions, have led the Council
to adopt a resolution under Chapter VII, whereby States
are prohibited from arming a group of individuals
involved in acts that pose threats to peace, security or
stability in Yemen.
In a move that reflects the Council's determination
to use the sanctions regime to deter anyone found
involved in acts that threaten peace, security or stability
in Yemen, the Council has imposed today a travel ban
and an assets freeze on Abdulmalik al-Houthi , the
leader of the Houthis, and Ahmed Ali Abdullah Saleh,
In addition to an arms supply embargo against them or
whoever acts on their behalf or at their direction.

Given that the Council stresses the importance of
dialogue and political solution to the Yemeni crisis, the
resolution requests the Secretary-General to intensify
his good offices role in order to enable a resumption
of the political transition process, as set out in the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and Implementation
Mechanism, and the outcomes of the comprehensive
National Dialogue Conference. It urges all Yemeni
parties to attend a conference to be held in Riyadh to
further support the political transition in Yemen, as
called for by the Yemeni President, whose legitimacy
is reiterated today by the Council, which has also
expressed its support for him.

In accordance with resolution 2216 (2015), the
Council is seeking to put an end to violence in Yemen
by creating the conditions to bring about such result, the
most important of which is the Houthis' commitment to
implementing the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including today's resolution, which demands, inter alia,
that they immediately and unconditionally end the use
of violence, withdraw their forces from all areas they
have seized, relinquish all additional weapons seized
from the military and security institutions, and refrain
from any provocations or threats to neighbouring states
of Yemen.

With respect to the humanitarian situation, the
resolution takes into account the guarantee to facilitate
the evacuation by concerned States and international
organizations of their citizens and personnel from
Yemen, ensures the smooth flow of humanitarian aid,
and facilitates evacuation procedures. It notes the
establishment of humanitarian pauses, as appropriate,
and in coordination with the Yemeni Government.

We emphasize that the humanitarian suffering in
Yemen began and reached record levels when the Houthis
failed to comply with Security Council resolutions and
rejected the appeals of the international community and
the League of Arab States. That derailed the political
transition process and exacerbated the humanitarian
and security situation in Yemen.

The adoption by the Council of this resolution
under Chapter VII sends a strong and firm message to
the Houthis, their supporters and any party that tries
to threaten the security and stability of Yemen. It is
a message that all parties should heed carefully and
seriously. The Council affirms its readiness to take
further measures in the event that any Yemeni party
fails to implement this resolution and resolution 2201
(2015).

Finally, the deteriorating political and security
situation in Yemen poses a serious and growing threat to
neighbouring States. The international community and
the Security Council should bear in mind the potential
security and political repercussions on the region as a
whole, and should continue to listen to the concerns of
the Gulf Cooperation Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

