Mr. Kolby (Norway): I welcome the successful
completion of the Loya Jirga. It was a major step
towards fulfilment of the Bonn Agreement and was
thus a step towards establishing long-term stability and
democracy in Afghanistan. On this occasion I would
like to pay tribute to Ambassador Brahimi and his staff
for the very important and remarkable role they are
playing through the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I welcome his assessment
that the peace process is on track. I also note his
additional comment that it is a fragile peace which
must be handled with care.

The recent tragic assassination of Vice-President
Haji Abdul Qadir clearly illustrates the fragility of the
situation. It underscores the urgent need to establish a
national army under civilian leadership and an effective
police force, as well as the need for reform of the
security services. I believe also that quick and tangible
progress on reconstruction, under the direction of the
Afghan Transitional Authority, is essential in order to
strengthen support for the central Government and to
have its presence felt throughout the country. The
provision of a peace dividend to people affected by
more than 23 years of war is an effective tool for
strengthening the political process.

Building a new Afghanistan is primarily the
responsibility of the Afghan people. They must set the
priorities, determine the kind of assistance required and
decide on the pace of reconstruction efforts.

The current humanitarian crisis is a top priority.
Moreover, alleviating the suffering of the civilian
population is also a tool for promoting long-term peace
and stability. In that regard, funding for integration of a
large number of returnees is a crucial and urgent issue.
It can in turn prevent new population movements due
to a lack of food, shelter and basic social services,
movements which could threaten to destabilize entire
regions even further. Afghanistan has, for many years,
been marred by an almost total lack of the rule of law
and basic human rights protections.

We have now reached a historic turning point for
the country and face the prospect of putting human
rights on the agenda in a sound and broad-based
manner. The need for human rights protection on the
ground is imperative. Moreover, there can be no
sustainable peace if impunity for past and current
abuses is allowed to prevail. In order to ensure the rule
of law and full accountability in all fields of public
authority, institution-building must be a key priority at
this stage. The recent establishment by the Afghan
Transitional Authority of the Human Rights
Commission is a welcome initiative in that regard. We
also anticipate the establishment, in the near future, of
a constitutional commission. Norway calls on the
Transitional Authority to give sufficient impetus to the
work of those two bodies. Moreover, the international
community must increase its commitment to assist in
the creation of an Afghan State based on respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms.

The need for participation of women in the
rebuilding and reconstruction process in Afghanistan is
regularly reiterated. However, at this stage it is crucial
to move beyond words and prioritize making women
truly instrumental in all rebuilding processes. Afghan
children have also suffered incalculably as a result of
several decades of war. They have been deprived of
access to health and education, maimed, orphaned,
displaced and abused. If lasting peace is to come to
Afghanistan, the protection and well-being of its
children must be a top political and financial priority
during the recovery and reconstruction phases.

Norway, together with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict has worked on a number of initiatives to
address the plight of the Afghan children. These
include an agenda for Afghan children prepared by the
Office of the Special Representative and the United
Nations Children's Fund. The aim is to organize a
children's conference that will bring together a group
of youths from all ethnic backgrounds and give them
the opportunity to become more active participants and
partners in their country's recovery. It is also our hope
that the conference could lead to the appointment of a
national commissioner or ombudsman for children's
affairs.

Norway chaired an Afghanistan Support Group
meeting on 11 July 2002, where representatives from
the Afghan authority, the donor community, the United
Nations and non-governmental organizations came
together to discuss recent developments in
Afghanistan. Immediate and long-term needs were
highlighted and the appropriate donor response was
discussed. We are pleased to note the donors'
reconfirmation of their support to Afghanistan.
Particularly commendable was the willingness to fund
both humanitarian aid and long-term development
efforts, including budgetary support to the Transitional
Administration of President Karzai. The latter form of
assistance is considered pivotal for the strengthening of
the central Government at the expense of the warlords,
which is indeed one of the key challenges in today's
Afghanistan.

The political road map for the future Afghanistan
has been agreed upon, and the world's attention is still
focused on the country. However the window of
opportunity will not remain open for long. Sustained
support for the Afghan Transitional Administration is
thus of crucial importance, including throughout the
second phase of the Bonn process.

