My delegation wishes to thank the Dominican Republic for convening today's open debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. Notwithstanding the difficulties of convening a physical gathering at this time, we are pleased that we can contribute to this important discussion. I also wish to congratulate the Dominican Republic on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of April. The Government and the people of the Maldives attach great importance to the issue of the Middle East, and in particular the question of Palestine. We once again take this opportunity to reaffirm our resolute solidarity with the people of Palestine. We will continue to do so until a just, lasting and peaceful solution is found to the Palestinian question, in line with international law, the Charter of the United Nations and relevant resolutions. Tomorrow Palestinians will begin the Muslim holy month of Ramadan not only under cruel occupation but with the additional severe challenges caused by the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Seven decades of conflict have brought unimaginable suffering to the people of Palestine, yet the human rights violations and crimes perpetrated by the occupying Power, Israel, amid the ongoing global crisis resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, is exacerbating an already precarious situation. Not surprisingly, as the public-health emergency persists in Palestine, Israel is actively exploiting the crisis to inflict more misery upon the Palestinian people. While Palestinians try to grapple with the health emergency, Israel is continuing with the demolition of Palestinian homes and properties, including water and sanitation infrastructure. Along with these illegal actions, daily military raids and settler attacks on Palestinian civilians are severely undermining Palestinian efforts to combat the pandemic. This is particularly worrisome for the Gaza Strip, where 2 million Palestinians, most of them refugees, have been forced to live under appalling conditions as a result of Israel's 13-year-long blockade and repeated military aggression. The Government of Maldives condemns these deplorable acts of aggression and calls on Israel to lift the blockade that it has imposed on the civilian population in Gaza, cease its appalling attempts to spread fear and panic among Palestinian civilians, including dumping contaminated trash around Palestinian homes, and refrain from undermining Palestinian efforts to contain the COVID-19. The Maldives has always believed that an independent and sovereign State of Palestine, established within the pre-1967 borders, living side by side in peace and harmony with Israel, and with East Jerusalem as its capital, as prescribed in resolution 2334 (2016), is the best and only solution to the conflict. We therefore believe that Israel must be compelled to immediately and completely cease all illegal settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Furthermore, the demolition of Palestinian homes and properties, as well as the forced displacement of Palestinian civilians, should stop immediately. Some 5.6 million displaced Palestinian refugees depend on the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) for much-needed humanitarian and socioeconomic assistance, especially in the areas of education and health care, including essential emergency assistance to help confront the COVID-19 pandemic. Pending a just solution to the Palestinian cause, 75/99 76/99 the Maldives urges sufficient and predictable funding for UNRWA to enable the Agency to continue its work. The Security Council needs to take urgent action to protect civilians and deliver the much-needed basic humanitarian assistance to millions of Palestinians. We urge the Council and the entire United Nations membership to redouble their efforts to end the conflict and bring meaningful and lasting peace to the people of Palestine, as well as to Israel. It is an unfortunate reality that the Middle East continues to be susceptible to enduring conflicts, such as those in Yemen and Syria, with the attendant tragic human suffering. As a result, these areas have become, and continue to be, breeding grounds for terrorism, which is a global menace. Terrorism is a global threat to peace and security, requiring a global solution. The international community needs better coordination, information sharing and cooperative strategies to tackle this threat. As the body responsible for maintaining international peace and security, the Security Council should do more to ensure that its authority and legitimacy are not compromised. The Maldives reaffirms its support for the Council and for the Secretary-General in all current efforts aimed at bringing lasting peace to the Middle East.
