Mrs. Junod (International Committee of the Red Cross): We would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
the other members of the Council for the opportunity to
take part in this important debate.

Taking action to help the victims of conflict has
always involved a degree of risk. What is new and
particularly alarming about the tragedies of recent years
is the ever more violent and volatile environments in
which refugees, displaced persons and other victims of
conflicts find themselves, and in which humanitarian
organizations are expected to operate. It is in these new
environments that humanitarian workers are being
deliberately targeted and killed. As the Secretary-General
points out in his report, it is in this context that the
urgency and importance of addressing today's topic should
be seen.

There are a number of reasons why the security
problem has become more acute over the past few years.
Many of them have already been mentioned by other
speakers. We would like, however, to outline, without
being exhaustive, some factors contributing to the
worsening of the situation.

Economic interests, as well as criminal elements
engaged in drug- and weapons-trafficking, are often
involved. Organized crime and banditry play an important
role in many of today's conflicts. Bandits and many
armed groups covet the often considerable and highly
visible material deployed by humanitarian organizations.
They also know that most of the time these items are not
protected in any way and that no action will likely be
taken if they are stolen. Humanitarian organizations are
simply considered easy targets. The abduction of
expatriates for money is a new and growing dimension of
banditry. The International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) would like to express its solidarity with
organizations that have been so targeted, in particular
those whose staff have been taken hostage or killed.

Another reason is that humanitarian action is being
increasingly politicized. Humanitarian action conceals the
fact that Governments are unwilling to take the risks
involved in addressing the root causes of conflict.
However, humanitarian action can be no substitute for
political settlements.

A further problem is that civilians continue to be the
main target of armed hostilities - indeed, they are
increasingly becoming an integral part of political and
military strategies. As a result, the main challenges today

 

are the protection and upholding of the rights of a civilian
population, rather than merely material assistance, and the
promotion of a new culture of accountability to replace that
of impunity. When the aim of parties to a conflict is to
annihilate an ethnic group or permanently remove it from
a given territory, humanitarian workers can become
embarrassing witnesses, and humanitarian action as such
might be perceived as running counter to the objectives of
warring parties.

Yet another factor is that in certain parts of the world
humanitarian action is associated with "the West" and is
perceived as a vehicle for the spread of "Western values".
This misconception means that international humanitarian
work in such places is accepted only with great reluctance,
if not completely opposed.

Confronted with these new challenges, humanitarian
action needs to adapt, and organizations need to work
together. With this in mind, the ICRC is firmly committed
to pursuing the following practical steps.

First, we must work more through local contacts and
networks. The ICRC has multiplied its efforts to enhance
the acceptance of its work not only by the people it seeks
to assist, but also by the warring parties and local
authorities.

Secondly, we must strengthen the ICRC's ability to
understand today's new conflicts by analysing political,
social and economic aspects, in order to better adapt its
operations.

Thirdly, we need to strive to develop a more coherent
approach to the various authorities in the field.
Humanitarian organizations are finding it more and more
difficult to gain access to the victims. Differences in ethics
and failure to respect certain principles can be hazardous to
the safety of humanitarian personnel. A common approach
by humanitarian organizations is necessary, and the
promotion of the Code of Conduct for the International Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement and Non-Govemmental
Organizations in Disaster Relief should be pursued.

Fourthly, we must seek a more balanced relationship
between humanitarian organizations and the media, whose
growing influence has made public advocacy common
practice. While a degree of publicity is necessary for any
organization, there have been too many exaggerated
attempts to be in the picture at any cost, regardless of the
risks involved.

It should be emphasized that faithful implementation
of the Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols,
as well as of refugee law and the various human rights
instruments, first and foremost aims at increasing respect
for the civilian population, including refugees and the
internally displaced.

In our view, a fundamental condition for any
humanitarian operation involving humanitarian assistance
or protection is the consent of the warring parties. Such
action should never be imposed by force. Rather, it must
be transparent in its objectives and impartial in its
implementation. Discussion and persuasion should be used
to negotiate access for humanitarian action, in full
accordance with the basic principles of neutrality and
impartiality. If one's work is accepted, one faces less risk.

It may be recalled that, during last year's debate on
this topic, the ICRC expressed the opinion that
humanitarian organizations need to preserve the strictly
non-political and impartial character of their work, the
perception of which could be jeopardized by the presence
of armed escorts. While ICRC delegations have hired
armed guards for its premises and staff residences against
criminal acts, it does not intend their use as protection for
humanitarian activities in the field or to have military
personnel or armed escorts in conflict areas. I know that
this is a well-known position, but it is maintained by my
organization. Humanitarian work must be clearly
dissociated from any military operations aimed at
ensuring security and restoring law and order in regions
plagued by violence.

In every situation, clarity regarding the sharing of
tasks between the various actors remains one of the best
guarantees for effective security and, in essence, the
ICRC feels that the following measures should be
respected.

First, humanitarian action must not become the main
instrument of foreign policy. Political entities should
focus on finding political settlement to a conflict.
Secondly, any international military presence, such as a
peacekeeping force, should have a clear and appropriate
mandate and not simply become a supplier of
humanitarian assistance. That can easily lead to confusion
and a distorted perception of humanitarian work. Thirdly,
the primary responsibility for the implementation of
international norms lies with the States. The ICRC and
other agencies, such as the United Nations Children's
Fund, can only assist in this endeavour.

 

Finally, we would like to emphasize once more that
combating impunity is the key factor in the prevention of
future violations.

