Ms. Hjelm-Wallen (Sweden): Eleven years ago I took
part in the General Assembly's special session on Africa.
Joint responsibility for Africa's future was a major theme
of my statement and of the session itself. This theme is still
valid today.

We must be partners for development and also
partners for peace and security. The message is clear,
Africans do not want special treatment, but equal treatment:
access to markets, cooperation with investors, exchange of
experiences and cultural interaction.

Sweden has a long-standing and deep involvement in
Africa. The Swedish Government is now preparing a new
African policy based on partnership. Over the next three
years, in contrast to the international trend, our aid budget
will increase substantially. Its largest part is allocated to
Africa, but aid, among a set of other instruments, should be
used to enable African peoples to become masters of their
own destiny.

An important part of the role of the United Nations in
Africa is to help countries maintain and restore peace and
human security. Conflicts in Africa have for a long time
required much of the attention of the Security Council.
Greater efforts must be directed at preventing armed
conflicts. Conflict prevention should involve long-term
measures to build an environment where disputes between
and within States are resolved peacefully. Sustainable
economic and social development, the eradication of
poverty, good governance, democracy, and respect for
human rights are essential factors.

African Governments share with the rest of the
world the responsibility to abide by international
agreements, including those on matters such as
humanitarian law and the respect for human rights. True
partnership is based on respect for differences, but not on
different sets of standards, in particular as they affect the
essence and purpose of cooperation: to build peace and
prosperity and to defend human dignity.

We welcome the growing African involvement in
conflict prevention, not least through the Mechanism of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU). The OAU and
subregional organizations are increasingly engaged at all
stages of conflict resolution and peacekeeping.

The international community, including the Security
Council, has an obvious responsibility in African crises,
as it has in other parts of the world. Within the United
Nations we should study how the instruments at our
disposal could be used more effectively to prevent and
resolve conflicts in cooperation with regional
organizations. Except in cases of self-defence, only the
Security Council can legally authorize the use of force.

Sweden hopes to see further cooperation between the
United Nations the OAU. We welcome the joint efforts of
the United Nations and the OAU in the Great Lakes
region, in particular the appointment of a Special
Representative, Ambassador Mohamed Sahnoun. We are
also pleased to see contacts between the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
OAU on a new humanitarian framework for the Great
Lakes region.

Madam President, Sweden deeply appreciates your
initiative to organize this ministerial debate on Africa. It
is a manifestation of the need for common action between
Africa and the world at large. This must not remain an
isolated event. We look forward to a wide-ranging
discussion between all Members of the United Nations on
the basis of recommendations made by the Secretary-
General. It should set in motion a process towards
practical and concrete follow-up by the Security Council
and the General Assembly.

 

