Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique): My delegation
would like to join previous speakers in extending to you,
Sir, sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the current month
of August. We are particularly happy to see you presiding
over deliberations on the important agenda item before
this body today. We would also like to extend our
congratulations to your predecessor on the excellent
manner in which he guided the work of the Security
Council during the month of July.

 

When we last addressed the Security Council, we
rejoiced over the formation of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation as a major step towards stability
and the normalization of the situation in Angola, putting an
end to long years of suffering in that sister country.

It is with grave concern and disappointment that we
note today that since the last meeting of the Security
Council no substantive progress has been achieved in the
Angolan peace process, notwithstanding significant steps
already taken. The persistent military tension affecting
almost the entire country has very dangerous implications
for the movement towards stability and the normalization of
life in Angola.

Having read carefully the progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Observer Mission
in Angola (MONUA), we find yet again that the Angolan
peace process is facing setbacks caused by persistent
procrastination by UNITA on the implementation of
important aspects of the Lusaka Protocol. The military
tension is increasing. The normalization of State
administration throughout the country is facing serious
problems because of a lack cooperation on the part of
UNITA. The transformation of UNITA's radio VORGAN
into a non-partisan station has not progressed, despite the
repeated promises by UNITA to find a mutually acceptable
solution. The prevailing tension has resulted in insecurity
and mistrust, which affect the process of reconciliation and
the reconstruction and development of the country.

We appeal to UNITA and to the Government of
Angola to refrain from any action that might lead to
renewed fighting, which could cause more suffering to the
martyr people of Angola.

We appeal to UNITA to fulfil its obligations in the
implementation of important aspects of the Lusaka Protocol,
such as complete demilitarization of UNITA, completion of
the demobilization of the remaining UNITA forces,
cooperation with the Government in the restoration of State
administration throughout the country, transformation of
radio VORGAN into a non-partisan station, and the true
transformation of UNITA into a political party.
My delegation supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to postpone the withdrawal of United
Nation military units from Angola in order to give the
parties an additional chance to complete the peace process,
and we affirm the need to ensure the security of United
Nations and other international personnel. However, this
postponement should not be seen as tolerance by the
international community for acts of procrastination in the
Angolan peace process.

We hope that the Security Council will continue to
exercise its authority and will take all necessary steps to
ensure full compliance with its decisions, including the
provisions of its resolution 1118 (1997) of 30 June 1997
and the presidential statement of 23 July 1997.

My delegation appreciates the efforts undertaken by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
by the representatives of the observer States to put the
Angolan peace process on track. We equally appreciate
the statement issued on 13 August 1997 by the Presidency
of the European Union relating to the peace process in
Angola.

We appeal to the international community to
continue to render support to the people of Angola to help
them overcome the precarious situation they are facing
now. For our part, we remain fully committed, and we
shall continue to render our modest but unflinching
support to our brothers and sisters in Angola.

