Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to underscore
its appreciation to the Permanent Representative of
Ethiopia and his team for their outstanding presidency
of the Security Council last month, and joins the
representative of Uruguay in wishing the French
presidency every success for this month.
Bolivia appreciates the briefing given by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mahamat Saleh
Annadif, and welcomes the presence of Mr. Abdoulaye
Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs, African Integration
and International Cooperation of the Republic of Mali,
We thank France for having convened and organized
this briefing.

Bolivia regrets and condemns the attacks
perpetrated by armed groups against the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) in the Gao region on 24 September.
We convey our condolences to the families of those
attacked and to the Government and the people of
Bangladesh for the loss of three members of the
peacekeeping force. We also express our appreciation
to the personnel of MINUSMA who have stepped up
their work so as to complete the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, while
facilitating political dialogue through mediation, good
offices and cooperation with the Malian Government.
Similarly, we acknowledge the work of the Government
and the President of the Republic of Mali, aimed at
bringing about a definitive ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities by initiating the national plans and taking
national political measure that are fundamental to
achieving peace and stability in Mali.

In that regard, it is important that to analyse the
root causes of the crisis, including the consequences
of intervention and the regime change policies carried
out in Libya in 2011, leading to destabilization and
the ensuing chaos and terrorism that fuelled national
conflicts in the Sahel and Libya.

We express our concern about the lack of material,
technological, logistical and intelligence capacities
suffered by MINUSMA, which impedes it from
effectively being able to effectively and efficiently
carry out its mandate in a very volatile environment
encompassing asymmetrical attacks that jeopardize
the political process, the safety of the members of the
Mission and the civilian population.

According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/811), during the reporting period from June
to September, 44 attacks were carried out by terrorist
and extremist armed groups, of which 21 were against
MINUSMA, 10 targeted French forces, and 13 targeted
the Malian defence and security forces. Those statistics
represent an increase of 102 per cent in the number
of attacks. Moreover, owing to those asymmetrical
attacks, the protection of civilians has deteriorated.
Armed groups continue to carry out violent acts in
the Menaka, Mopti, Gao, Timbuktu and, especially,
Kidal regions where we have also seen a breakdown
in relations among the Coordination des movements
de l'Azawad, the Tuareg and the Platform coalition of
armed groups.

The humanitarian situation is also a source of
concern largely because of the clashes among non- State
armed groups engaged in activities of serious concern,
including forced disappearances, extrajudicial
executions, the recruitment of children and sexual
abuse and violence. Their actions and hold over large
swathes of the territory have led to the increase of
internally displaced persons and refugees, who to date
number more than 3,000. More than 140,000 Malians
have sought refuge across the border in neighbouring
countries. Bolivia calls on all armed groups to lay down
their weapons, join the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process and abide by all the provisions
of the 2015 Agreement.

In conclusion, we urge the international community
to continue its unwavering efforts to bring about peace
and stability Mali once and for all. We believe that
supporting the Mali Government is key to achieving
lasting peace, while firmly respecting the country's
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.

We also welcome the initiative of the French
presidency to organize a visit to the region, which
will allow us to gain first-hand understanding of the
situation in the region.

