Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting and
congratulates Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs; Mr. Mohamed
Khaled Khiari, Assistant Secretary-General for the
Middle East, Asia and the Pacific; and Ms. Agnes
Marcaillou, Director of the United Nations Mine
Action Service, Department of Peace Operations, for
their detailed briefings on recent developments in the
humanitarian situation in Syria.

The escalation of hostilities on 29 April in Idlib
governorate and the Turkish military offensive
launched on 9 October in north-east Syria are real
sources of concern for Cote d'Ivoire in terms of
their humanitarian consequences. According to the
Secretary-General's report (S/2019/820), more than
1,000 civilians have been killed since the escalation of
hostilities in Idlib governorate began, while 400,000
people have been forced to flee to the Turkish border.
Once a place of refuge for thousands of Syrians fleeing
the fighting in their country, the Turkish-Syrian
border has become, since the outbreak of the Turkish
military offensive, a high-risk area that has reignited
the concern of the international community about
the already very worrisome humanitarian situation
in the country. According to estimates by the United
Nations Children's fund, to date nearly 165,000 people,
including 80,000 children, are being affected by the
military escalation in north-east Syria, not to mention
the impact of the clashes on sanitation infrastructure,
including a water treatment station that serves the
drinking-water needs of approximately 400,000 people
in the area of Hasakah.

My delegation resolutely condemns the attacks on
civilian populations and infrastructure and reminds
those leading the offensive that conducting military
operations does not exempt them from their obligations
under international humanitarian law, which include
the protection of civilians and educational and
health infrastructure, as well as the provision of
humanitarian assistance.

Furthermore, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the
unilateral truce decreed by the Russian Federation and
Government forces in Idlib governorate on 31 August.
We also welcome the fact that United States and
Russian mediation efforts led to Turkey's decision to
suspend its offensive against Kurdish forces in north-
east Syria. My country encourages the continuation of
dialogue with both Turkey and Kurdish forces and urges
all actors in the Syrian crisis to take further action
to de-escalate. We also urge all actors to establish a
permanent ceasefire, which is essential to meeting the
humanitarian challenges in the region and increasing
the likelihood of achieving a successful outcome at the
meeting scheduled for 30 October in Geneva with a
view to setting in motion the Constitutional Committee.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the continued provision
of cross-border humanitarian assistance, which has
helped to relieve thousands of people affected by the
conflict and, in turn, reduce the risk of a humanitarian
disaster. In that regard, we would like to remind the
belligerents of the urgent need to ensure safe, prompt,
unhindered and sustainable humanitarian access for
people in distress. In that connection, my delegation
sincerely hopes that the upcoming negotiations among
the members of the Council will lead to the renewal for
a one-year period of the mandate of the United Nations
Monitoring Mechanism, which ensures the provision of
cross-border humanitarian aid and is set to expire on
10 January 2020.

Cote d'Ivoire also notes with regret the low level of
funding for the humanitarian response plan for Syria,
of which, as of the end of September, only 35 per cent
of the needs outlined therein had been provided. We
therefore call on States and organizations that have
committed themselves to supporting Syria and the
region to honour their promises in order to allow for the
continued provision of aid to people.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire once again urges the
international community to maintain its humanitarian
assistance efforts in Syria and reiterates its support
for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in his
efforts to find a peaceful and lasting solution to the
crisis. We hope that the talks scheduled to take place
among the Syrian parties in Geneva on 30 October will
build the broad political perspective that is necessary to
that end so as to bring peace, stability and development
back to the entire region.

