Mr. Oshima (Japan): I join other members in
thanking Mr. De Soto for his comprehensive briefing
and express to him our appreciation for the excellent
work being done on the Middle East. First, regarding
the Palestinian issue, which is at the core of the
problems in the Middle East, we must express our deep
concern over the political deadlock and the ever
deteriorating law and order situation, made further
worse by the recent disputes and clashes between
Hamas and Fatah. The worsening economic and
humanitarian conditions among the large segment of
the Palestinian people, particularly in Gaza, are cause
of serious concern on the part of the international

community. To break out of the current stalemate, we
urge people in Palestine to find ways to overcome their
differences and support a new national unity
government that will be formed at the earliest possible
date in order to restore law and order and improve the
political climate.

Japan strongly expects that the new Palestinian
Government will make it clear to the international
community that it seeks to achieve coexistence and
mutual prosperity with its neighbour Israel. If the
Palestinian Government makes it clear and sends a
strong message that it will pursue peace through
dialogue, then the international community should not
wait to support actively such a policy. We expect that
Israel for its part should support and respond positively
to the efforts of President Abbas aimed at promoting
such a goal. We must express our concern also at the
continuing fighting between Israel and Palestinian
military groups since the abduction of Corporal Gilad
Shalit at the end of June. We call upon the Palestinians
to work towards the safe return of the abducted soldier
and stop attacking Israel.

Japan also renews its call upon Israel to exercise
maximum restraint and release the Palestinian
ministers and parliament members held in custody. We
also express our concern about Israel's move to expand
its settlements.

Nothing is more important for the solution of
problems, especially at this critical moment, than direct
talks between the parties at the highest level. We
strongly expect an early resumption of the long-
delayed direct talks between the leaders of the two
parties, Israel and Palestine.

The rapidly deteriorating humanitarian and
economic situation among Palestinians is a matter of
deep concern. We reiterate our call on the international
community and Israel to continue and augment the
needed assistance. In this regard, we stress that an
early resumption by the Israeli Government of the
transfer of tax and customs revenues to the Palestinian
Authority is of primary importance, as is the full
implementation of the Agreement on Movement and
Access.

On our part, Japan's pledge of $25 million in
additional humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian
people, made in July, is being implemented. The
proposal launched by Japan for creating a corridor for
peace and prosperity to promote regional cooperation
for development, coexistence and mutual prosperity in
the region in the mid- to long-term is being tackled by
officials of the four parties concerned - Israel,
Palestine, Jordan and Japan - with a View to
implementing it at an early date.

On the situation in Lebanon, Japan welcomes that
the cessation of hostilities has generally held under
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), with the
withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces from Lebanese
territory and the steady deployment of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and
Lebanese forces in the south. Here, we commend all
those countries contributing to UNIFIL, including
those from Asia.

On the other hand, serious efforts are needed to
address the issues mentioned in the resolution,
including disarmament of the militias and the
delineation of Lebanon's international borders, with the
continued support of the international community.
Stability in Lebanon is indispensable to achieve
comprehensive peace and stability in the entire Middle
East region. Having this in mind, Japan, for its part,
will consider providing appropriate assistance to
Lebanon's recovery and reconstruction efforts.

We wish also to emphasize the importance of
Syria's role in achieving stability in Lebanon and peace
in the whole region. Japan strongly expects from Syria
positive, constructive engagement in and cooperation
with the efforts by the international community to this
end.

Japan will continue to be engaged, working with
all concerned countries in the region with a view to
defusing the tension, restoring stability and nurturing
the spirit of cooperation in the region.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

At this juncture, I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the consideration of the item, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic took
the seat reserved for him at the side of the
Council Chamber.

I shall now give the floor to the Permanent
Observer of Palestine.

