Mr. Brolo Vila (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to congratulate Belgium on its presidency of the Security Council, and particularly Minister Goffin for convening this open debate, which reminds us that, in any peacebuilding process, transitional justice mechanisms are critical to achieving a firm and lasting peace with a view to reconciling people in conflict. I appear before the Council for the first time, as the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Guatemala, because of the importance that the new Guatemalan Administration attaches to this issue and to the various organs of the United Nations. I take this opportunity to represent the Government of President Alejandro Giammatei Falla, who is determined to provide security and welfare to its citizens and has prioritized human dignity and the common good through the application of justice. One of the strategic pillars of the Government policy plan for the period 2020 to 2024 recognizes the vital role of multilateralism, in particular the role of the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace and security Our Government is making efforts to achieve a true national reconciliation that will allow us to reduce social polarization and build the confidence, governance and legal stability that will attract investment and promote the economic and comprehensive development of society so as to guarantee that the Guatemalan people are never again pitted against one another. Moreover, we believe that it is vital to look ahead, build a future and find spaces for dialogue and negotiation in the search for common objectives that will benefit the entire population. Following the signing of the peace agreements in Guatemala in 1996, the Peace Secretariat was created as an entity that advises and coordinates the implementation of those agreements at the national level. That model institution has contributed to peacebuilding efforts. Guatemala has made efforts to strengthen its justice system. Now, at the beginning of President Giammatei's Administration, the Government will continue to prioritize ensuring access to justice and strengthening the relevant institutions in an effective and responsible manner. Regarding its role and international commitment to peace, the State of Guatemala has historically contributed military personnel to peacekeeping operations as a special component of its foreign policy and currently has Blue Helmets deployed in seven peacekeeping missions. Guatemala reiterates its commitment to the Council to continue sending troops, as such missions are one of the Organization's noble tasks to help those in extremely adverse circumstances.Global challenges, such as the maintenance of peace and security and respect for human rights, must be addressed in this forum, as they require the united political will of the international community. Seventy- five years after the creation of this Organization, we believe in the critical role of the United Nations in resolving conflicts and promoting the rule of law.
