In comparison to our efforts in Yemen, we have made some progress in the Council on South Sudan over the past two years. We have seen the implementation of some of the provisions of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. We have witnessed less violence in the country. The Transitional Government and most of the Governors are in place. Over the past two years, the protection-of-civilian sites have been gradually transformed into camps for internally displaced people. We have made progress and I think we have to recognize that. But, unfortunately, we are also still seeing many deficiencies and negative developments. A number of critical tasks of the peace agreement are still outstanding. The transitional security arrangements have not been implemented. We still do not have unified security forces. We do not have the Transitional National Legislative Assembly. We continue to see violence in several pockets in the country. Key transitional justice institutions have not been established. I would like to pick up on what Special Representative of the Secretary- General David Shearer said and underline how important it is that transitional justice institutions be put in place. They are needed to fight impunity. There continue to be massive human rights violations. There is gender-based violence, and we need to see impunity end. We need accountability. Otherwise we will not see peace and reconciliation in the country. That is a general theme. We discussed the issue yesterday with regard to Yemen. We see it in Syria. Those of us who travelled to Colombia saw how important accountability is to the peace process. With regard to the involvement of women and civil society, the 35 per cent objective has not been met. The humanitarian situation is aggravated by floods. In South Sudan, we have yet another example of the repercussions that climate change has for security. We are alarmed by the fact that a large number of people are facing famine. Humanitarian workers find themselves increasingly at risk. Nine humanitarian workers killed is nine too many. Those responsible for these murders have to be brought to justice. I think it is extremely regrettable that the Ambassador of South Sudan is not at this meeting. We have asked before that he listen to these discussions. I think it is disrespectful to the Security Council. It is also disrespectful to the countries that send their Blue Helmets and police to South Sudan and to those that are big donors of humanitarian aid. I would have asked the Ambassador to ask his Government to finally stop impeding the ability of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to move around the country. UNMISS is doing a fantastic job in bringing peace and security to the country and it is unacceptable that it does not have free access to every area. I would also have liked to ask the Ambassador to convey to the capital that there should be more financial transparency and expedited financial governance reforms in the country. We know that South Sudan has a number of resources. It is not comprehensible that a potentially rich country has a population facing famine. Much more has to be done, and we just heard about the illegal exploitation of resources. That is something UNMISS should look at. We in the Council are in broad agreement. The only major point of difference among us is with regard to sanctions. I just cannot follow the argument that we should lift sanctions and the arms embargo. We heard from David Shearer that we still do not have a unified security force. There is fragmentation in the chain of command. Some units are ready to return to conflict. Lifting the arms embargo in this situation is asking for more conflict and more victims. One argument urged us to lift sanctions because of the coronavirus disease. That is an argument I just cannot follow intellectually. I would propose that everybody desperate to send arms to South Sudan instead increase the delivery of humanitarian goods. There are sanctioned individuals who have committed serious crimes and human rights violations. Do we want to promote impunity and have less accountability by lifting sanctions? No. I think that sanctions are a very important factor in stabilizing the peace process in South Sudan. In conclusion, I want to thank my colleague the Ambassador of Viet Nam for doing the difficult task of chairing the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary- General Mark Lowcock and, last but not least, Special Representative David Shearer. Over the past two years, I have been very impressed by Mr. Shearer's work and I thank him for being so principled. I fully support his proposal regarding the UNMISS review process for adapting the Mission to the changing realities on the ground. I also think that we must continue the job that he is doing and protect civilians in the parts of the country where they still face threats.
