Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we thank Mr. Ivan Simonovic', Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, for his briefing.

Chile reiterates its concern about the human rights
situation in eastern Ukraine, in particular in Donetsk
and Luhansk, described in the report of United Nations
monitoring mission, especially with regard to the
allegations ofabductions, torture, forced disappearances
and other forms of human rights violations and abuses
that have affected civilians in the areas controlled by
armed groups.

What I have just said underscores the need to
establish the rule of law and to respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
General Assembly resolution 68/262 and international
law. In that context, all actions undertaken by the
Government of Ukraine in maintaining public order
in its territory must be carried out with full respect
for human rights and be proportionate to the situation
facing it.

Chile reiterates its strong support for the calls of
Mr. Simonovic' to ensure accountability for all human
rights violations and abuses in Ukraine. We therefore
believe that it is essential that the valuable work carried
out by human rights monitoring mission in that country
be continued.

We would briefly refer to the downing of Flight
MH-17 on 17 July, merely to reiterate that the agreed
ceasefire should be respected by all parties. Resolution
2166 (2014) should be implemented; it demands the
immediate cessation of all military activities, including
those of armed groups, in the areas surrounding the
accident site, in order to ensure the security of the
international investigation team. The Council's clear
message should be heeded by all.

We believe that the human rights violations and
abuses are directly related to the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, about which the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs informed us
last Tuesday (see S/PV.7234). This is the result of the
intensification of fighting on the ground. We would like
to reiterate the call that we made previously to the parties
that they seek a peaceful solution to the crisis through
direct political dialogue, acting with moderation and
without taking any unilateral measures that could
increase tensions, and participating in international
mediation initiatives. We value in particular the role
played by the observer mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.

Here we reiterate once again our gratitude to
Assistant Secretary-General Simonovie for his briefing.

