The President: Members of the Security Council will
recall that the date and agenda for this meeting of the
Security Council were agreed upon by members of the
Council in its prior consultations.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Africa

Invitation to His Excellency Mr. Robert Mugabe,
President of the Republic of Zimbabwe and current
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity

The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, I request the
Chief of Protocol to escort His Excellency Mr. Robert
Mugabe, President of the Republic of Zimbabwe and
current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, to
a seat at the Council table.

Mr. Robert Mugabe, President of the Republic of
Zimbabwe and current Chairman of the Organization
of African Unity, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.

Invitation to Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, Secretary-
General of the Organization of African Unity


The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, I invite His
Excellency Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, Secretary-General of
the Organization of African Unity, to take a seat at the
Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim, Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity, took a seat at the Council table.

Welcome to Foreign Ministers


The President: I am very pleased to acknowledge that
at this meeting of the Security Council all members of the
Council are represented by their Ministers for Foreign
Affairs. I welcome their presence at the Council table.

I should also like to acknowledge and welcome the
presence of other Ministers for Foreign Affairs in the
Council Chamber today. Their presence is an affirmation of
the importance of the subject matter to be addressed at
this meeting.
The spirit of cooperation demonstrated by all those
present here, which has made this meeting possible, is
greatly appreciated by all of us.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is today holding its first
ministerial meeting on Africa. This unprecedented
meeting takes place at a time when there is a new
partnership in global responsibility, one which is shared
by all members of the Security Council and by the
international community as a whole. In recent years the
members of the Security Council have worked together
and have achieved a number of successes in tackling
some of the most complex, critical and challenging issues
facing the international community. Today's meeting is
intended to focus the attention of the international
community on the situation in Africa. This meeting
provides an opportunity to assess the present and to help
lay the foundations for a peaceful and prosperous future
for the African continent. We trust that today's meeting
will spur our common efforts to assist the peoples and
nations of Africa as they build that future.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/ 1997/730, which contains the
text of a letter dated 22 September 1997 from the
Permanent Representative of Argentina to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting a letter of the same date from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, International Trade and
Worship of Argentina addressed to the President of the
Security Council, concerning today's meeting.

It is my privilege to call on the President of the
Republic of Zimbabwe and current Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity, His Excellency Mr. Robert
Mugabe.


