Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): I should like to congratulate Oman on its
presidency of the Security Council, and I should like also
to extend our best wishes to the Russian Federation as it
presides over the Council.

Recently the General Assembly devoted two days of
plenary meetings to a debate on the report of the Security
Council. The list of Member States that participated in the
debate was a long one, and the overwhelming majority
reaffirmed the principle that one of the main aspects of the
overall process of reforming the Security Council was the
need for transparency and democratization in the working
methods and procedures of this organ.

To that end, some measures and initiatives have been
implemented in the last few months. My delegation
acknowledges their relevance.

However, despite those measures, there continue to be
situations and practices within the Council that must be
reviewed and replaced by mechanisms that promote the
transparency and democratization required by the nature and
functions of this United Nations organ.

The informal meetings of the Security Council, the
negotiating forum par excellence at which most of this
body's work is done, continue to be held behind closed
doors, without the participation of the general membership
of the Organization, which can then only learn indirectly of
the results of these meetings, through the voluntary
briefings given by each month's President.
The disparity between the number of formal and
informal meetings is increasing. States that are not members
of the Council continue to be deprived of any possibility of
following those meetings, and documentation and
information on what goes on in them continues to be
handled with great reticence.

Communication between members and non-members
of the Council on decisions relating to peace-keeping
operations is still a matter of particular importance to us.
The increase in the number, diversity and complexity of
those operations and their political and financial
implications require their analysis on both an overall and
case-by-case basis. But such analysis must above all be
transparent, dynamic and timely, and have a practical
impact on how the operations are carried out.

The procedure established by the presidential
statement of 4 November 1994 on arrangements for
holding consultations and for the exchange of information
with troop-contributing countries, while a commendable
initiative, is not enough. The negotiation and analysis of
matters affecting the international community as a whole
require more participatory and institutionalized modalities.

Only timely, transparent and democratic discussions
and decision-making, allowing for the participation of all
Members of the United Nations that are involved or
interested, directly or indirectly, in all or some peace-
keeping operations will enable the Council and the
Organization as a whole to take well-informed, proper
decisions relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security. The present international situation,
which is constantly changing, requires - rather than
traditional formulas - dynamic and transparent
procedures for negotiation and for reaching agreement.

Effective participation by all Member States in
decision-making and adequate information on
developments will show how transparent our procedures
truly are.

No mechanism for information or participation for a
group of States can be a substitute for information or
participation for all Member States, because the Security
Council can only act on behalf of all members when it is
carrying out its functions.

We regard as positive the proposal for the possible
establishment of a subsidiary organ of the Security
Council, which would take up matters relating to
consultations between troop contributors and the Council.
However, it would be even better if the new mechanism
were one with universal participation, through the
presence as observers of Member States that do not
contribute troops but are interested in the issue. In any

 

event, it is very important for this future subsidiary organ
to include all troop contributors at all of its meetings so that
they can analyse all operations, some operations or just one
particular operation. As our delegation sees it, there would
be no point in having a mechanism which would analyse
some peace-keeping operations or one specific one only
with the participation of those who contribute troops to that
or those particular operations.

The Security Council will be able to achieve this as
long as its mandate and its actions take account of the
provisions of the Charter which provide for equal
participation by all Members of this Organization.

It is only when the United Nations has a
representative, democratic and transparent Security Council
that makes proper use of the powers delegated to it by the
Member States that we will have a truly effective
Council - effective not only in the area of international
peace and security but also able to take up the needs and
challenges of the future.

