Mr. van den Berg (Netherlands): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania and
Turkey; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Serbia and Montenegro and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia; and the European Free Trade
Association countries Iceland and Norway, members of
the European Economic Area, align themselves with
this statement.

Terrorism has many faces and guises; the struggle
against terrorism has as many fronts. Almost every day,
we hear about new instances of vicious attacks in
various parts of the world. In that respect, we would
like to express our grief at the loss of life in Jakarta
and Beslan. No matter what the cause, the location or
the scale, the European Union condemns any terrorist
attack, shares its deep compassion with the victims and
remains firmly committed to stay the course in the
combat against terrorism.

Today, the Security Council is discussing the
sanctions against Al Qaeda and the Taliban. The
European Union thanks Ambassador Mufioz for his
informative briefing and for his excellent ongoing
work as Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities.

The European Union welcomes the first report of
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
(S/2004/679). Although the sanctions have been
successful, the report rightly concentrates on ways and
means to improve their implementation in order to
further tighten the net around Al Qaeda.

At the analytical level, the report concisely
describes the changing nature of the threat. The
sanctions were designed to combat a group that was
operating from a central base with a strong core
leadership, in most instances using conventional
weapons. Now Al Qaeda manifests itself through a
network of loosely affiliated groups. It operates more
or less without a central command, making inventive
use of the Internet, combined with unconventional
means of delivery.

The analysis is not new. Over time, the sanctions
have been modified and widened to include groups and
individuals from all over the world. However, the
basics of the sanctions have remained the same, while
the basics of Al Qaeda have changed drastically.
Consequently, the report suggests a more fundamental
refocusing to even better reflect the changed
circumstances. To some extent, these are uncharted
waters for the Council. It will be a great challenge to
design sanctions against an enemy that is so fluid and
intangible in appearance. The looser its organization,
the more difficult it might be to define Al Qaeda and
the threat it poses. However, it is crucial that the
Security Council remain on top of this issue, constantly
refine its ways to deal with the threat in accordance
with international law and provide the world
community with clear direction in this battle.

Again, the European Union commends the
Monitoring Team for raising these issues and stirring
up the debate. We hope the second report will further
build on the analysis presented. As stipulated in
Security Council resolution 1526 (2004), the Team
might want to make concrete recommendations for new
measures.

The report also offers recommendations for the
implementation of the sanctions as they stand today.
Indeed, there remains much work to be done and much
ground to be gained in order to further increase the
impact of the current sanctions. The effectiveness of
the sanctions regime is contingent on the quality of the
Consolidated List of individuals and entities. States are
encouraged to actively contribute to the List, thus
making the sanctions more effective and at the same
time broadening ownership. In addition, we must all do
our utmost to constantly update information on the
individuals and entities already on the List and to
transform the List from a static to a dynamic
document. In that context, the European Union would
also welcome an examination of the current delisting
procedures in the light of the general issue of due
process.

The European Union would like to add its voice
to the appeal to all Member States to comply with other
aspects of the sanctions. The European Union agrees
on the necessity of reports that go beyond mere
description of intentions or regulations and that instead
provide honest assessments of implementation at the
operational level. Respect for the rule of law and
fundamental human rights should at all times be an
integral part of the implementation. Such respect
actually enhances the effectiveness and credibility of
the sanctions.

While the Monitoring Team is in a unique
position to observe States' failure to comply, it lacks
the capacity to provide technical assistance. Both the
Monitoring Team and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities should continue to strengthen
ties with organizations that could facilitate or provide
such assistance. I would mention here the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) and its new Executive
Directorate, but also regional organizations and other
United Nations bodies, including the Terrorism
Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime. The European Union stands ready to
be a constructive partner in this respect. By the same
token, we encourage the intention of the Monitoring
Team to explore potential areas of cooperation with the
Committee established under United Nations Security
Council resolution 1540 on prevention of proliferation
of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.

Finally, the report recommends that the
Committee pursue ways to make the financial measures
more effective. It specifically calls on the Committee
to look at the role of alternative remittance systems,
cash couriers and charitable organizations. The
European Union welcomes these recommendations. In
this regard, I would like to point out that the
Netherlands presidency of the European Union, in
close cooperation with Mr. Gijs de Vries, the European
Union Counter-Terrorism Coordinator, has organized a
seminar on 22 September on this very topic. We will
ensure that the outcome of the seminar will be shared
with both the Security Council's 1267 Committee and
the CTC.

Let me reiterate the wholehearted support of the
European Union to the firm and creative approach of
Ambassador Munoz and the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team. The European Union
stands ready to fully support the unconditional and
unqualified implementation of the sanctions regime.
We also look forward to contributing to the ongoing
debate on refining and refocusing the sanctions to
reflect the changing nature of the threat of Al Qaeda.

