I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this meeting and to thank also the High Representative for her briefing. We welcome the open format of this meeting, which contributes to efforts to keep this topic high on the agenda of the international community. The use of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime has been part of its brutal war against its own people, with devastating humanitarian consequences. Indeed, 21 August marked the seventh anniversary of the horrific Ghouta sarin attack by the Al-Assad regime. In that single incident, the resident pawn in Damascus and his regime killed hundreds of civilians in cold blood. This was yet another appalling crime committed by the regime against humanity, this time with prohibited weapons. The perpetrators of this attack are yet to be held accountable. Emboldened by a growing sense of impunity, the regime continued to resort to chemical weapons repeatedly in the following years. The regime's crimes are well documented by the United Nations-Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Joint Investigative Mechanism. The Mechanism confirmed that the Syrian regime was responsible for using toxic substances in Talmenes, on 21 April 2014; Sarmin, on 16 March 2015; and Qmenas, on 16 March 2015; and that it once again used sarin in Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017. The Al-Assad regime was shielded from being held immediately accountable for its continued use of chemical weapons by the dismantling of the Joint Investigative Mechanism at the end of 2017, and the use of chemical weapons by the regime continued unabated. The OPCW fact-finding mission reported the additional use of toxic chemicals in Ltamenah in March 2017 and in Douma in April 2018. The regime's history of repeatedly using chemical weapons against its own people cannot be disputed. Turkey has strongly condemned the use of chemical weapons by the regime from the very beginning. We remain determined to hold it accountable for the indiscriminate killing of innocent children, women and men with those heinous weapons. We welcomed the establishment of the Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) last year and supported its efforts to identify the perpetrators of the chemical- weapons attacks in Syria. The first report of the IIT issued last April concluded that the Syrian regime's air force was the perpetrator of the three chemical-weapons attacks that took place in Ltamenah on 24, 25 and 30 March 2017. We consider that report as an important step towards ensuring that those responsible for the chemical- weapons attacks in Syria are held accountable for their crimes. At the same time, we look forward to the conclusion of the current investigations carried out by both the fact-finding mission and the IIT on other cases. Now that we have ample evidence of and documentation about the perpetrators of those attacks, it is high time justice was served. To that end, the cooperation between the OPCW Secretariat and the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria is significant and must continue. We also commend the ongoing work of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry, which continues to contribute substantively to investigating the use of chemical weapons in Syria. Turkey reiterates its strong support for the important work of the fact-finding mission and the Declaration Assessment Team. We underscore our full trust in the professionalism and impartiality of the mission and the objectivity of its reports. It would serve no party's interest to question the credibility of the fact-finding mission. While the Al-Assad regime's record of use of chemical weapons is growing, the gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies stemming from the initial declaration of the regime continue. The pandemic should not be used as an excuse for the delay in addressing this pressing problem. We expect the full implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). The regime keeps insulting our intelligence by repeating the illusory statement that it has no chemical-weapon stockpiles. This cannot continue. The regime must be forced to undertake a results-oriented cooperation with the OPCW. The decision adopted during the ninety-fourth session of the OPCW Executive Council is a crucial step forward in addressing the possession and use of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime. At the same time, the decision sets clear and verifiable parameters for action that the regime needs to take. Turkey gladly co-sponsored that decision. The Al-Assad regime and its backers have been indiscriminately killing civilians, including children, for the past nine years. They must and will be held accountable for those crimes. If we fail to act urgently and decisively, there is no guarantee that the regime will not use chemical weapons again. We particularly recall the responsibility of those parties that have influence on the Syrian regime in this regard. The Al-Assad regime's culpability in horrific chemical attacks is undeniable. Turkey will continue to support all the steps taken by the international community, first and foremost the United Nations and the OP WC, for ensuring full accountability in Syria. We echo the call of the Secretary-General. The Security Council must act firmly and in unity. This is the least we can do to ensure justice for the innocent victims of chemical attacks in Syria. As for the delusional remarks of the regime representative, I would like to emphasize that they are nothing but futile efforts to divert the international community's attention from the Syrian regime's well-documented record of the use of chemical weapons. He is not a legitimate representative of the Syrian people and is not worthy of my reply.
