Mrs. May (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Prime Minister Desalegn, for convening this debate
and coordinating resolution 2378 (2017), on an issue
of great importance to the United Kingdom. I am
pleased to see its unanimous adoption. I thank our
briefers - Secretary-General Guterres, His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat and His Excellency Mr. Jose'
Ramos-Horta.

The Secretary-General has made the reform of
the United Nations approach to peace and security
a priority, and rightly so. The Security Council has
a solemn responsibility that we must uphold. The
Secretary-General has called for the United Nations to
become more coordinated in its approach to conflict,
while seeking to prevent outbreaks of violence before
we are forced to send in peacekeepers. I share the
Secretary-General's vision for sustaining peace and
fully support the steps he is taking to deliver it.

For our peacekeepers to succeed, we must have
a clear political strategy for resolving conflicts. For
no matter how bravely our peacekeepers fulfil their
mandate, peace will come about only when we get the
politics of conflict right. I am therefore encouraged that
resolution 2378 (2017) recognizes the vital political
role of the Council and of the Secretary-General's good
offices in resolving conflict.

However, politics do not stop with the peacekeeping
mission on the ground. Just like peacekeepers, the
Council must be willing and capable of discharging its
duty. Too often we are in deadlock and unable to act.
Too often we cannot agree to give a strong message of
condemnation when our resolutions are not implemented
by States. The Council's own performance in responding
to the situation in South Sudan, where there has been
conflict for five out of the six years the country has
existed, has been found wanting. Therefore, just as we
want to monitor the performances of our peacekeeping
missions, we should monitor our own performance too.

The United Kingdom is proud to be a champion
of peacekeeping reform. In September 2016, in
London, we held the United Nations Peacekeeping
Defence Ministerial Meeting, a landmark event with
a communique signed by 64 countries, which set out
a path to better peacekeeping. As we look ahead to
the next such meeting, to be held in Vancouver in two
months' time, we must concentrate on delivering the
vision we agreed upon in London and continue the
progress made since the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations issued its report (see S/2015/446),
two years ago. We want to see better planning of
peacekeeping missions, more pledges of the personnel
and equipment that the United Nations needs, and
stronger performance by peacekeepers on the ground.
I am delighted to see those points reflected in this
resolution, and will cover each of them in turn.

First, with regard to better planning, to plan our
missions effectively, we must be clear-sighted as to
what they are there to achieve so that we know when
we are making progress and when it is time for the
mission to go. That requires the different parts of the
United Nations - peace and security, development
and humanitarian - to work as one to build a shared
understanding of the situation and coordinate our efforts
to resolve it. When the circumstances on the ground
change, we must be agile in reviewing our missions and
adapting them quickly.
Secondly, with regard to more pledges, collectively
we have generated over 80 new pledges of personnel
and capability in the past two years. That is fantastic,
but pledging is only the first step. We must all turn
those pledges into troops on the ground. In early
July, United Kingdom troops officially opened a field
hospital in Bentiu, South Sudan. In doing so, I am
proud that delivered on our pledge to double the number
of British forces deployed in United Nations missions.
That required patient and determined effort, delivered
hand in hand with our colleagues in the United Nations.

Pledges are crucial so that the United Nations can
always deploy troops on basis ofwho is best for the job,
not just who is available for the job. The quicker that we
all turn those pledges from words spoken around a table
into real women and men on the ground, the quicker
we realize that goal. I am glad that this resolution
reinforces that.

Work is also under way to improve strategic
force-generation. As we reform peacekeeping into just
mandates, we need to be sure that we have the right
troops with the right capabilities at hand and ready to
deploy. That is why the United Kingdom and France
will hold a debate on this very issue next month.

I am also pleased that the resolution recognizes
the vital role that women play in peacekeeping, as well
as our commitment to double the number of women
serving in peacekeeping by 2020. At the London
Ministerial Meeting, we reaffirmed that goal and
agreed that 15 per cent of all military observer and staff
officer roles should be filled by women.

Thirdly, with regard to stronger performance,
I salute what United Nations peacekeepers have
achieved in often horribly difficult circumstances,
and I pay tribute to those who have lost their lives. We
ask a lot of them. We must give them every chance to
succeed through high-quality training, functioning
equipment and capable and decisive leadership. But
when those standards are not met, we must also have
accountability. The huge contribution made during
peacekeeping's 70-year history is undermined with
every failure to protect civilians and every instance of
sexual exploitation and abuse. This resolution breaks
ground by calling for the collection ofperformance data
so we can better monitor peacekeeping performance
and evaluate success. Let me be very clear: sexual
exploitation and abuse cannot continue to happen. We
fully support the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse and the
Council's resolution 2272 (2016). That is why I joined
the Secretary-General's circle of leadership and the
United Kingdom signed the Voluntary Compact against
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.

I would like to conclude by recognizing the
importance of the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) in delivering
lasting peace on the African continent. A secure
funding arrangement for African Union-led operations
can help us to achieve that goal. Resolution 2320 (2016)
and the African Union's commitment to fund 25 per
cent of AU peace-support operations provide a basis for
us to work towards part funding on a case by case basis
by the United Nations. I welcome further discussion to
establish the role of the Council in deploying and ending
peace operations and ensuring that we achieve common
performance, conduct and financial management
standards across all United Nations and AU operations.
We must also find a creative solution to ensure funding
for the African Union Mission in Somalia on secure
basis, beyond 2018. All options should be on the table
so that the Council can make an informed decision that
is acceptable to all.

I thank all delegations for the vital contribution their
countries have made to United Nations peacekeeping.
I again thank Ethiopia for organizing this debate, and
our briefers for addressing it. Together we can deliver
better peacekeeping, and this resolution is an important
step in that direction.

