Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for your skilled stewardship of the Security Council
this month and for the efforts to address the crisis being
faced by the Palestinian people, particularly due to the
Israeli military aggression in the Gaza Strip. I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing
and convey our deep gratitude to him for undertaking
an emergency mission to the region in support of the
regional and international efforts to secure an urgent
ceasefire based on the Egyptian initiative and with the
active engagement of President Mahmoud Abbas and
other concerned parties. I also welcome Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg Asselborn, who is with
us today to attend this very important meeting.

Today, we also recognize the efforts on the ground
of United Nations Special Coordinator Robert Serry,
including with regard to the calls for a humanitarian
pause, as well as the valiant efforts of United Nations
agencies on the ground, including the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA), under the leadership
of Commissioner-General Pierre Kreihenbiihl, and
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, under the leadership of Under-Secretary-
General Valerie Amos, as well as other United Nations
agencies and humanitarian organizations, including
the International Committee of the Red Cross, that are
providing Vital emergency assistance to the Palestinian
people at this time of crisis.

Regrettably, in spite of all of those regional and
international efforts, hundreds more Palestinian
civilians have been killed, thousands have been injured
and tens of thousands have been displaced by the Israeli
military aggression in Gaza since we last appeared
before the Security Council last Friday (see S/PV.7220).

Israeli bombardment - including missile airstrikes,

bombs and artillery shelling by air, land and sea in
densely populated civilian areas - has also resulted in
the destruction of more than 1,000 homes and damage
to more than 18,000 others. Fear and panic have gripped
the population, leading to the displacement of more than
100,000 people, who are now sheltering in UNRWA
schools, already double the number of Palestinians who
sought refuge in the Agency's schools in the Israeli war
on Gaza of 2008 to 2009. We urgently appeal for efforts
to address the immense humanitarian needs of the
Palestinian civilians in Gaza, including through donor
support to UNRWA emergency appeals.

With no regard for human life, Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to slaughter entire families. A family
of 26 people in Khan Younis, the Al-Jami family; a
family of 8 people in northern Gaza, the Abu Jarad
family; a family of 10 people in Shujaiya, the Ayyad
family; a family of 7 people in Shujaiya, the Al-Hallaq
family; a family of 6 people in Shujaiya, the Al-Sakafi
family; a family of5 people, also in Shujaiya, the Sleem
family; a family of 4 people in Shujaiya, the Al-Hayyeh
family; and a family of4 people in northern Gaza, the
Al-Zuweidi family, were among the many victims of
Israel's heinous attacks injust the past three days, with
children and women constituting the majority of the
dead.

The casualties are mounting with every passing
minute. In one day alone, Sunday, 20 July, 95 Palestinians
were brutally killed, with at least 72 people, including
17 children, 14 women and 4 elderly persons, massacred
in Shujaiya by the occupying forces, who left the streets
of the area littered with bodies and with many victims
trapped under the rubble of homes, thereby ensuring
a rising death toll. Overwhelmed paramedics there
declared, "There are no injured in Shujaiya, only dead."

It is nearly impossible to keep up with the pace of
killing and injury caused by the occupying Power with all
means ofheavy weaponry against a defenceless civilian
population. For instance, in a period of just two hours
following my letter to the Security Council yesterday,
another 23 Palestinians were killed, their names and
stories not yet included in the vast documentation of
the Israeli war crimes against the Palestinian people,
which we will continue to insist be officially recorded
by the United Nations in our tireless pursuit of justice
for the victims and our nation.

The death toll now stands at more than 600
Palestinians killed and more than 3,500 people injured.
We are haunted by the images of babies, boys, girls,
women and men murdered by the Israeli occupying
forces in their homes, in the streets and in refugee
camps; by the images of the thousands of wounded
people, their lives forever marred; and by the sight of
thousands of Palestinian families again dispossessed
and fleeing for safety from the Israeli assaults in this
endless Nakba against our people.

Let me just show Council members some of the
pictures of the victims. These are from Shujaiya. These
are the human faces of our victims and these are samples
of those who suffer the most and who are killed in the
greatest numbers - the children. We are not numbers.
We are human beings.

When hospital floors are drowning in the blood
of innocents, corridors are filled with the deafening
screams of pain of the wounded and the cries of grief
and anguish for loved ones killed, and doctors, with
barely any supplies and deprived of sleep and sustenance
struggle courageously to save human lives, despite
themselves being targeted for attack by the Israeli war
machine, we know that the international community has
failed - failed in its commitment to protect civilians
in armed conflict, failed to enforce the rule of law and
failed to uphold its promise to humankind.

I am therefore again compelled to at least read the
names of our many innocent children killed by the
Israeli occupying forces in the past days and to honour
their memories. We are wearing black ribbons today
to honour all of our children, women, men and all
Palestinians civilians killed in the genocide by Israel
against our people in the Gaza Strip. Tawfiq Ahmad
Abu Jami, age 5; Haifa Tawfiq Ahmad Abu Jami, age
9; Shahinaz Walid Muhammad Abu Jami, age 1; Rayan
Tayseer Abu Jami, age 8; Rozan Abu Jami, age 14;
Ahmad Ayman Mahrous Siyam, age 17; Mustafa Nabil
Mahrous Siyam, age 12; Ghayda Nabil Mahrous Siyam,
age 8; Dalal Nabil Mahrous Siyam, 8 months; Mayar
Nayif Al-Yaziji, age 2; Anas Al-Yaziji, age 5; Ibrahim
Ammar, age 13; Assem Ammar, age 4; Iman Ammar,
age 9; Saji Hasan Al-Hallaq, age 4; Kinan Al-Hallaq,
age 6; Mohammed Al-Hallaq, age 2; Shadi Isleem, age
15; Alaa Isleem, age 11; Fadi Isleem, age 10; Samia
Al-Sheikh Khalil, age 3; Hiba Khalil, age 13; Khalil
Al-Hayyeh, age 7; Umama Al-Hayyeh, age 9; Dima
Isleem, age 2; Mohamad Ayyad, age 2; Rahaf Abu
Jumaa, age 4; Tala Al-Attawi, age 7; Dina Hamada,
age 15; Omar Hamouda, age 10; Ghada Ayyad, age
9; Marah Al-Jammal, age 11; Marwa Al-Sirsawi, age
3; Ahmad Ismail Abu Musallam, age 10; Wala Abu
Musallam, age 12; Muhammad Abu Musallam, age 15;
Rahaf Khalil Al-Jbour, age 4; Yassin Al-Humaidi, age
4; Mohammad Shadi Natiz, age 15; Mohammed Salim
Natiz, age 4; Siham Mousa Abu Jarad, age 15; Ahlam
Na'im Abu Jarad, age 13; Haniyeh Abdelrahman Abu
Jarad, age 3; Samih Na'im Abu Jarad, 12 months old.

While Council members may be fatigued by our
repeated lists, we must bear witness to the despair of
our people and insist on their dignity. Those Palestinian
children, whose lives have been so cruelly taken by
the occupying Power, are not just figures; they had
names, dreams and mothers, fathers, sisters, brothers,
grandparents and friends, who are grieving their deaths
and devastated by the massive loss of human life for
which there can be no justification and no consolation.
On behalf of the Palestinian people, we ask: What is the
international community doing to stop the bloodletting,
to stop Israel's atrocities? What is the Security Council
doing to uphold its commitment to protect civilians in
armed conflict and uphold the law and the Charter?

Without decisive action, the Council's resolutions
and statements ring hollow as defenceless civilians find
no relief from the murderous Israeli war machine. In
Shujaiya and all of Gaza City, in Khan Younis, Beit
Hanoun, Jabaliya, Nuseirat, Beit Lahiya, Bureij, Rafah,
Deir Al-Balah and everywhere in Gaza, the Palestinian
people are suffering gravely. The ability to cope with
the humanitarian fallout is on the brink of collapse
under the impact of the Israeli aggression and eight-
year blockade. As the obligation to ensure the safety
and well-being of the civilians under its occupation
is gravely breached by Israel, we reiterate our appeal
to the Security Council to uphold its duty to maintain
international peace and security, without conditions,
without exceptions and without delay. Even as efforts in
the region to secure a ceasefire continue, the Security
Council still has a responsibility to act to stop the
slaughter of innocent men, women and children.

Israeli impunity must be halted and the pretexts
for its crimes rejected. The world can no longer deny
that such crimes are being deliberately planned and
carried out to exact maximum loss and punishment
against an occupied people, whether via military
attacks and reprisals, colonization of the land,
imprisonment of thousands, blockade or humiliation
of the people and leadership. That is a fact verified by
the many declarations by Israel's Prime Minister and
other Government officials and by settler leaders and
terror gangs, regarding the price they will make the
Palestinians pay for daring to demand their rights, and
it is a fact repeatedly proven by the violent, racist and
illegal actions of the occupying Power.

Moreover, we reject the cynical Israeli arguments
labelling an entire people as terrorists. Our children,
women and men are not terrorists and no family would
allow their loved ones to be used as human shields. The
reality is that they have been held captive by Israel in an
open prison called Gaza, which remains under Israeli
occupation and control, regardless of the false Israeli
narrative regarding the 2005 redeployment.

We have never once heard the Israeli representative
mention before the Council the word "occupation",
conveniently ignoring the fact that Israel is an occupier
yet somehow claiming the right to defend itself from the
people it is viciously occupying and repressing - an
Israeli-fabricated right certainly not ordained under
international law, as opposed to the legitimate right
to resist foreign occupation and the right to self-
determination.

We reiterate that it is no coincidence that this latest
aggression was launched amid increased international
pressure on Israel in the peace process; international
acceptance of the Palestinian unity Government; the
intensifying world condemnation of the settlements;
settler terror; provocations in East Jerusalem; the
Gaza blockade; the crisis of Palestinian prisoners and
detainees; Israel's destruction of the two-State solution;
and the growing global calls for boycott, divestment
and sanctions against Israel.

The Council must live up to the demands of
the Charter, as well as to the expectations of the
international community, Where the injustices being
endured by the Palestinian people under this depraved
Israeli occupation have again rallied millions of
people - of every race, colour and creed - in the
streets of capitals all over the world demanding an end
to the Israeli aggression, colonization and collective
punishment in occupied Palestine, including East
Jerusalem, and demanding accountability for Israeli
war crimes, including at the International Criminal
Court.

The Council must play its rightful role and
contribute to the urgent efforts to secure a ceasefire.
Moreover, it must exert efforts to ensure that the
ceasefire is sustainable, preventing the recurrence of
such crises and addressing the core issues, including
the need to end the Israeli blockade of Gaza and ensure
the sustained movement of persons and goods, the need
to ensure protection for the Palestinian people, and the
need for a political horizon forward.

Despite all the odds and the immeasurable loss
and grief, the Palestinian people hold firm to their
conviction in the United Nations and to the promises
and commitment to bring an end to their oppression
and achieve justice. We reaffirm that we continue to
strive for a peaceful political solution to this conflict,
to which there is no military solution. We appeal
once again to the international community to lend all
support possible to the long-running efforts to achieve
a just, lasting and peaceful settlement and the long-
overdue realization by the Palestinian people of their
rights and national aspirations, including to freedom
and independence in their State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
In conclusion, I reiterate my call for the adoption of
a resolution by the Security Council condemning this
Israeli aggression against the State of Palestine so as
to stop this aggression immediately, lift the blockade
against the Gaza Strip, and to provide the Palestinian
people with international protection.

