Ms. Batista (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would also like to thank the briefers of
this morning's meeting.

We recognize that the security situation in the
Abyei Area remains generally contained although we
are concerned about sporadic intercommunal tensions
and the presence of armed elements, as well as the
high crime rate. We hope that those negative events
do not diminish the relative calm. To that end, it is
indispensable that the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA) maintain its rapid response
capacity and continue its protection ofcivilian activities.

The meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee should be resumed and the meetings of the
Joint Political and Security Mechanism should continue.
The absence ofthose bodies in the Area affects the lives,
safety and well-being of more than 200,000 vulnerable
people, with increasing humanitarian needs, which are
worsened by the impact of the floods that have affected
the farming areas.
Regarding the reconfiguration of UNISFA, we
see as positive the increase in the police component
and the proposal for the strengthening of political
support, which will help to alleviate the increasing
levels of criminality, the effective management of
intercommunal relations and the general maintenance
of peace in the Area.

In that regard, we call on the authorities in Khartoum
to expedite the issuance of visas for police personnel in
order to strengthen their deployment, in particular in
vulnerable areas such as the Amiet common market,
which has seen various incidents of public disorder.

A vital element in normalizing relations between the
Sudan and South Sudan is the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism. Its significance to
UNISFA fulfilling its mandate for the protection of
civilians and peacekeeping is undeniable. We hope
and are optimistic that the political processes in both
countries and the current rapprochement between their
capitals will provide momentum to ultimately resolve
the pending border issues.

Another extremely significant aspect that we would
like to emphasize is UNISFA's commitment to gender
initiatives. We applaud the implementation of activities
to raise awareness of the importance of women's
representation in joint peace committees and the
establishment of a traditional leaders gender champion
network for the promotion of resolution 1325 (2000).
We also commend the work done by UNISFA to address
sexual and gender-based violence and children's rights.

In conclusion, the presence of UNISFA and its
support to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism have been instrumental in stabilizing the
Abyei Area. However, it is crucial that both the Sudan
and South Sudan do more as soon as possible to fulfil
their commitments and that the Council continue to
seek ways to make UNISFA's operations more effective.

