Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): It is indeed
an honour to be before the members of the Council,
particular you, Sir, who, as President of the Council for
this month, have performed so brilliantly in your task. We
also take this opportunity to thank your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of France, His Excellency Mr.
Jean-B ernard Merimee, for his most able performance last
month, when I was still one of the United Nations
colleagues of Council members.

 

As a sovereign country facing a most brutal aggression
and endeavouring to defend our peoples from premeditated
genocide, we have welcomed the assistance of the United
Nations mission in our Republic. Yes, this assistance was
largely symptomatic relief and, as a whole, has been a poor
substitute for a real remedy addressing our victimization at
the hands of a relentless aggressor. None the less, we once
again stress our appreciation even for those half-measures,
while continuing our call for real remedies.

Maybe we were naive. Maybe by rejecting those half-
measures, by demanding our full rights and by calling upon
the world Powers to meet their clear responsibilities in the
face of aggression and genocide, we would have ultimately
forced a true remedy. However, we could not afford to be
so callous, so calculating with the most urgent physical
needs of our population, even if some intended by giving
us bread to muffle the screams of agony and cries for
justice of those who continued to be "ethnically cleansed",
shelled and murdered. Still, we also do not wish here to
seem ungrateful or, especially, insensitive, by not taking the
care to point out that most of those who sought to help our
citizens, especially those courageous men and women of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) and so many other organizations,
offered their help with the purest of motives.

Unfortunately, it appears that their good will and
commitment to mankind, combined with our desperation for
food and other essentials, was taken advantage of by more
calculating political forces. We were all lectured that there
was a choice between humanitarian assistance and the
United Nations mission on the one hand and real remedies
to bring about real peace and justice on the other. But time
has shown that there really never was a real dilemma. The
day of reckoning has come, and manufactured arguments
have been exposed, running down the side of the wall like
cheap paint in the midst of a rain storm.

Even the half-measures that the United Nations
mission has offered, which helped sustain our people at one
time, have now almost totally evaporated. Sarajevo,
Srebrenica, Zepa, Gorazde and Bihac are denied any level
of humanitarian assistance. Their populations are constantly
targeted and murdered, and the stranglehold is allowed to
tighten without response.

Furthermore, Serbian forces no longer just hold our
civilians hostage to their war aims, but have now become
so emboldened as to take United Nations personnel as
human shields. Serbian terrorist tactics produce further
concessions while the United Nations mission is further
reduced to irrelevance.

The exclusion zone around Sarajevo is violated by
the Serbians and ignored by those who are obligated to
enforce it. Now we look forward to deployment of the
rapid-reaction capability. It is the expectation of my
Government that this mission will seek to reverse the
negative process and enable the United Nations mission
in our Republic once again to be fully and faithfully
implemented.

In this context, we have given our consent to this
new deployment. We could express notions of scepticism
and even cynicism. Instead, we offer mutual cooperation
in the most urgent task before our Government and the
United Nations: to alleviate the humanitarian situation,
loosen the stranglehold on our population and cities and
lift the terrorism targeting civilians and United Nations
personnel alike.

I think we all know that this is the last chance. And
based upon experience we will continue to hope for the
best, but must frankly anticipate the least as we consider
our options.

