The President: I shall now make some brief
comments in my capacity as the representative of the
Philippines.

First, we join colleagues in extending
condolences to the families and the Governments of
those who perished in the unfortunate helicopter crash
in Sierra Leone.

We would like also to thank the Presidents and
the Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for
their comprehensive and informative presentations this
morning. We recognize the challenge facing the courts
in completing their respective tasks and winding up
their operations in accordance with the completion
strategies, in accordance with resolution 1503 (2003).
We appreciate the measures they have adopted to fulfil
their completion strategies. We urge the courts to stick
by the timeline established under resolution 1503
(2003) and to exert every effort to implement those
strategies.

In March of this year, the Council reaffirmed the
strategies by its resolution 1534 (2004). To prove that
the Council was cognizant of the difficulties faced by
the courts, we asked the courts to focus on "the most
senior leaders suspected of being most responsible for
crimes within [their] jurisdiction" (resolution 1534 (2004), para. 5) in order to free the courts from being
saddled with volumes of cases that are best left to local
courts. This morning, however, we took note of Judge
Meron's comments on this element of focusing on the
most senior leaders.

One important strategy for streamlining the
handling of cases and for complying with paragraph 5
of resolution 1534 (2004) is to turn over as many cases
as possible to local courts, not only for trials but also
for appeals. That should clear considerable space in the
dockets of the courts and enable them to fulfil their
completion strategies. In that regard, all efforts must be
made to implement rule 11 bis of the Rules of
Procedure and Evidence, regarding referrals. While we
understand the difficulties cited in the reports
(S/2004/34l and S/2004/420), we nevertheless call on
the Tribunals to pursue the strategy explicitly provided
for in rule 11 bis.

We appreciate the report that both courts are
currently operating at maximum capacity. My
delegation would therefore support proposals to ease
some of the factors that might have a bearing on the
implementation of the completion strategies. A specific
example is the lifting, in exceptional circumstances, of
the general hiring freeze imposed on the Tribunals,
which is described in the ICTY report as a "clear and
present danger" (S/2004/420, enclosure 1, para. 53) to
the accomplishment of the court's goals. We will
support such lifting after consultations with other
members of the Security Council.

To encourage the retention of qualified staff who,
understandably, would look for other opportunities
outside the Tribunals when these are destined to end
soon, we will also support a change in the
classification of posts in the Tribunals, making
personnel eligible to apply for other positions in the
United Nations.

Finally, the Tribunals cannot function without the
cooperation of Member States. In particular, the
President and the Prosecutor of the ICTY have brought
to the attention of the Council the fact that the court
has received little or no cooperation from a Member
State whose representative will be allowed to address
the Council in a few minutes. We would like to hear
the reply to that observation of the ICTY.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

