Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this important meeting on peace and security in the
Sahel. We also thank Ms. Guebre Sellassie, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel, for her
briefing and for the efforts she directs to marshall the
needed support for the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.

The Sahel faces many challenges in the security,
political and humanitarian fields. That has led to a
deterioration in the humanitarian situation and created
fertile ground for armed terrorist groups. In turn, that
poses a threat to peace and security in the region. It is
not an overstatement to say that the Sahel is a crossroads
for terrorist groups, including armed terrorist groups
coming from the Middle East. The effects of their
actions are clearly visible throughout the world. Jordan
emphatically condemns the terrorist attacks, especially
the recent attack that targeted a hotel in the centre of
Bamako. We reiterate our rejection of terrorism, which
is directed at civilians in many parts of the world.

On the security front, the increase in terrorist
groups' activities and their move into the Sahel region,
and the expanding illicit trade in drugs and arms, the
result of weak security institutions and the inability
of some States in the region to protect their extensive
borders have all led to a deteriorating security situation
and undermined the security of citizens in the region
and of society as a whole.

Concerning the strengthening of regional security
cooperation among the countries of the Sahel with the aim
of eradicating terrorism and enhancing Africa's peace
and security architecture, Jordan welcomes the steps
they have taken to eliminate Boko Haram, including
the Nouakchott Process and the establishment of the
Multinational Joint Task Force, as well as the creation
of the Group of Five for the Sahel. In that regard, Jordan
is of the View that the international community should
support the Sahel in creating a unified, comprehensive
regional strategy. It should be aimed both at eradicating
terrorism and at tackling the problem of terrorist groups
by depriving them of their ability to recruit citizens by
cutting off their financing sources and by dealing with
the region's economic and social challenges so that the
groups can no longer exploit them in order to recruit
new fighters. The countries of the Sahel region should
also step up their efforts to counter transnational
security threats by strengthening their border controls
and ending illicit trafficking in arms, natural resources
and narcotics.

In the areas ofpolitical stability, peaceful transition
and the holding of elections, the fact that entire sectors
of society, including young people, women and
minorities, do not participate enough in political life,
coupled with weaknesses in institutions, governance
and the rule of law, makes for a source of tension and
instability and undermines regional efforts to improve
stability and cohesion.

On the humanitarian front, the indicators have
regressed as a result ofincreasing acts ofviolence. More
than 20 million people suffer from food insecurity,
and about 4.4 million have been displaced, which is
extremely worrying. The international community
must act to end this slide. Unemployment remains high,
particularly among young people, who are becoming
economically marginalized at a time when the region
urgently needs to invest in its young people's strengths.
Poverty, unemployment, illiteracy and unstable
family relationships contribute to creating a fertile
environment for extremist and obscurantist ideology,
and we are grateful to Ms. Sellassie for drawing our
attention to this important issue.

In conclusion, Jordan reaffirms the importance
of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel, which must be promoted if we are to mobilize
partnerships and strengthen regional cooperation,
particularly on the security front, in order to tackle
the current emerging and interlinked challenges, while
at the same time formulating a comprehensive vision
aimed at dealing with the underlying causes of tension
and conflict so as to strengthen peace and establish
lasting security in the region.

