Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too thank Mr. Williams for his briefing
on the situation in the Middle East peace process. We
would like to join with colleagues in expressing high
praise for the active and professional activities of
Mr. Williams in his important post. We wish
Mr. Williams every success in his new appointment,
one that is also directly linked to settlement of the
Middle East situation.

The situation in the Middle East continues to be
complex and contradictory. Alongside the profound and
ongoing crisis within the Palestinian National
Authority, after the events in June, there has been some
encouraging progress in Palestinian-Israeli relations. A
positive factor, of course, is the current absence of
large-scale violence. Although, unfortunately, there are
still victims. But it is important to increase the tempo
and to enhance the effectiveness of efforts for a
comprehensive settlement in the region, in all aspects.

A source of a certain degree of optimism is the
fact that contacts between Mr. Abbas and Mr. Olmert,
the latest of which was held on 28 August in Jerusalem,
are becoming regular. Their agenda is becoming more
substantive. However, at present, their stress is still on
day to day, although still important, issues whereas the
main problem relates to the development of political
contours and the issue of a final independent status.
This, in our View, requires accelerated work by
involved parties, along with collective and constructive
international assistance, including from the Quartet and
international mediators.

A de facto dual authority continues to exist in the
Palestinian territories. The rift between Fatah and
Hamas is not only destabilizing the situation, it is also
having a negative impact on the prospect for progress
towards a long-term settlement with Israel. Russia has
consistently supported the Palestinian Constitutional
structure and the head of the Palestinian Authority,
Mr. Abbas and this was particularly reinforced during
Mr. Abbas' recent visit to Moscow. At the same time,
we believe that there is no alternative to intra-
Palestinian unity and harmony. This is extremely
important, if durable and lasting peace is to be
achieved in the Middle East. It is clear that any
possible agreements with Israel will need to enjoy the
broadest possible support among Palestinians.

The socio-economic situation in the territories of
the Palestinian National Authority, and particularly in
Gaza, are a source of profound concern. At this time,
Russian humanitarian assistance is being sent there. We
expect Israel to take additional steps in order to meet
the humanitarian needs of the Palestinians. All parties
need to observe all previously assumed obligations and
above all, as far as the Palestinian side is concerned,
they need to combat terrorism. At the same time, we
note the inadmissibility of the Israeli practice of
targeted eliminations, the construction of settlements
and the continuation of the Wall.

In these present conditions, the search for collective
achievements towards Arab-Israeli reconciliation remains
fundamentally important and, in this connection, we
have supported the idea of convening an international
meeting this autumn on a Middle East settlement. We
hope that at the ministerial meeting of the Quartet,
which is planned for 23 September in New York,
agreement will be reached on format, modalities,
agenda and international legal basis.

At previous conferences of the Quartet, an
agreement was reached on the active participation of
the Quartet in the proposed activities of the meeting.
Our position is that the forthcoming meeting may
promote progress towards a comprehensive peace and,
in this context, may assist with preparations for a
representative international conference on the Middle
East. We see the role of such a full-format conference
as to be a relaunching of the peace process in all of its
aspects. Participation by Syria and Lebanon, in our
opinion, will assist in making the forum productive and
will contribute to the task of reaching a comprehensive
Middle East solution and settlement. A strategic
benchmark in this respect is that any settlement of the
Arab-Israeli conflict must be based on an
internationally recognized legal platform, such as the
resolutions of the Security Council, the Madrid
Principles and the Arab Peace Initiative.

We remain profoundly concerned about the
continuing political crisis in Lebanon. We call on the
Lebanese parties and groups to search assiduously for
compromise solutions through national dialogue and to
consider seriously the proposed initiatives which will
make it possible to avoid more fighting this year.
Above all, one matter that is extremely important to
life in Lebanon is the presidential election. We need to
give the Lebanese constructive external support and to
expand the political and social basis of intra-Lebanese
agreement. The United Nations still has an important
role to play in this process, including through the
stabilizing role of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL), the mandate of which the Security
Council recently extended for a year.

