Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): Ijoin earlier speakers in
welcoming our discussion today on the situation in the
Lake Chad Basin, which we, too, feel is timely, and we
thank the United Kingdom for having requested it. This
discussion, in my view, could also set the stage for the
wider conversation on peacebuilding in Africa that the
presidency will convene tomorrow.

I wish to add my voice to those expressing
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Feltman and
Under-Secretary-General O'Brien for their respective
briefings, which shed much light on the situation
there. Earlier speakers touched on the security and
humanitarian challenges faced by the region and on
possible responses by the international community.
With a view to contributing to the discussion, I intend to
focus my statement on similar themes, but I also intend
to focus on the theme of the protection of children in
the Basin area.

Malaysia shares the concerns expressed by Council
members on the deteriorating security and humanitarian
situation of the roughly 50 million inhabitants of the
wider Basin area, which straddles Chad, Cameroon, the
Niger and Nigeria. On the security front, my delegation

notes that the civilian population of the Basin is
doubly impacted, first by the worsening humanitarian
situation, which results partly from both climate and
human factors, and, secondly, by the security threat
posed by violent extremists, particularly Boko Haram.

Clearly, Boko Haram has played a role in
exacerbating the already dire humanitarian situation
in the Lake Chad Basin, and we recognize the needs
of the population. We support the call made and
encourage donors not to overlook but instead support
the humanitarian response to the region. The fact that
Boko Haram retains the capability to launch large-scale
attacks and undertake complex ambushes and is fairly
proficient with improvised explosive devices, as well as
its pledge of allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and Da'esh, give rise to much concern, not
least because the humanitarian situation of the civilian
population in the Basin area is already vulnerable
and precarious.

In this connection, Malaysia is pleased to note that
the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF), established
last year by the Lake Chad Basin Commission member
States and the African Union, has been operationalized
and is undertaking active operations against Boko
Haram. Apart from the MNJTF operations, we also
welcome the various other measures undertaken
by the countries in the region to prevent attacks and
reduce civilian targets. The improved coordination and
intelligence-gathering among the MNJTF authorities
that allow for successful pre-emptive operations are
also commendable.

It is striking to note that nearly one of every five
Boko Haram suicide bombers is a child; almost three
quarters are girls, as highlighted by UNICEF in its
most recent report. This is utterly abhorrent. Despite
the criticism levelled at it, the MNJTF is a concrete
example of what concerted political will and military
action, coupled with regional solidarity, cooperation
and resolve, can achieve.

In combating the scourge of terrorism and violent
extremism, all parties must continue to adhere to
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We fully
understand, however, that in order to ensure its continued
functioning, the MNJTF requires the predictable and
sustained provision of necessary resources. We support
the call for States and other partners in a position to
do so, including those from the region, to positively
consider meeting such needs. The protracted situation
of insecurity, instability and lack of socioeconomic
development in the Basin area continues to expose
the exceeding vulnerability of the civilian population,
particularly of women and children, boys and girls.
In this regard, I wish to highlight the deplorable
and unacceptable situation faced by children at the
hands of Boko Haram. Since 2013, at least 1.3 million
children have been uprooted or displaced as they seek
to flee the violence. Among the key losses suffered is
access to education and to health care. Loss of access to
education is particularly worrying. Left unchecked, the
large number of uneducated and idle youth provide a
pool of potential recruits not just for terrorists but also
for other armed criminal groups, thereby perpetuating
the cycle of violence in an already insecure and unstable
region. As such, we stress the importance of ensuring
that all children, including and especially displaced
children in the affected areas, continue to receive an
education.

Malaysia condemns in the strongest terms the
practice of abducting children for recruitment and using
them as combatants or human shields by terrorists and
other parties to conflict in the region. Such practices
constitute grave violations against children for which
the perpetrators must be held to account. These children
and the many others who are hidden within the ranks
of the group are victims of Boko Haram's inhuman and
ruthless tactics. We encourage the MNJTF authorities
to provide special protection for children associated
with Boko Haram. We condemn on equal terms the
abduction of women and girls, who are then subjected
to sexual violence and forced marriage by the group, as
appalling and unacceptable.

Moving forward, we wish to flag the concern
that even upon their release or separation from Boko
Haram, children face serious challenges in getting their
lives back. They are often stigmatized by their own
communities. We wish to stress that in such situations,
children must primarily be seen as victims who deserve
treatment and support for their eventual reintegration
into the community. They should not have to suffer
being ostracized and shamed.

By way of conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Malaysia's
commitment to working effectively with all partners
and stakeholders in a coordinated and concerted
manner, with a view to collectively addressing the dire
situation in the Lake Chad Basin.
