Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation agrees that we should
not accept the fact that 108 million people around the
world, of whom 52 million are children, are starving.
We support the determination of the Secretary-General
and the plans ofthe United Nations specialized agencies
to draft a strategy to tackle that challenge. We believe
that, among other things, the success of our common
struggle will depend largely on how correctly we
identify the causes behind that issue.

We believe that the premise that hunger is primarily
triggered by conflict is extremely simplistic. The
presidential statement on hunger and on famine adopted
by the Security Council in August (S/PRST/2017/14)
rightly noted that conflicts are only one of the factors
that cause hunger. It would be wrong to slight the no
less and indeed often more obvious reasons for hunger,
such as global food-market volatility, global economic
stagnation, slow progress in achieving sustainable
production and demand, gaps in access to farming and
agro-industrial technology, lack of investment, and
plain underdevelopment, poverty and inequality. We
believe that without accounting for all of these factors,
an effective response strategy is hardly possible.

In our view, we can find a solid basis for this
argument in the official annual report of the United
Nations agencies, The State of Food Security and
Nutrition in the World 2017, which the Secretary-
General mentioned today. The report states clearly that
of the 815 million malnourished people worldwide,
489 million live in conflict-afflicted countries, which
means that the remaining 320 million who do not
live in such countries are still experiencing equally
and sometimes even more severe food shortages.
Incidentally, the same report has another noteworthy
statistic, which is that the prevalence of hunger in
conflict-ridden countries is only between 1.4 per cent
and 4.4 per cent higher than in other countries.

Ofcourse, that does not mean that we should pay less
attention to the issue of hunger and famine in conflict-
afflicted countries. We believe that to seriously improve
the food security situation, we should implement the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, ensure
sustainable agricultural production, make rational
use of natural resources and improve effectiveness
and modern practices at every stage of the food chain.
One current challenge is including the question of
balanced nutrition within comprehensive strategies for
socioeconomic development. In that regard, the relevant
United Nations entities - the Food and Agricultural
Organization (FAO), the World Food Programme
(WFP) and the International Fund for Agricultural
Development - have a significant role to play. All of
these issues are being fully and productively discussed
in the General Assembly.

Russia, as a major producer and exporter of
foodstuffs, is making a significant contribution to
global and regional food security. Together with major
international entities, including the United Nations,
we are implementing a development project designed
to ensure food security and sustainable agrarian
production for countries in need. In the past 10 years,
Russia has delivered humanitarian assistance in the
form ofa total of 650,000 tons of food supplies to more
than 110 States. Furthermore, every year for the past few
years Russia has conducted more than 45 humanitarian
operations delivering humanitarian assistance
amounting to some $120 million. We view the WFP as
one of the key channels for delivering food assistance
to those in need, and Russia's annual assistance
through the WFP totals more than $30 million. We
also deliver significant humanitarian aid through the
International Civil Defence Organization, amounting
to another $30 million. In 2017, recipients of Russian
food assistance through the WFP included Tajikistan,
Kyrgyzstan, Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
Syria, Palestine, Namibia, Kenya, Iraq and Jordan.

Russia has undertaken considerable efforts in
the area of school meals, financing relevant projects
in various Central Asian countries through the FAO.
Needless to say, we consider aid to countries with acute
hunger and famine issues, particularly Yemen, Somalia
and South Sudan, to be extremely important. In the
past four years, Russia has allocated food assistance
to those countries amounting to $8 million through the
WFP. Since 2015 we have delivered some 110 tons of
humanitarian cargo to Yemen, including two Russian
emergency flights this July. Russia intends to continue
actively contributing to international efforts to arrive
at a comprehensive solution to the problem of ending
hunger worldwide.

