Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania voted in favour of the
resolution we have just adopted. We voted thus while
regretting the failure of diplomatic efforts intended to
engage the Islamic Republic of Iran and to achieve a
suitable outcome that would have protected the right of
Iran to pursue peaceful nuclear activities.

As a matter of principle, the United Republic of
Tanzania is opposed to nuclear weapons, whether held
by friend or by foe. We are therefore opposed to
nuclear proliferation and strongly support the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the non-
proliferation regime it establishes under the auspices of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), to
which the Islamic Republic of Iran also subscribes.

The United Republic of Tanzania firmly believes
in the right of the people of Iran to civilian nuclear
energy. This resolution does not in any way seek to
constrain that right. However, it seeks to bring any
such programme under a verifiable inspection regime
of the IAEA. In our view, that is as it ought to be.

The United Republic of Tanzania is mindful that
the Islamic Republic of Iran had offered to respond by
22 August 2006 to the package of proposals presented
by the Permanent Five plus one. We regret that that
Isranian offer was not accommodated. We hope,
however, that the willingness for dialogue that was
demonstrated by that offer can still be reciprocated. In
our View, engaging the Islamic Republic of Iran needs
to be continued by all the parties, including the IAEA.

The United Republic of Tanzania also voted in
favour of the resolution essentially because it precludes
the use of force as an option in engaging the Islamic
Republic of Iran. It is our hope that, even in the
resolution's current form, additional measures will be
unnecessary.

In conclusion, it is also the hope of the United
Republic of Tanzania that the adoption of today's
resolution at this point in time will not serve to further
complicate matters in an already volatile region.

