Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My
country voted in favour of resolution 1871 (2009) to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara because we believe
that it is important to lend unanimous Security Council
support to the plan presented to us by Mr. Ross,
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General, in whose
management we have confidence.

However, we are not satisfied with the text of the
adopted resolution. As you know, Sir, from your own
experience, Costa Rica has been an active advocate of
peaceful dispute settlement processes. Our President
was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize precisely because
of an effort on his part that brought peace to Central
America and rendered the United Nations efforts
successful. We know from our own experience that the
foundation of mediation is political will to arrive at an
agreement and that this political will has to be based on
absolute respect for the Charter of the United Nations,
together with a legitimate sense of commitment to the
promotion and protection of human rights.

Costa Rica considers that the full respect for and
guarantee of human rights is an essential prerequisite
to the resolution of this and other conflicts, and not an
obstacle, as some seem to think. This position of my
country is a clear one, and we have manifested it with
great transparency, respect and with complete respect
for the rules of negotiation in this Council. That is
what we did throughout all the consultations and
meetings of experts that took place. We brought the
arguments and elements we wanted to see reflected in
the text. We are very sorry that our concerns have not
been reflected in the resolution.

We are aware of the efforts of the parties and
their commitment to move ahead, some to a greater
extent than others. That is why we put forth, as a last
resort, a proposal whose sole purpose was to ask for a
report on the efforts of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to work with
the parties to ensure respect for human rights in
Western Sahara. As we said during the consultations,
Costa Rica has not invented human rights in the
Sahara. This is a topic that appears in the Secretary-
General's 2008 report (S/2008/251), in paragraph 71,
where he stated,

"I would like to repeat my call to the parties to
remain engaged in continuous and constructive
dialogue with the Office of the United Nations
09-31958
High Commissioner for Human Rights with a
view to ensuring respect for the human rights of
the people of Western Sahara."

This appeal, along with an important statement to
the effect that the United Nations remains resolutely in
favour of respect for those same human rights
standards appears in paragraph 66 of this year's report
(S/2009/2OO and Corr.1), where the Secretary-General
says,

"I would like to reiterate that the United Nations
remains committed to upholding international
human rights standards, and I repeat my call to
the parties to remain engaged in continuous and
constructive dialogue with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, with a view to ensuring respect for the
human rights of the people of Western Sahara in
the Territory and in the refugee camps ...".

But the Security Council has unfortunately not
endorsed these conclusions of the Secretary-General,
which appear in his last two reports (S/2008/251, S/2009/200 and Corr.1).

We voted in favour of the resolution in order to
lend support to the work of the Personal Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ross, and we hope that he will
be guided in his performance by the words of the
Secretary-General, which, leaving aside the economic
and political interests of the moment, represents the
generous moral voice of humanity.

