Mr. Plasai (Thailand) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate. As
this is the first time in March that Thailand takes the
floor in the Security Council, I would like to join other
speakers in congratulating France on its presidency of
the Council this month. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict for her briefing.

Thailand associates itself with the statements to be
delivered by the represntative of Viet Nam on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and by
the Ambassador of Austria on behalf of the Human
Security Network.

In order for them to become responsible and
productive citizens of the world, children must grow
up in an environment of peace, love and understanding,
not violence. Thailand reaffirms its commitment and
resolve in support ofinternational efforts to assure such
an environment for every child. This year Thailand is
particularly concerned about the exacerbation of current
armed conflicts by the added elements of extremism and
terrorism, which have inflicted suffering on children
that will undoubtedly be repeated for many others
around the world if we do not act. The perpetrators of
such violent acts must be brought to justice, since they
not only violate international legal norms; they also cut
short the lives of our young people, who represent the
future itself.

We condemn any involvement, anywhere and by
anyone - including non-State armed groups - of
children in situations of violence and armed conflict.
The suffering of children, particularly girls, in these
situations is unacceptable to us. That is why we are
committed to efforts to stop violence against children
and to address violations of children's rights in armed
conflict situations, including the killing, maiming and
recruitment of and sexual violence against children,
as well as the abduction of and denial of humanitarian
access to children in armed conflict. In this regard, we
commend the success of the "Children, Not Soldiers"
campaign in preventing the recruitment of child
soldiers.

The timing of this debate is also ideal. This year
marks the landmark tenth anniversary of resolution
1612 (2005), which established the Security Council's
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. In
this regard, I would like to commend Malaysia and
Luxembourg, the current and previous Chairs of the
Working Group, for the outstanding work accomplished
to date.

Thailand is convinced that ongoing armed conflicts
require coordinated international efforts to protect
children. Allow me to outline some of the elements that
we believe should be an integral part of ourjoint efforts.

First, human rights and international humanitarian
law must be fully respected. Secondly, Thailand
believes that child protection in all situations remains
the sovereign responsibility ofevery State in accordance
with its obligations under international law. The United
Nations must therefore work in close cooperation
with the Governments concerned on the basis of their
consent. In several armed conflicts in which non-State
actors commit crimes against children, the United
Nations must be fully aware of the sensitivities on
the ground and of the need to work closely with host
Governments to tackle the problem.

Thirdly, given the multitude of international
agencies involved with child protection, we need to
strengthen cooperation and coordination among them.
Thailand was pleased to co-chair, along with Austria,
work on the drafting of the United Nations Model
Strategies and Practical Measures on the Elimination
of Violence against Children in the Field of Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice (resolution 69/194),
which was submitted to the General Assembly last year.
Indeed, Thailand believes that there is a need to address
all aspects of the work of the United Nations regarding
the protection of children.

Fourthly, to remain useful and credible, the annual
report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict should be the outcome of constructive
consultations with the Member States concerned and
should be based on accurate, objective, reliable and
verifiable information. With the rise of extremism and
terrorism over the past year, it is more essential than
ever to have credible information to steer the Council's
efforts towards putting an end to the suffering of
children in situations of armed conflict.

Lastly, as part of our comprehensive effort to
tackling the problems facing children in armed conflict,
we must not overlook the importance of addressing past
traumas. Thailand therefore urges that greater emphasis
be placed on reintegration efforts for affected children.
National long-term strategies must be formulated so as
to improve education and socioeconomic conditions,
as well as ensure the rule of law, which will make it
possible better to protect children from the threats and
dangers of armed conflict.

