Ms. Del Ponte: It is a great honour to be here
again to provide an assessment of the progress made in
the implementation of the completion strategy. As
members know, a written assessment has previously
been distributed, and I intend to concentrate today on
the major issues. For six years now, I have had to
report to the Council that the failure to bring Radovan
Karadzic and Ratko Mladic into the custody of the
Tribunal is the major impediment to the success of our
work. As we advance in the implementation of the
completion strategy, it is becoming more crucial every
day to bring those two indictees to The Hague, because
any further delay will impact on the completion
strategy.

On 13 June (see S/PV.5199), I presented my last
assessment to the Council, and it was cautiously
optimistic. There was a momentum at that time, and it
was legitimate to believe that the issue of fugitives
could be resolved once and for all in a matter of a few
months. The Serbian Government, in particular, had
raised expectations that Ratko Mladic would be
transferred to The Hague before the commemoration of
the Srebrenica genocide on 11 July, or at the latest at
the beginning of October. That did not happen. There
was also hope that, once Mladic was in The Hague,
efforts would focus on Radovan Karadzic. As far as I
know, there is no reliable or confirmed information on
either of those two accused, and I am not aware of any
credible attempt to locate and apprehend them.

The Office of the Prosecutor has no explicit
mandate to arrest indictees. However, the Tribunal, and
in particular its Prosecutor, has a responsibility to
ensure that arrest warrants are executed and that
indictees are tried. Since trials in absentia are not
permitted at the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the accused must be
brought to The Hague, through either arrests or
voluntary surrenders.

In 2001, I decided to begin carrying out small-
scale tracking activities for a combination of reasons.
First, many arrest warrants were left unexecuted. At
that time, 24 accused were at large. Secondly, I was not
receiving any information from the other relevant
actors. Finally, since the completion strategy was being
developed at the time, it became clear that the arrest of
fugitives would be a key condition for successful
implementation of the strategy. It was therefore
essential for the Office of the Prosecutor to build a
small, but effective, in-house capability.

Our tracking activities are meant to remain of a
mainly coordinating nature, because my Office cannot
and will not build up the technical and human
resources that would allow us to carry out sophisticated
intelligence operations.

Despite our limited resources, we were successful
in locating fugitives on a number of occasions. But
when significant resources are required, we have to
turn to the relevant States, inside and outside the
region, or to NATO and the European Union-led
peacekeeping force (EUFOR) - and previously to the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) - in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We are systematically passing on our
information to those national and international bodies.
Unfortunately, we rarely get any feedback on the
information we provide. It was only recently that my
Office began to receive some information. As far as I
know, neither those States nor international
organizations have ever managed to come close to the
arrest of Karadzic or Mladic. Until recently, they have
been unwilling to provide the ICTY with useful
information about those fugitives or to coordinate
efforts. I could give many examples to illustrate that
dysfunctional situation, but this is not the place or the
time to go into detail. But after 10 years of failures, it
is legitimate to ask ourselves what we did wrong and
what we can do better.

It is obvious to all informed observers that in the
first years after indictments were issued there was no
political will, on the part of either local authorities in
Republika Srpska and Serbia or the international forces
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, to arrest Karadzic or
Mladic. It was perceived that arrest operations against
either of them could undermine the stability of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the security of international
troops there. It is particularly well documented that,
two years after they were indicted, Karadzic and
Mladic were moving freely in Republika Srpska.
Karadzic was even giving interviews and running party
and State business with the full knowledge of the
international community. Mladic even participated in
military ceremonies. From 1998 onwards, Karadzic's
movements became more discreet and his whereabouts
became unknown, while Mladic probably moved his
permanent residence to Serbia at that time. Efforts
were made in 1998 and 1999 to arrange for Karadzic's
voluntary surrender, but eventually he broke off all
contacts. It was only after the fall of Milosevic, in
2000, that the international community expressed the
political will to bring Karadzic and Mladic to justice.
However, that political will was never translated into
the creation of the effective operational instruments
that would be necessary for that purpose.

What are the principal shortcomings?

First, the circulation of information among the
interested actors, domestic and international, is
inadequate. Intelligence-gathering efforts are carried
out at the national level, and the products of
intelligence are jealously guarded by the various
national authorities for themselves. Generally,
information, especially when it is relevant, is not
shared with other actors - and certainly not with my
Office. As a consequence, we cannot compare sources
and knowledge that would allow us to make progress
towards locating Karadzic and Mladic. It was only
after cumbersome procedures and long delays that
recently my Office was finally given partial access to
useful information obtained by NATO and, previously,
SFOR. Those materials are of interest in drawing up a
profile of Karadzic's and Mladic's movements,
contacts and networks. Sometimes, my Office learned
through the media about the existence of key
documents seized by the international forces in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The reasons given for those
unhelpful practices are the necessity to protect
sensitive sources and methods of work, as well as the
suspicion that such documents and intelligence could
be leaked should they reach the Office of the
Prosecutor.

A high degree of confidentiality is an
understandable condition for intelligence activities
when early disclosure could threaten the lives of
individuals involved or jeopardize arrest operations.
However, most of the information collected in the
course of search operations or intelligence-gathering
activities is not that sensitive from an operational
standpoint. Still, it is rarely shared with others.
Furthermore, the Office of the Prosecutor has in recent
years proven that it can handle intelligence adequately
so as to facilitate surrenders by national authorities.
Data provided by my Office prompted the surrender of
Ljubisa Beara, Momir Nikolic and Milan Lukic, to
name just a few. The Council may recall that my staff
took pictures of Goran Hadzic while he was tipped off
and as he fled.

My second point is that, beyond the sharing of
data itself, there is also a lack of coordination of
efforts, which has counterproductive effects. In Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for instance, since we were unable to
learn who was doing what to track Karadzic and
Mladic, we asked local authorities to implement certain
surveillance measures. At that point in time, and
without consulting or informing my Office, a third
party interfered to request those authorities to
discontinue those measures. My attempts to receive
explanations were never answered. Such
communication gaps feed the confusion and cannot
lead to positive results. Karadzic in particular is fully
aware of the unorganized way in which the
international community is proceeding against him,
and he is taking full advantage of it. In an undated
letter that reached my Office only recently, but which
was probably written shortly after he disappeared, one
of his close supporters wrote to him,

"I found out from a source that SF OR forces take
action in certain cases exclusively on the basis of
approval by their Governments and not from
some centre. That should be taken advantage
of Exclude any kind of communications
except through couriers. I think that, from what
can be found in various manners, some action
aimed at capture is nevertheless of a limited
nature, and they will avoid risky, spectacular
actions".

He planned well indeed.

Thirdly, the capture of Radovan Karadzic and
Ratko Mladic is no longer such a high priority for the
international community that it would justify allocating
substantial technical and human resources to it. Most
international intelligence assets have left the Balkans.
We must therefore rely principally on local authorities
in Republika Srpska and Serbia and Montenegro to
carry out the arrests. Until recently, there was no
political will on the part of either of those parties to
aggressively go after Karadzic and Mladic. That has
now changed, at least at the level of rhetoric.
Numerous statements have been made by Serb and
Bosnian Serb political, and even religious, leaders
saying that Karadzic and Mladic must be brought to
The Hague. However, those intentions at the top have
not necessarily filtered through all the layers of the
institutions involved.

To sum up this most crucial issue, my main
partners in the hunt for Karadzic and Mladic are now
the Government of Serbia and Montenegro and the
relevant authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
international community, through the use of
conditionality, is providing political incentives for
local authorities to arrest those indictees. On
operational issues, however, the involvement of the
international community has been minimal, at least
over the past two years. I am ready to provide the
Council with more details, but they should not be
discussed in a public meeting.

On the basis of this assessment, I would like to
offer as possible remedies a few suggestions relating to
efforts that I have been pursuing in recent months
despite my limited resources.

First, mechanisms must be set up or revived that
offer the possibility for meaningful planning and
exchanges of information between those involved in
intelligence-gathering activities. The relevant national
authorities, inside and outside the region, and
international organizations, including the ICTY, should
join forces in setting up such a framework for sharing
information on Karadzic and Mladic. Since last spring,
I have taken the initiative to encourage Serbia,
Montenegro and the relevant services in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to intensify their cooperation, both among
themselves and with my Office. That has already
produced some results, but further energy should be
put into that effort. I would expect all international
assets present in the region also to take part in that
coordinated effort. International actors must finally
cooperate with each other and with the ICTY, not only
promptly sharing information on the location of
fugitives, but also coordinating operations against
fugitives or their support networks. I have developed a
fruitful relationship at the highest levels with the
civilian and military leadership of NATO in that
context, and I believe that the situation has begun to
improve very recently.

Secondly, the current efforts aimed at breaking
the support networks protecting Karadzic and Mladic
must be further aggressively pursued. My Office is in
contact with NATO and EUFOR in Sarajevo, and we
are working on a joint programme in that context.
However, the strategy will be much more likely to bear
fruit should it be complemented by efficient
intelligence and operational activities. Furthermore, it
comes very late in the day. Such comprehensive
strategies should have been put in place long ago.

Thirdly, the States of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Serbia and Montenegro must be held accountable
for their failure to bring Radovan Karadzic and Ratko
Mladic to justice. At the end of the day, the
responsibility is theirs, and the international
community will increasingly want to limit its
involvement to a supportive role in that process.
Experience shows that political pressure from the
European Union and the United States is the most
significant factor encouraging the States of the former
Yugoslavia to transfer indictees to The Hague. The first
half of 2005 demonstrated how efficiently international
pressure works. Unfortunately, a number of deadlines
have passed in the second half of the year, including
the commemoration of Srebrenica, the anniversary of
the Dayton-Paris accords, and the beginning of
negotiations between the European Union and Serbia
and Montenegro, but no progress has been recorded on
Karadzic and Mladic. As the two most important
leaders responsible for the worst crimes are still at
large, the international community must remain fully
committed.

As the Prosecutor of the ICTY, I am expected to
do my utmost to bring all indictees to justice. However,
there is no domestic judicial system in which the
prosecutor has such limited coercive powers and
cannot instruct police forces to collect intelligence or
arrest accused individuals. Let me stress that, under
article 29 of the Statute, all States are legally obligated
to comply without undue delay with any request for
assistance. Moreover, resolution 1534 (2004) of 26
March 2004 calls

"on all States to intensify cooperation with and
render all necessary assistance to the ICTY,
particularly to bring Radovan Karadzic and Ratko
Mladic... and all other indictees to the ICTY".
(resolution 1534 (2004), para. 1)

If the States having the power to locate them are
not interested in providing information or in otherwise
cooperating with my Office in the search, then it
certainly makes the fulfilment of the Tribunal's
mandate impossible. That assessment reflects the
situation regarding Karadzic, Mladic and the other
fugitives who are within the reach of Serbia and
Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Goran
Hadzic, Zdravko Tolimir and Stojan Zupljanin are all
within reach of the authorities of Serbia and
Montenegro. Tolimir should be tried together with his
eight co-accused for the crimes committed in
Srebrenica. Djordjevic's transfer is urgent because his
trial, too, is due to open towards the middle of next
year. Regarding Zupljanin, my plan is to have a joint
trial with an accused, Mico Stanisic, who has already
appeared before the ICTY.

Serbia and Montenegro's cooperation has,
unfortunately, deteriorated in the past months. There is
no serious, well-articulated action plan on the
fugitives. Moreover, there is a lack of coordination
between the State Union authorities and the two
Republics' Governments, and the rivalry between the
involved agencies is palpable. The information passed
to my Office is scarce and unconvincing. The army of
Serbia and Montenegro continues to hamper, both
actively and passively, the cooperation of Serbia and
Montenegro with the ICTY. Serbian civilian authorities
admit today that the army as an institution was
protecting Ratko Mladic until as late as at least May
2002. They contend that that is not the case anymore.
However, on other issues - such as access to military
documents, for instance, Mladic's military and medical
files, or documents related to Kosovo - the military
authorities of Serbia and Montenegro obstruct
cooperation with my Office, despite the admirable
efforts of the National Cooperation Council's President
and the assurances given to me by the civilian
authorities.

I would note that, on my recent visit to Belgrade,
the authorities again gave assurances that we would be
given full access to those materials, but it remains to be
seen if those assurances will be honoured. However, in
view of the authorities' unwillingness thus far to
provide me with those materials, I have requested the
Chamber to issue binding orders. The irony is that
some of the materials are sometimes produced by
defence witnesses in the Milosevic case. From whom
did they obtain them, if not from those who refuse to
provide them to us?
In Kosovo, too, my Office encounters difficulties
in accessing documents from the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
They are at times redacted or delivered in such a way
that they cannot be used in court. The cooperation
provided by UNMIK in the protection of witnesses has
also been sometimes less than optimal. Furthermore,
my Office is not convinced that UNMIK is properly
exerting its control over the conditions set by the
Chambers for Haradinaj 's provisional release.

Indeed, as was also noted by Ambassador Kai
Eide in his recent report, the intimidation of witnesses
is a grave problem in Kosovo. It is widespread and
systematic and has a very serious impact on court
proceedings at the ICTY. In the Limaj case, several
witnesses eventually refused to appear and testify in
front of the court, or withdrew or changed their
testimony because they were intimidated or afraid.

The arrest of the remaining six fugitives and
access to key documents and witnesses are issues
deeply affecting the completion strategy. They are
largely beyond our control, even though my Office
continues to use all means at its disposal to try to make
progress towards their arrest. We are confronted with
powerful structures that see no interest in cooperating
with the ICTY. Among the issues which are under the
control of the ICTY, let me mention three areas where
significant progress has been achieved since my last
report.

First, we have continued to pursue consistently
our policy of referring cases involving mid- and low-
level perpetrators to domestic jurisdictions. Three
cases involving four accused have already been
transferred to the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to Croatia. Six other motions
involving 12 accused are pending before the Chambers.
We are also preparing for the transfer of non-indicted
cases to Croatia, Serbia and Montenegro, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It will be up to the local judiciaries to
decide whether to complete the investigations and
prosecute the cases.

Secondly, we have undertaken to save time and
resources by proposing to the Chambers that they join
certain cases where there are similar crime bases. One
motion involving seven accused, including Djordjevic,
who is, unfortunately, still at large in Russia, was
approved by the Chambers. Another motion involving
nine accused, including Tolimir, who is at large in
Serbia, was also approved by the Chambers. Both trials
are scheduled to begin towards the middle of 2006.

Thirdly, we have taken steps to adapt the
structure and management of the Office to the
evolution of the completion strategy. Next year, 2006,
will be the busiest period in the Tribunal's history. We
expect to have some 33 accused on trial, as compared
with 2005, when 12 were on trial. Despite that
increased activity, significant reductions in staff were
made in the Office of the Prosecutor following the
conclusion of the first phase of the completion strategy.
The size of the investigation division has been reduced
by 37 per cent, or 79 posts. Furthermore, in the context
of the 2006-2007 budget, the redeployment of 15 posts
from the investigation division to the prosecution
division and the appeals section has been proposed.

I wish to express my thanks to the Governments
of Croatia and of Spain for having brought Ante
Gotovina to The Hague. My gratitude also goes to the
European Union and its member States for having
provided the ICTY with the political support that
contributed so much to that result. Gotovina's arrest
will also be positive for the completion strategy. I will
request the Chambers to join his case with those of
Cerrnak and Markac, two other former Croatian
generals who are currently on provisional release. We
will save a substantial amount of court time and
resources.

On 29 September, the Croatian authorities
provided me with indisputable evidence that Ante
Gotovina was in Spain. Croatia established immediate
contact with the Spanish authorities, and we quickly
learned that he was in the Canary Islands. I had told the
Council in June that Croatia would be considered to be
cooperating fully if either Gotovina was in The Hague
or if Croatia provided me with actionable intelligence
on his whereabouts. Since the latter condition had been
met, on 3 October I was pleased to inform the
European Union Task Force for Croatia that, indeed,
Croatia was fully cooperating with us. For operational
reasons, however, details were limited to a small circle
in Zagreb, Spain and The Hague. As all Council
members know, Gotovina was arrested on the island of
Tenerife on 7 December. The successful outcome of
that operation shows that the methodology was correct.

That can serve as a model to help us to overcome
the difficulties facing us in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and in Serbia and Montenegro. The key to success was
a combination of international incentives, provided
mainly by the European Union's consistent policy of
conditioning European Union accession upon full
cooperation with the ICTY, and an effective joint
operational plan between Croatia and the ICTY. The
United States also provided valuable support by
insisting that Croatia could not join NATO before
Gotovina was at The Hague.

With the exception of Spain, since the end of
September there has been no involvement by outside
actors. After the European Union postponed, in March
this year, the beginning of accession talks with Croatia,
the authorities drew up, together with the ICTY, an
operational plan, and its implementation started in
April. The operation was coordinated on the Croatian
side by a very limited number of highly motivated,
highly professional individuals under the leadership of
the State Prosecutor, who had received proper, strong
backing from the political leadership. They were
entitled to instruct all relevant services. A solid
relationship of trust, based on full transparency, was
established with my Office. Only a small number of
individuals from my Office were involved - first and
foremost the Chief of my Investigation Division.

After the operation was launched, we received
well over 100 reports from various Croatian agencies
which were, for the most part, of a good professional
quality. Those reports were reviewed in The Hague and
suggestions were made so as to direct further action.
The mix of political will and operational effectiveness
leads to results.

In conclusion, for 10 years we have been facing
grave systemic deficiencies in the efforts made to
capture Karadzic and Mladic. There is no coordination
mechanism; there is not even a desire to coordinate the
various activities, to say nothing about sharing the
most basic information.

For 10 years the international community has
been playing cat-and-mouse with Karadzic and Mladic.
For much of that time, the cats have chosen to wear
blindfolds, to claw at each other and to allow the mice
to run from one hole to another. It is time now for the
cats to remove their blindfolds. It is time for the
international community and the local governments,
especially in Serbia and Montenegro and Republika
Srpska, to take concerted action to find the places
where those fugitives are hiding, to arrest them and to
turn them over to the ICTY, so that it can administer
the justice that the Security Council promised the
people of the former Yugoslavia in 1993. It is time now
for the cats to stop suffering the ridicule of the mice.

