Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Let me at the outset
express the sincere condolences of my delegation to the
Government of France and, through Ambassador
Merimee, to the families of the two French soldiers killed
in the alley-ways of Sarajevo this past week. The Security
Council issued a Presidential statement last Friday
condemning the killing of Sergeant Rals Gunther, and the
response of the warmongers in Bosnia was to murder
Corporal Eric Hardouin. The perpetrators of these cold-
blooded murders should not be left under any illusion that
they can intimidate the United Nations out of Bosnia.

It is demonstrably clear to us that there is a
deliberate plan by elements of one or both of the parties
in the Bosnia conflict to target the United Nations forces
for attack, and this trend should be nipped in the bud
before it gets out of control. It is unacceptable that the
Blue Helmets of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR), who left the comfort of their homes to go
and help the people of Bosnia live in peace with one
another, should themselves be victims of unprovoked
attacks. It is imperative that the Council should institute
specific measures to avoid a recurrence of similar
incidents in the future.

We therefore agree with the import of operative
paragraph 2 of the draft resolution, which requests the
Secretary-General to submit proposals on measures to be
undertaken to prevent attacks on UNPROFOR and its
personnel.

The general deterioration in the situation in Bosnia
makes us wonder how long the international community
will have to wait for the dawn of common sense in that
war-ravaged country. The extraordinary ferocity of the
war, the physical devastation, the deliberate massacre of
civilians and the wanton indifference to human suffering
have continued unabated for three years now. All attempts
at mediation have thus far foundered. Surely the parties
to that conflict should by now have come to terms with
the futility of a war that is proving unwinnable; they

 
should by now have come to the realization that they can
never resolve their differences through the barrel of the
gun. And yet, tragically, the senseless carnage continues,
with no end in sight.

