Mr. Kulyk (Ukraine): At the outset, I would like
to join other speakers in thanking the presidency for
initiating this meeting. We also thank the delegation of
Columbia for offering useful complementary material
for today's debate. My delegation is grateful to
Assistant Secretary-General Mr. Fall for his
comprehensive introduction to our discussion.

In recent years, the need for a comprehensive,
coordinated and integrated strategy to meet the
numerous challenges facing West Africa has been
dictated by the multidimensional nature of the crises
and the close interlinkage and interplay between the
conflicts in the subregion. The international community
has come to the conclusion that these challenges cannot
be effectively addressed independently of one another
and that a comprehensive approach is needed to
respond to them.

We highly appreciate a number of significant
initiatives undertaken by the Secretary-General in this
sphere in 2001, including the dispatching of the inter-
agency mission to West Africa. These endeavours, in
our view, represent important steps towards the
creation of a consolidating force in the region for
ensuring an effective implementation of the
subregional, comprehensive approach to address the
multifaceted problems of West Africa. Those problems
are numerous, multidimensional and challenging:
conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peace-building,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as well
as the implementation of sanctions, to name a few. All
these areas require increased attention on the part of
the Security Council and appropriate coordinated
support from the international community for regional
and national efforts.

The United Nations is already doing an
outstanding job in the subregion, in particular in the
countries of the Mano River Union, by assisting the
peace efforts in Sierra Leone through the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). Ukraine
is proud to be associated with this peacekeeping
operation, which thus far has successfully passed the
test for United Nations peacekeeping. The United
Nations is also actively working with Guinea-Bissau in
assisting its post-conflict peace-building efforts.
However, there are a number of challenges ahead, to
which Mr. Fall referred in detail earlier.

It is an undeniable fact - and all speakers today
underlined this - that an effective partnership of the
Security Council with the subregional actors, in
particular with the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), is critically important in
the implementation of the regional approach to conflict
management in West Africa. The international
community can and must support and assist ECOWAS
activities and initiatives, in particular those related to
capacity-building, promoting mechanisms of early
warning and conflict-prevention, peacekeeping, peace-
building and others.

Ukraine strongly endorses the decision of the
Secretary-General to establish the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa. We hope that the activities of the office will
effectively contribute to the work of the Security
Council in further strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations, subregional organizations
and partners in the implementation of a fully integrated
and comprehensive regional approach aimed at
promoting durable peace and sustainable development
in West Africa.

