The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of October, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay a tribute, on behalf of the
members of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Francesco
Paolo Fulci, Permanent Representative of Italy to the
United Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of September 1995. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Security Council in expressing
our deep appreciation to Ambassador Fulci for the great
diplomatic skill, excellent manner and unfailing courtesy
with which he conducted the Council's business last month.
We express appreciation also to the members of his
delegation.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Croatia

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nobilo
(Croatia) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Mist'c
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took the place reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

 

"The Security Council expresses its concern at
the humanitarian situation in and around the
Republic of Croatia, including the situation of
refugees from the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

"The Security Council is particularly concerned
at the withdrawal of refugee status from and the
consequent ending of assistance to many refugees
from the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina at
present in the Republic of Croatia. The decisions of
the Government of Croatia in this regard may lead
to the involuntary return of tens of thousands of
people to an area that is neither safe nor prepared to
receive them. The Council stresses the importance of
the principle of non-refoulement set out in the 1951
Geneva Convention on the Status of Refugees, to
which Croatia is a party. The Council urges the
Government of Croatia to continue to provide
asylum to all refugees regardless of their origin.

"The Security Council is also seriously
concerned at the situation of the refugees from the
Republic of Croatia wishing to return, as well as of
those ethnic Serbs who have chosen to remain in the
Republic of Croatia. It reiterates its demands,
contained inter alia in its resolution 1009 (1995),
that the Government of Croatia respect fully the
rights of the local Serb population including their
right to remain or return in safety, investigate all
reports of human rights violations and take
appropriate measures to put an end to such acts. The
Council calls upon the Government of Croatia to lift
any time-limits placed on the return of refugees to
Croatia to reclaim their property. The Council also
calls on the Government to cooperate with
international humanitarian organizations in the
creation of conditions conducive for the repatriation
of refugees in safety and dignity.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1995/49.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 12.35 pm.

