Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to
thank the Jordanian presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this timely debate. I also thank Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman
for his thought-provoking statement.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made later today by the Head of the European
Union delegation.

Humanity's lessons from the horrors of war have
often found expression in a combination of normative
and institutional acts. Thus, like the United Nations
itself, the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights arose directly from the experience of
the Second World War. Originating from the bloody
memories of the Battle of Solferino, international
humanitarian law continued to evolve in response
to the new realities of war in the twentieth century,
leading to the reinforcement in 1977 of the provisions
on, inter alia, the illegality of indiscriminate attacks
against civilians and the expansion of its application to
non-international conflicts.

The more recent concepts of the protection of
civilians, key to the work of the Council, human
security and the responsibility to protect emerged as a
response to the changing nature ofmodern conflict. The
moral outrage in the face of mass atrocities highlighted
the urgency of tackling impunity for crimes against
humanity, genocide and major war crimes, leading
to the creation of international and mixed criminal
tribunals and the International Criminal Court, a
body whose purpose is to make accountability truly
universal. Commissions of inquiry and fact-finding
missions established themselves as an important tool for
registering mass violations of human rights and crimes
against humanity. Today, they are a useful instrument
in the work of the Council.

The world has also seen more than 30 truth
and reconciliation commissions, established to
research, record and testify to abuses of international
humanitarian and human rights law. Recommendations
by those commissions command high legitimacy
and are essential for ending impunity and preventing
further abuses. Furthermore, such commissions are
instrumental in the healing process of communities
affected by conflict as sharing personal stories of pain
and loss can help the victims to recover their dignity
and give them courage, while remembering to move on
with their lives.

In our part of the world, joint commissions
of historians to seek common understanding of
contentious issues have been set up. The knowledge of
truth and historic memory is essential as knowledge
and the memory of the brutalities are powerful vehicles
for pushing humanity towards seeking better and
more effective ways to protect human lives and human
dignity and create durable peace.

In order to have an impact, however, truth alone is
not sufficient. It must be supported by political will and
be firmly anchored in an enabling legal and institutional
framework of respect for human rights, the rule of
law, accountability and democratic governance. A
fundamental lesson that requires enhanced application
is that of prevention. Unresolved grievances, exclusion
and marginalization, extremist ideologies and
unchecked personal ambitions, territorial claims and
ethnic tensions - 100 years since the beginning of
the First World War, the causes of conflict remain
hauntingly similar.

Knowing that, it is essential that we improve
significantly our ability to anticipate the warning signs
of a looming conflict and act accordingly. The world is
not short ofinspiring examples ofpreventive action. An
outstanding case of preventive thinking in Europe after

the end of the Second World War was the Franco-German
reconciliation, binding two former enemies in a solid
framework of interdependence. Also in Europe, what
started with the emergence of the European Coal and
Steel Community is today the 28-strong European
Union, whose membership continues to be sought and
to inspire democratic transformations among aspirant
States.

Regional organizations are well placed to develop
preventive capacities. Lithuania's experience as Chair
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe a couple of years ago and our working
together with our European Union partners to defuse
emerging crises strengthen our belief in the importance
of confidence-building, the use of good offices and
mediation for conflict prevention. The efforts of
subregional organizations in Africa and elsewhere
aimed at conflict prevention offer a promising
alternative for the future.

A key element of prevention is education. Through
education, we can promote truth and keep alive the
memory of the countless victims of wars, genocides,
ethnic cleansings, religious extremism and totalitarian
ideologies. The stories of the victims are essential in
promoting the shared values of humanity and a better
understanding of our common history. We should use
those stories for the sake of building a lasting peace
so that the much promised "never again" can finally
indeed become "never again".

