Mr. Weissbrod (Israel): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on holding the presidency of the Council this
month, and thank you for convening this important
debate. My delegation also congratulates the
Chairpersons of the counter-terrorism subsidiary
bodies on their able stewardship, and I wish to thank
them for their informative briefings this morning.

As this Council has reiterated many times,
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations is illegal,
unacceptable and constitutes a threat to international
peace and security. There is never any justification for
terrorism.

Terrorism as a global phenomenon is multifaceted
and carries multiple identities. It is viewed both as a
battlefield and an enemy, a weapon and a method of
warfare, a strategy and a tactic, a means and an end.
Terrorism knows no borders and is not confined by
archaic boundaries. As such, the struggle against
terrorism must be a global one. It must reflect the new
realities of the twenty-first century, where money, men
and materiel flow virtually without restriction from
country to country. Because of the globalized world in
which we live, the United Nations has an important
role to play in coordinating and streamlining efforts to
combat terrorism. While States bear the primary
responsibility to prevent and combat terrorism, the
United Nations must continue to review and implement
a comprehensive approach to eliminating this scourge.
The Security Council plays a central role in any such
effort.

The State of Israel has been challenged by
terrorism from its very beginning. Israelis and Israeli
interests have been the target of terrorist attacks
abroad, along our borders to the north and south, and in
the very heart of the country. In this respect, Israel
stresses that it is incumbent upon all States to adhere to
their obligations under international law, including the
relevant resolutions adopted by this Council, to prevent
terrorism and to bring terrorists to justice.

Unfortunately, some States fail to observe their
international obligations and continue to offer safe
havens to terrorists and, in certain cases, actively host
and sponsor terrorism. As such, these States threaten
international peace and security. For the Council to
remain engaged and effective in the fight against
terrorism, it must address these breaches of its counter-
terrorism resolutions in a concrete and determined
manner.

Israel commends the ongoing work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) in monitoring
the national implementation of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), including through the ongoing
process of reviewing the preliminary implementation
assessment submitted by Member States. The progress
outlined in document S/2008/379 represents an
important assessment of the compliance, or lack
thereof, of anti-terrorism measures in different regions.
It is Israel's hope that the preliminary implementation
assessment review process, together with the new
technical guide being drafted by CTED, will offer the
Council effective ways to evaluate compliance with
resolution 1373 (2001) and to offer constructive
improvements.

Israel supported the adoption of a working plan
for CTED earlier this year. In particular, we appreciate
the efforts being taken by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and CTED to improve transparency in their
work. We continue to look forward to a fruitful
dialogue with these two organs in the future.

Israel welcomes the adoption this year of
resolution 1822 (2008), which extended the mandate of
the Monitoring Team established to support the activity
of the 1267 Committee. It remains critically important
that the world community continues to pursue
Al-Qaida, Osama bin Laden and the Taliban and other
individuals, undertakings and entities associated with
them in an uncompromising fashion. The recent
adoption of resolution 1822 (2008) is further
demonstration of the Security Council's commitment
against those who seek to use terrorism and target
innocent civilians.

Israel encourages efforts to ensure that fair and
clear procedures continue to be utilized in the listing
and delisting of terrorist suspects. We welcome the
decision of the Council to make accessible a summary
of reasons for listing, including with regard to entries
that were added to the Consolidated List before the
adoption of resolution 1822 (2008). Israel further
welcomes the decision to conduct a review of all
names on the Consolidated List in order to ensure that
the list is updated and accurate.

The threat of conventional terrorism continues to
require our full and undivided attention. Yet, the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction -
chemical, biological, nuclear and radiological -
presents an even more pressing threat to all of
humanity. The dangerous nexus of terrorism and
weapons of mass destruction remains a principal
concern for Israel. As such, Israel fully supports
resolution 1540 (2004), and we believe that it is a
significant step towards the implementation of
international standards against the threats of
international terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 1810
(2008) and the ongoing efforts for the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We urge all
members of the United Nations to reassess their
compliance with resolution 1540 (2004) in an effort to
redouble efforts to ensure that the world's most
dangerous weapons do not fall into the hands of
terrorists.

Terrorism is an international plague that must be
tackled in a global, holistic and comprehensive manner.
In this regard, Israel welcomes the ongoing and
enhanced cooperation between the Council's three
counter-terrorism Committees, as well as between
these Committees and other counter-terrorism organs,
such as the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force.

Israel, for its part, will continue to actively
engage in the work of the Council's counter-terrorism
Committees and to fully support their work. We are
proud to be a donor country to CTED and to offer our
vast experience, knowledge and best-practices to every
State interested in improving its counter-terrorism
abilities. Like all States, for Israel to be successful
against terrorism, the international community must be
successful against terrorism.

