Mr. Moura (Brazil): Thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this meeting. The United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and the United Nations as a whole can be proud of
what has already been attained in such a short period of
time, especially if one recalls the extent of the
destruction following the 1999 popular consultation.
The political skills and competence shown by Sergio
Vieira de Mello in conducting UNTAET as well as the
vision of the Timorese leadership have been
instrumental to the success achieved. Let me pay
tribute to Jose Ramos-Horta, who is here with us, for
his central role in building a democratic East Timor. I
thank also the Secretary-General for his report.

As we enter the crucial stages of the transition to
independence, the support of the international
community becomes even more important, as
eloquently expressed this morning by Mr. Vieira de
Mello and Mr. Ramos-Horta in their comprehensive
statements.

Brazil agrees with the Secretary-General that,
once independent, East Timor will require international
support to be provided through a mission mandated by
the Security Council and funded from assessed
contributions.

The Brazilian Government is committed to the
efforts towards building a democratic and stable East
Timor. This was the main thrust of the visit of
President Fernando Henrique Cardoso to East Timor
last January. President Cardoso personally presided
over the launching of Brazilian cooperation projects in
the fields of capacity-building, professional training
and education. As a concrete follow-up to President
Cardoso's visit, a Brazilian technical mission visited
East Timor in May in order to identify opportunities for
cooperation in the area of agriculture. We hope to build
on our experience in South-South cooperation to
strengthen the cooperation with East Timor and expand
the areas covered by Brazilian projects.

The problem of militia activities in and around
the refugee camps of West Timor and in the border area
remains a serious threat to the stability of East Timor.
From time to time unidentified gunmen fire shots at
United Nations peacekeepers and provoke violence.
Fortunately, these incidents are today less frequent.
This type of incident is a reminder of how unstable the
situation might become if we do not keep vigilant.
They also show the importance of maintaining a
credible dissuasive capacity with a robust
peacekeeping force.

We are also worried about the fate of refugees in
the camps of West Timor and look forward to the
assessment of the security situation to be submitted by
the Secretary-General. A secure environment is a
precondition for the resumption of international
assistance to the refugees and to allow them to decide
freely about their own future and choose whether they
want to remain in Indonesia or return to East Timor.

The East Timorese are tired of violence and
destruction. There must be a clear effort to bring to
justice those who incite hatred as a political weapon to
foster anarchy and chaos. The criminal justice system
must be reinforced, and additional resources may be
necessary to this effect.

The first verdict delivered by East Timor's
judicial system concerning a serious crime 4 the case
of violence against women in Lolotoe - is an
important development. We remain concerned,
however, with the difficulties facing the United Nations
Serious Crimes Unit, in charge of gathering evidence to
prosecute perpetrators of grave abuses. For this unit to
make a difference, it is important to overcome the
current dearth of forensic experts, experienced
investigators and interpreters.

The solutions for security and law and order
problems are multidimensional. Besides the most
obvious reactions through military force and policing
and the functioning of an efficient criminal justice
system, we should not overlook the far-reaching tasks
of nation-building. Sustainable solutions lie in the
construction of inclusive and effective democratic
institutions coupled with the creation of economic
opportunities for all.

Widespread inequality and high unemployment
rates contribute decisively to fuelling violence,
particularly in situations characterized by fragile
democratic institutions.

The organization of the forthcoming election for
the Constituent Assembly will certainly be the first test
case for the embryonic democratic institutions of East
Timor. The support of the international community is
essential to quell any possible attempts to jeopardize
this election. It is also important to ensure a free, fair
and transparent election in all its phases, from the
political campaign to registration, balloting, accounting
of votes and the certification of winners. It is necessary
to create a solid basis for sustainable elections in the
future, bearing in mind that further elections may be
necessary this year in the light of decisions to be taken
by the Constituent Assembly.

Civic education and training is crucial now and
will continue to be in the future. We note with
satisfaction that registration for the election was
completed, political parties are campaigning, and
UNTAET is making an effort to draw more women into
the political process.

I will make a few additional remarks concerning
the political process and the economy.

As regards the political process, it is essential that
political parties remain committed to settling their
differences through institutional channels. The signing
of a pact of national unity is a positive step, but its
practice must follow suit. The logical questions are: is
there any chance that those groups that did not sign the
pact may embroil others in disorderly conduct in the
run-up to the elections? What measures are being taken
to prevent that from happening?

In the area of the economy, growth has been
fostered by the international presence. As
independence approaches and the downsizing of the
mission in East Timor is carried out, an important
source of hard currency will certainly start to dry up.
Since it is not possible to wait for the revenue from the
Timor Gap, one important question is how to put in
place export-oriented income-generating projects. This
will probably not happen without arrangements to
facilitate market access for East Timorese agricultural
products.

The international community has made the
commitment to help East Timor build a solid
democracy. For such commitment to become deeply
ingrained in East Timorese society and shape its polity,
it needs to be shored up by the improvement of the
day-to-day reality on the ground, at the very grass roots
level. To that end our efforts must be untiring.

