Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Salame for his briefing and
his continuing efforts, and those of his team, in a very
challenging environment.

As the representative of the United Kingdom noted
and every subsequent speaker suggested, the status
quo in Libya is not sustainable. Terrorists continue
to probe for opportunities to regroup, as we saw last
month in the heinous attack of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Shams against the Ministry for Foreign Affairs
in Tripoli. Disruptions to petroleum production in the
south are hurting all Libyans. Armed groups continue
to jockey for influence and patronage.

In that context, we strongly support Special
Representative Salame and the recalibrated United
Nations action plan he presented to the Security
Council on 8 November (see S/PV.8394), including his
calls for a Libyan-led national conference to be held in
early 2019 and the subsequent electoral process to begin
this spring. We welcome the Special Representative's
briefing today on his recent consultations with Libyan
leaders, his travel to the south and his current plans
for the conference. We urge all Libyans to seize this
opportunity to break the political deadlock in the
country. The United States stands ready to assist the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
however we can.

As United Nations mediation advances, some armed
factions, fearful of genuine and inclusive progress, have
attempted to escalate tensions. There can be no military
solution to the crisis in Libya. The United States will
strongly oppose all attempts to circumvent the political
process through violence.
While the political process should move quickly,
artificial deadlines will complicate efforts. The United
States commends Libyan Prime Minister Serraj and
other Libyan leaders for their continued attention to
the economic dimensions of the conflict. At Libyan
invitation, the United States hosted Libyan leaders in
Tunis last week for the ninth iteration of the Libyan
economic dialogue.

We encourage the Government of National Accord
to accelerate the implementation of the necessary
monetary and subsidy reforms to stabilize the Libyan
economy and urge it to redouble its commitment to
fiscal transparency. Such efforts will enable a much-
needed conversation about the equitable distribution of
the country's wealth.

As the Security Council has repeatedly affirmed,
Libya's petroleum belongs to the Libyan people. We
condemn illicit transactions in Libyan petroleum and
reaffirm our support for the robust implementation of
resolutions 2146 (2014), 2278 (2016), and 2362 (2017),
which ban that practice.

We also encourage Libyan authorities to continue
their work with UNSMIL to strengthen security
arrangements, particularly in Tripoli. We echo
UNSMIL's condemnation of recent violence in the
Libyan capital and call on all groups to respect their
commitments to the 4 September ceasefire and
the ceasefire consolidation agreement reached on
9 September.

We remind those who threaten Libya's peace,
security and stability that the Security Council is paying
attention and can impose sanctions. The respective
asset freezes and travel bans on militia leaders Ibrahim
Jadhran in September and Salah Badi in November
show how serious we were and remain.

The Libyan people have suffered greatly from
insecurity, lack of economic opportunity and political
upheaval for too long. In partnership with Special
Representative Salame, we must seize the current
opportunity to break the political impasse through
participation in the national conference and empower
all Libyans to move toward a more peaceful and
prosperous future.

