Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing. I would like to welcome
both Minister for Foreign Affairs Hoxhaj and Minister
for Foreign Affairs Mrkic' to the Council, and thank
them for sharing their perspectives with us. I would
also like to express again my appreciation to our long-
standing partners in Kosovo, the European Union (EU),
the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX),
the Kosovo Force (KFOR)/NATO, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other
organizations that support the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I would
like to make three main points.

First, the United States commends Kosovo and
Serbia for their efforts to move towards normalizing their
relations and to continue on a path towards full Euro-
Atlantic integration. The 19 October and 7 November
meetings of Prime Ministers Thaci and Daeic' with EU
High Representative Ashton demonstrate a willingness
to engage constructively. We also affirm that it is
only through dialogue that both countries can realize
their common goal of a European future and improve
their citizens' lives. We are pleased that the Serbian
Government has stated that it will honour the dialogue
agreement on regional cooperation - a step that can
only benefit both countries in the region as a whole.

We extend our congratulations as well to Kosovo
on its most recent recognitions from Fiji, Timor-Leste,
Burundi and Papua New Guinea and for deepening its
regional economic integration through its impending
membership in the European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development (EBRD). EBRD membership will
support economic development and cooperation,
growth and social stability, to the benefit of the people
of Kosovo and throughout the Balkan region. We hope
that these developments will continue as we approach
the new year, and call for increased cooperation to
address the many issues that remain. We also welcome
steps being taken by both sides towards implementing
the agreement on integrated border management and
we look forward to the establishment of the first four
interim facilities by the end of this year.

Secondly, the United States remains concerned
about attacks on international personnel, restrictions on
freedom of movement, particularly that of EULEX and
the high level of tensions between ethnic communities.
Just last week, tensions rose in northern Kosovo when
Serb parallel officials, supported by Belgrade, sought
to halt the reconstruction of homes for displaced
ethnic Albanians and to protest implementation of the
integrated border management agreement. With regard
to the former, I note that employees of the UNMIK
office in North Mitrovica reportedly also tried to
impede construction efforts. We call on all officials of
Kosovo and Serbia, as well as UNMIK, to work to calm
tensions and avoid inflammatory language and actions.

We encourage close coordination between EULEX
and KFOR to deter and respond to such actions aimed
at undermining the rule of law and preventing legal
construction and returns to the north. We are deeply
troubled by the 7 September attack on a EULEX
armoured vehicle and the reports of attacks on staff of
the newly-established Mitrovica North administrative
office, including the attempted firebombing of the
house of its deputy director on 19 November. Those
efforts aim to intimidate the staff, many of whom are
ethnic Serbs working to better their communities.

We commend the Kosovo police force's increased
efforts to protect cultural and religious heritage, as well
as its action against organized crime and trafficking
rings. We also encourage Kosovo and Serbia to redouble
their efforts to cooperate with the International
Committee of the Red Cross and local organizations to
locate the remains of over 1,700 persons who are still
missing. Further, we continue to support the Special
Investigative Task Force in its work to investigate and,
if necessary, prosecute allegations of organ trafficking
and other wrongdoing. We note the judgement of the
Appeals Chamber of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in the case of two Croatian
generals. We fully support the ICTY and accept its
rulings.

Finally, the United States congratulates Kosovo
on reaching the end of supervised independence
on 10 September, pursuant to a decision of the
International Steering Group that the Government
of Kosovo had substantially met all of its obligations
under the comprehensive settlement plan. We thank the
International Civilian Representative and his Office
for working diligently with the Kosovo Government to
reach this milestone. To achieve full EU integration,
Kosovo must continue its efforts, with the support of the
international community, to strengthen its multi-ethnic
democracy and the rule of law.

The United States continues to support both
Serbia and Kosovo in their pursuit of integration into
European institutions. To that end, we reiterate our call
for further constructive dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, under EU facilitation. As Secretary Clinton
said during her October visit to Pristina with EU High
Representative Ashton,

"We will stand with you as you make key reforms
to improve governance that brings you closer to
full Euro-Atlantic integration. We will stand with
you as you work with Serbia to resolve practical
problems and overcome obstacles, and we will
be there for you as you take the necessary steps
towards the future you so richly deserve."

