Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): May I
take this opportunity to congratulate you, Madame
President, on taking over the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October and to wish you well
in that task. I also wish to thank Ambassador Nawaf
Salam and his team from Lebanon, who ably stewarded
the Council in September.

The United Kingdom is deeply disappointed by
the decision of some Council members to block the
adoption of the draft resolution submitted today by the
European members of the Council. Two months ago,
this Council adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2011/16) condemning the widespread
violations of human rights and the use of force against
civilians by the Syrian authorities. It called for an
immediate end to violence, compliance with
obligations under international law and for the Syrian
Government to implement its stated commitments to
reform.

Since the presidential statement, the situation has
deteriorated further. The regime continues to brutally
repress its people. It has killed almost three thousand
civilians. It has used disproportionate force and has
arbitrarily detained many thousands of people. Its
actions may amount to crimes against humanity. There
is no sign of reform or of a genuine attempt to address
the concerns of the Syrian population. How can there
be genuine dialogue when the regime is denying its
people freedom of assembly and freedom of speech?

The failure of the Syrian regime to heed calls of
the international community, both bilateral and
collective, has been met with increasing concern by
Syria's neighbours and the wider region. Two weeks
ago, the United Nations Secretary-General said that
enough is enough, and called for the international
community to take coherent measures.

Against this backdrop, the time for strong
Security Council action was long overdue. We, and
indeed the majority of members of the Council,
believed that the time had come for the imposition of
sanctions. But a minority - two with the power of

veto - said they would oppose sanctions.

In an attempt to maintain the unity of this
Council, for the past few weeks we have therefore been
engaged in intensive negotiations aimed at ensuring
that the Council could at least send a strong signal to
the Syrian regime to stop the violence. Through these
negotiations we tried to meet the stated concerns of
Council members. We removed the sanctions. Still, it
was unacceptable to the minority. We called on all
sides to reject violence and extremism. Still it was
unacceptable. We removed any sense that sanctions
would automatically follow in 30 days if the regime
failed to comply, and still it was unacceptable. By
including reference to Article 41 of the United Nations
Charter we made it clear that any further steps would
be non-military in nature. Still it was unacceptable.

The text we voted on today contained nothing
that any member of this Council should have felt the
need to oppose. Yet two members chose to veto. It will
be a deep disappointment to the people of Syria and to
the wider region that some members of this Council
could not show their support for their struggle for basic
human rights that most populations of the countries
around this table enjoy.

Some members of the Security Council have
made bilateral attempts to engage President Assad and
to persuade the Syrian Government to change course
and implement reform. Each time, they have received
vague promises of reform, and each time the Syrian
Government has failed to deliver. By blocking this
resolution, the onus is now on those countries to step
up their efforts to persuade the Syrian Government to
end the violence and pursue genuine reform.

If the situation continues as it is, this Council will
have to shoulder its responsibilities and take the tough
action that it has, unfortunately, been prevented from
taking today.

