Mr. Normandin (Canada): Mr. President, Canada
welcomes the opportunity to address the Security
Council on the important issue of its working methods,
and I would like to thank you for convening this
meeting.

As we all know, the Security Council has a
central role in safeguarding international peace and
security and in leading collective responses to today's
security challenges. With more than 90,000 military,
police and civilians deployed in peace support missions
worldwide, the decisions of the Security Council affect
the daily lives of millions of people. There is therefore
a genuine urgency in ensuring that the Security Council
is accountable, inclusive and transparent in its
decision-making processes.

The President's excellent concept paper has laid
out the progress made since the issuance of the note of
the President of the Security Council in July 2006
(S/2006/507). Canada welcomes this progress.
However, it is also clear that much more work needs to
be done.

Regardless of the outcome of the ongoing
discussions on expansion of the Security Council, it is
a reform of the working methods that will have the
greatest impact for most small- and medium-sized
States, in particular with regard to the effectiveness of
the Council and the legitimacy of its decisions. In this
regard, Canada feels that immediate progress is both
necessary and possible.

For the vast majority of Member States, of
course, membership on the Security Council is a rare
occurrence, while the decisions of the Security Council
affect us all greatly. While it is clear that each Council
member must act in accordance with its national
conscience, the wider membership has a legitimate
interest in knowing how those decisions are made and
in contributing to them as appropriate.

For this reason, we urge the Council to redouble
its efforts to enhance transparency through the
10
increased use of public meetings. We acknowledge that
there is occasionally the need for private meetings, for
example, if the very resolution of a conflict hinges on
discreet and confidential negotiation or consultation.
But most meetings, such as briefings provided by the
Secretariat, do not need to be conducted in private.

Canada strongly supports the recommendation
contained in the President's concept paper that the
Council should give a clear explanation of the rationale
for the adoption of specific meeting formats and should
set forth the objectives for each meeting.

Canada also urges the Council to increase
consultations with the broader membership, for
example, by making more frequent and systematic use
of informal exchanges and by increasing the regularity
of substantive briefings for non-Council Member
States, including on the work of subsidiary bodies. In
particular, consultations with troop-contributing
countries and major stakeholders and financial
contributors should be strengthened, so that their input
can be taken into account prior to the establishment or
renewal ofa mission.

We would also encourage the Council to expand
and deepen the practice of public and open debates,
which allows the membership to contribute their
perspectives and ideas.

We commend the Council for increasing the
number of briefings for Member States over past years,
particularly on the monthly programme of work, which
has proven to be very useful. However, this practice
should become a systematic one and not one that
depends on the goodwill of the incumbent presidency.

(spoke in French)

The Security Council would also benefit from a
serious consideration of the use of the veto. We all
know the inhibiting effect that the veto - or even the
threat of the veto - can have on Council deliberations.
There have been several regrettable occasions in recent
years when the spectre of the veto had the effect of
dampening debate and delaying much-needed action.

But the veto is not, and was never meant to be, a
tool for avoiding debate on certain issues. For that
reason, Canada believes that any use of the veto should
be publicly explained and justified. We also strongly
believe that the veto has no place in deliberations on
situations of genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes. We urge the five permanent members of
the Security Council to commit to voluntary
restrictions on its use in those situations.

Given the importance of the issue, Canada hopes
that this open debate will not be a stand-alone event. It
has been 14 years since the last open debate on
Security Council working methods was held, and the
membership can not afford to wait that long again.

Canada supports the suggestion put forward by
the group of five small countries, that the Security
Council Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions be mandated to
undertake a comprehensive review of note of the
President of the Security Council (S/2006/507), and
that the Working Group present its findings to the
Security Council, preferably in an open debate before
the end of 2008.

In conclusion, Sir, I would like to thank you
again for convening this meeting, which is a significant
step towards making urgently needed reform. This
reform will inevitably be an ongoing process, and one
in which both members and non-members of the
Security Council will need to engage. However, it is
also an area where early action leading to tangible
results for Member States is possible. Canada looks
forward to engaging constructively on this process in
the months ahead.

