Mr. Bhandari (Nepal): I wish to begin by thanking the Belgian presidency for convening this open debate on transitional justice. I would also like to thank the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the other briefers for the insightful presentations they gave earlier today (see S/PV.8723).Nepal believes that transitional justice is an important component for sustaining peace in post- conflict societies. It supports the process of healing wounds, addressing the injustices of the past and fostering trust and harmony in society. Transitional justice is also about working through the painful past in order to create a peaceful future. In that endeavour, fundamental elements, such as finding truth, providing reparations, ensuring non-recurrence and achieving social reconciliation are all critical. Furthermore, efforts to ensure peace should be complemented by broad-based economic development and the inclusion of victims in the country's development activities. There cannot be a one-size-fits-all approach to transitional justice. Each conflict and its peace process is unique and requires a unique transitional justice system. Transitional justice must be guided by the national context and societal needs of the post-conflict communities. National leadership and ownership are quintessential for healing the wounds of the past and for ensuring psychosocial recovery. It is equally important to promote the engagement of women, young people and civil society in the process. Allow me to shed some light on Nepal's transitional justice mechanisms. Nepal is a uniquely successful case of a nationally owned and led peace process that culminated with the promulgation of the new Constitution in 2015. In order to conclude the last leg of that process, two independent commissions - the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and the Commission of Investigation on Enforced Disappeared Persons - were set up in 2015. The mandates of the Commissions have been extended and new commissioners have recently been appointed. The independence and impartiality of the Commissions are guaranteed by law. In addition, we are consulting with the victims in order to ensure their participation in the amendment of transitional justice laws. Nepal's transitional justice process is guided by the Comprehensive Peace Accord, the directives of the Supreme Court, relevant international commitments, the concerns of the victims and realities on the ground. Our focus has been to strike a balance between compliance with international norms and standards and the national sociopolitical context by putting the victims at the centre. As a country that steered a uniquely successful peace process, Nepal has the requisite capacity and political will to conclude the transitional justice process in an equally unique manner. In conclusion, Nepal is committed to ensuring justice to the victims and making the transitional justice process a credible, smooth and successful one. Our only focus is on building a peaceful and prosperous Nepal. By ensuring social justice, promoting an inclusive society and delivering good governance, we are now well on the path to reconciliation.
