Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Ijoin
others in thanking our briefers.

The signing of the revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan of 2015 is encouraging, and I welcome it on
behalf of France. I also commend the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the countries of the
region, as well as its Special Envoy Ismail Wais,
who contributed to the finalization of the revitalized
Agreement. France will continue to support the efforts
of all partners. Such efforts must be inclusive in order
to find a solution to the crisis and end the violence.
We hope that the Agreement will enable us to move
towards lasting peace in South Sudan. It is our hope and
that of millions of South Sudanese who long for peace
and a better life.

Ms. Grace John, from whom we have just heard,
is the face of a fledgling South Sudanese civil society
that wishes to start a new chapter. But we know that
hopes have already been dashed several times in
South Sudan, and we must therefore collectively be
vigilant and determined. We must be vigilant, first
of all, because it is on the actions taken that we will
judge the progress made. The Agreement reached
must be effectively implemented on the ground. No
one - neither the South Sudanese nor the international
community - wants peace on paper alone. We will
therefore be vigilant in ensuring compliance with the
ceasefire and in protecting civilians, which is at the
heart of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS), as Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix has just reminded us, and is at the
heart of the Security Council's concerns. As Special
Envoy Haysom has just pointed out, it will also be
necessary to specify the mechanisms for monitoring
compliance with the commitments made.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/831)
refers to the progress on the ground in recent months.
But that progress is still far too modest. Several violent
and deadly incidents have occurred. And, as early
as Friday, a few hours after the signing of the Peace
Agreement, the ceasefire was violated in the Central
Equatoria region. The next day, Saturday, 15 September,
an UNMISS soldier was wounded by a soldier of the
South Sudanese Army in the town of Yei, which is an
unacceptable attack for which those responsible will
have to face justice. In that context, I would like to
express France's solidarity with UNMISS personnel.

France will equally be, and we must all be,
extremely vigilant about humanitarian access and the
protection of humanitarian workers who go to the aid of
populations to the point of risking their lives. France's
unwavering commitment on that subject is well known.

The humanitarian challenge is huge. Indeed,
on this point, the report of the Secretary-General is
edifying: 1.8 million displaced persons, 2.5 million
refugees in neighbouring countries, 60 per cent of the
population in a situation of severe food insecurity and
2.4 million children unable to go to school. Behind
the litany of numbers, an entire generation is being
sacrificed. Dangerous intercommunity tensions are also
being rekindled by poverty. In addition to this tragic
humanitarian situation, there have been serious human
rights violations, some of which may constitute crimes
against humanity and war crimes. That is a cause of
major concern for France. It is high time that the hybrid
court be established and made operational.

In addition to the necessary vigilance, we must
also demonstrate determination and perseverance. We
must collectively respond to humanitarian challenges.
We must also stand firm with regard to those who
bear responsibility for this situation, which is the
meaning of the sanctions adopted by the Council. And
we are determined to continue along this path as long
as necessary.

The Council can therefore count on France's
determination. It is the same determination that
leads us to give our full support to the Secretary-
General's recommendations to alleviate the suffering
of the people, silence the weapons and move forward
towards peace.

In conclusion, I would like to warmly thank Special
Envoy Haysom for his outstanding work over the past
two years and wish him every success in his new
responsibilities as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia.

