Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes you to New York, Mr.
President, to preside over this open meeting and also
expresses its appreciation of the efforts made by
Ambassador Fowler and the delegation of Canada for its

 

convening. We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General and Mr. Jakob Kellenberger, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for their
statements just now.

Today, armed conflicts continue to rage in many parts
of the world, inflicting great harm on civilians, jeopardizing
regional stability and development, and even threatening
international peace and security. Addressing the issue of
how effectively to protect civilians in armed conflict has
always been a serious and difficult task for the international
community.

Since this issue was first discussed by the Security
Council in February 1999, some progress has been made in
this field. Last September, the Council adopted resolution
1265 (1999) on the basis of the Secretary-General's report
and established an informal working group to study the
report and its recommendations. Building on this, the
Council has prepared the draft resolution before us. It is our
hope that its adoption will help the international community
to achieve better results in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

The Chinese delegation has consistently attached
importance to the issue of protecting civilians in armed
conflict and has always participated actively in the
consideration of this issue by the Security Council, the
General Assembly and other relevant bodies. We have
participated in a constructive manner in the informal
working group's review of the Secretary-General's report
and recommendations, expressed our position and put
forward positive suggestions on and amendments to this
draft resolution.

Today, I would like to highlight once again the
following points.

First, armed conflicts throughout the world differ in
their causes, manifestations and natures. The Security
Council should review and address the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict on a case-by-case
basis, dealing with each situation on its own merits. The
Security Council must take timely measures in response to
such cases as the Rwandan genocide. Usually, however, it
is the sovereign States that bear the main responsibility for
protecting civilians in armed conflict. The Security Council
cannot successfully consider and address this issue without
the close cooperation of the countries involved. It should
fully respect the opinions of the countries or parties
concerned, assist them in various ways, in accordance with
their specific needs, and act when necessary in support of
their efforts to protect civilians.

Not long ago, for example, the Security Council, in
response to the specific situations of the countries
concerned, incorporated elements of civilian protection
into the mandates of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone and the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is
commendable. In our view, the Government of a country
in armed conflict tends to decide on the measures
necessary to protect civilians in accordance with the
nature and characteristics of the conflict and the actual
circumstances of civilians in the area of conflict. In this
regard, the positions of sovereign States should be
respected by the Security Council. Action taken without
the understanding and cooperation of the countries
involved may lead those countries to resist. Should this
occur, not only will relevant measures for protecting
civilians fail to be implemented in any meaningful way,
but more civilians will be dragged down into misery.

It must be pointed out that any attempt to politicize
humanitarian concerns, wantonly interfere in other
countries' internal affairs or, worse yet, overturn a
legitimate Government under the pretext of protecting
civilians runs counter to the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter and will inevitably have
serious consequences. The draft resolution before us
reaffirms the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter and stresses the need to respect the
political independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all countries. We must keep in mind and abide by
these principles in acting to protect civilians in armed
conflict.

Secondly, in considering the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, the Security Council should
ensure a clear division of labour and enhance coordination
and cooperation with other bodies. The issue of protecting
civilians in armed conflict involves political,
peacekeeping, humanitarian, disarmament, legal and many
other dimensions. It requires the concerted efforts of the
entire international community and the United Nations
system. The 40 recommendations in the
Secretary-General's report were not made for the Security
Council alone. Many of them need to be assessed and
addressed by the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other relevant bodies. In
our View, all agencies within the United Nations system
should work with a well-defined division of labour and

 

terms of reference. The Security Council should review and
address this issue within its own mandate and, in doing so,
support and cooperate with other agencies in this regard.
This is the only way that different departments of the
United Nations can work in harmony and mutual
reinforcement, allowing the system as a whole to play its
role more effectively.

T hirdly, while addressing the issue of protecting
civilians in armed conflict, the Security Council should seek
to eradicate the causes of crises. The Security Council, with
its primary responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security, should draw upon past successes and failures
alike so as to perform its duties more effectively with a
view to creating a favourable international environment of
peace for all regions and countries. The Council should
focus its efforts on finding solutions to the armed conflicts
themselves.

Civilians can be truly protected only through the
establishment of a generally favourable and peaceful
environment and the early defusing of specific disputes
leading to conflicts. At the same time, we believe that the
international community and the relevant United Nations
bodies should take further steps to eradicate the root causes
of conflict by helping the countries at risk to eliminate
poverty, develop their economies, promote national
reconciliation and maintain domestic stability. Only thus
can a fundamental solution be reached to the issue of
protecting civilians in armed conflict.

