Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Allow me to express to
you, Sir, our warmest congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April and to commend your
predecessor, Ambassador Mayoral, for his able conduct
of this Council last month.

Before I start I would like to mention that I
listened very carefully to the statement by the
Palestinian observer, who, among other things, was
speaking about double standards. Talking of double
standards, there were many words mentioned by the
Palestinian observer. However, strangely or curiously,
there was one word missing: Hamas. Let me spell it out
for you: H - A - M. - A - S, Hamas. No mention.
And I think that the members of this Council deserve
to know and to hear from the Palestinian observer who
indeed he represents: President Mahmoud Abbas,
whom he quoted as condemning the suicide bombing in
Tel Aviv? Or Hamas, which justified and celebrated the
suicide bombing in Tel Aviv? I think we all deserve to
know that.

Two weeks ago, on March 30, we met in this
same forum to discuss the situation in the Middle East.
During that meeting, we stated our belief that the next
terror attack against Israeli civilians was being
financed, planned and nearing execution at that very
moment. Not even one hour after the meeting, a
Palestinian terrorist murdered four Israelis in yet
another atrocious attack. Since then and until today, we

have witnessed daily rocket attacks from the Gaza Strip
into Israel.

In my original speech, Mr. President, I wanted to
share with you - unfortunately yet again - our sad
belief that the next terror attack was very near; the
targeting of even more innocent human life was on its
way. However, the tragic reality was even quicker than
I envisioned in my worst nightmares.
This morning, in Tel Aviv, in the midst of the
holy week of Passover, a Palestinian suicide bomber
murdered nine people and wounded over 60 others in
yet another horrific act of terrorism. The Palestinian
terrorist organizations, Islamic Jihad and the Fatah-
linked Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigades immediately claimed
responsibility for this horrendous attack. How did the
newly elected officials of the Palestinian Authority
respond to this morning's abominable act? Sami Abu
Zuhri, the official spokesperson for Hamas, did not
bother to condemn the attack. Instead, he claimed the
Palestinians "have every right to use all means to
defend themselves" and said the attack was justified.
This reaction should not come as a surprise, because
only two weeks ago that same individual stated that the
Hamas movement is committed to all forms of
resistance, including suicide bombings.

Today's horrific act of terrorism, as well as those
that preceded it, are the direct result of the new axis of
terror that I have previously described, an axis
comprised of Member States in this Organization,
namely Iran and Syria, and of terrorist organizations
that they have been harbouring, nurturing, financing
and supporting, namely Hamas and Hizbollah.

This act of terrorism did not happen in a vacuum.
It is the swift implementation of the extreme, mad and
dangerous statements voiced only last week by
Palestinian officials and their sponsors. The words we
have heard are just a sample of the ongoing litany of
hatred, incitement and venom.

Allow me to present at random a very few recent
statements from high-ranking Palestinian officials. Last
Saturday in Teheran, during a well-attended macabre
convention of terror, Khaled Mashal - the Hamas
leader who usually sits comfortably at his headquarters
in Damascus, another capital of this axis of terror -
said, "The new Government in Palestine will never
recognize Israel, and there is no other way than
resistance to drive out the enemy from our lands."
Ismail Haniya - the Prime Minister of the Palestinian
Authority and the newest addition to this axis of
terror - stated after his bid for leadership, "Hamas's
Government ministers are all potential Shahids". On
Saturday, the ultimate leader of this axis of terror, the
President of Iran - who has been calling for the
annihilation of Israel, acquiring nuclear capabilities to
do so and denying the Holocaust while preparing for
the next one - continued his calls to wipe Israel off
the map and stated, "The Zionist regime is on the road
to being eliminated". He referred to Israel as "a rotten,
dried tree that would collapse in one storm". It is
particularly troubling that this same regime announced
just last week that it has enriched uranium, indicating a
likely intention to perpetrate that very storm.

Those words speak for the themselves and do not
need any interpretation. They are clear and represent
the stated goal of this axis of terror which to our
extreme horror was again executed, literally, this
morning in Tel Aviv. The mutilated bodies and the
blood in the marketplace are the most poignant
evidence.

Each day, extreme fundamentalist leaders are
inciting more acts of terrorism. A dark cloud is
looming over our region, and it is metastasizing as a
result of the statements and actions by the leaders of
Iran, Syria and the newly elected Government of the
Palestinian Authority. These recent statements are clear
declarations of war. I urge each and every one of you to
listen carefully and to take them at face value.

In the light - or rather, in the darkness - of
these words coming from the corridors of this new axis
of evil and terror and echoed constantly by deeds on
the ground - deeds of murder and terror, homicide
bombings and brutal killings, with more than 80 daily
alerts of terrorism in Israel, of which 16 are direct,
specific threats - we urge the international community
and the Security Council to take swift action to try and
prevent the next murder, which is, unfortunately,
already on its way.

Without the capable and sophisticated efforts of
the Israeli security forces and the effectiveness of the
security fence, we would witness every single day a
scene of horrific death, bloody streets, limbless
children and widespread fear. Since January, 11 major
suicide terrorist attacks have been prevented and 90
potential suicide bombers have been arrested. These
attacks would have taken place in crowded areas in Tel
Aviv or Jerusalem, causing mass fatalities. Fortunately,
security forces prevented or pre-empted the worst of
these. Yet the number of terror attacks during the
current period continues to mount. Since September
2000, Palestinian terrorists have perpetrated nearly
26,000 terror attacks against the Israeli people.

One of the most serious threats to security in
Israel has been the persistent fire of Qassam rockets
and mortar shells. Since Israel withdrew from the Gaza
Strip, Palestinian terrorists have fired more than 500
Qassam rockets and mortar shells, representing the
primary form of terrorism against Israel, emanating
from the Gaza Strip, which Israel has just disengaged
from. On the very day of our national parliamentary
elections, for the first time a Palestinian terrorist
organization fired a Katyusha rocket into Israel.

Members of the Security Council, imagine what
life would be like if, every day, rockets showered the
skies of your communities. You do not know if your
home will be struck. You do not know if your child's
school will be hit. You are under attack day and night. I
would like to ask each representative in the Council:
what would you do if your country were besieged by
rockets and mortar fire from territory from which you
had just disengaged? Would you wait passively for
more rocket attacks to continue? Would you sit idly as
acts of terrorism against your citizens continued?
Would you - as, unfortunately, a member of both the
Security Council and the Quartet has already done -
finance this engine of terror?

Israel will not compromise the safety and security
of its citizens. We will not passively allow human
bombs, Katyushas or Qassams to penetrate our
territory, kill Israeli citizens and put our people at risk.
Let me make it very clear: Israel regrets any loss of
life, but any attempt to equate the loss of life caused
erroneously by Israel acting in self-defence with a
suicide bomber specifically targeting women and
children is morally wrong and false. Terror is terror is
terror and can never and must never be justified.

In View of all of that, I ask each and every
member of the Council: indeed, what would you do?
Would you just sit still and wait to bury your children?
Would you ignore this harsh reality and just act as if it
were business as usual? Or would you try and stop this
horror and eliminate this danger - a danger, I must
add, not just to Israel but to the whole free world and
to civilization as we know it, as this axis of evil and
terror sows the seeds of the first world war of the
twenty-first century.

