Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like first of all to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Kalomoh for his informative briefing.

The past month has witnessed the beginning of an
unprecedented new phase in the situation between
Israel and Palestine. A new Hamas-led Government
was established, and the Kadima party won the
parliamentary election in Israel. Those developments
are reflections of the will of the peoples of Palestine
and Israel. The international community should respect
the democratic choices made by the peoples of
Palestine and Israel.

After years of bloodshed and conflict, the peoples
of Palestine and Israel earnestly yearn for the early
start of a life of peace and stability. The Governments
and their leaders on both sides have accepted such
choices for a peaceful settlement. The sticking point at
present is that the two sides have yet to establish
mutual trust, the lack of which leads to turbulence in
the security situation and to the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation. It also results in great harm and
injury to the general population and has a direct impact
on the peace and stability of the Middle East region as
a whole. This situation must be resolved. In China's
view, since it is a matter of fact that Israel exists as a
State, it is understandable that it should have concerns
about its security. At the same time, the basic rights of
the Palestinians should be guaranteed. The reasonable
demands of the Palestinians, such as the establishment
of a State, should also be satisfied.

China has consistently stressed that the key to the
settlement of the Middle East question is the
establishment of mutual trust between Israel and
Palestine, the renunciation of violence and the search,
through peaceful negotiation, for a settlement which is
truly in the fundamental interests of the peoples.
The road map for peace in the Middle East
remains the most viable option for the settlement of the
conflict between Israel and Palestine. It is our hope
that the leadership on both sides will display
statesmanship in their consideration of the various
questions and resume their dialogue with a view to
promoting the implementation of the road map so as to
carry out the important tasks that history and their
peoples have bestowed on them, and to live up to the
ardent aspirations of their peoples and of the
international community.

China follows developments in the Middle East
situation with close interest and has always tried to
promote the early establishment of a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East. It is our view that all
agreements reached in the past should continue to be
honoured and implemented. We greatly appreciate the
positive indications given by President Abbas. At the
same time, we believe that all of the resources
belonging to Palestine should be returned to the people
of Palestine in a timely manner, so as to improve the
lives of the general population in Palestine. China will
continue to work with various parties to promote
negotiations and advocate peace so that the peace
process in the Middle East can make positive headway.

We are pleased to note that, since the beginning
of March, many rounds of national dialogue have been
held in Lebanon and that certain basic agreements have
been reached. We hope that that process will help all
factions in Lebanon to reach consensus on major issues
affecting the fate of the country. Yesterday, the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 1664
(2006), authorizing the Secretary-General to continue
consultations with the Lebanese Government on the
details relating to the establishment of a tribunal of an
international character. We support the efforts of the
United Nations International Independent Investigation
Commission, led by Mr. Brammertz, to complete, as
soon as possible and in accordance with the
authorization by the Security Council, the investigation
into the assassination of Mr. Hariri, with a view to
uncovering the truth and upholding justice for the
victims. At the same time, we hope that the
establishment of such a tribunal will facilitate the
maintenance of peace and stability in Lebanon and in
the Middle East as a whole.

