Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the briefers for their
valuable briefings to the Security Council.

Criminal networks and various groups continue to
exploit ongoing conflicts and the absence of the rule of
law in many regions throughout the world to traffic in
persons so as to fund their criminal activities, especially
through exploiting the most vulnerable groups,
including women and children, whether through sexual
exploitation, forced labour, organ harvesting slavery or
other activities. That is fuelling those conflicts, and we
are in need of concerted international efforts to confront
the phenomenon. Egypt has been following closely and
with grave concern media reports of criminal groups
in Libya exploiting illegal migrants and committing
crimes involving human trafficking. Egypt rejects and
condemns that criminal act, which runs counter to the
most basic human values.

Egypt welcomes the efforts of of the Libyan
authorities, who have condemned those acts and
announced that the relevant Libyan entities have
launched an investigation to unearth the truth. They
are determined to punish everyone involved in those
practices if the allegations prove to be true. We are
fully prepared to provide all forms of support to the
brotherly Libyan people so as to support the Libyan
authorities in confronting the situation in all its aspects.

That shocking and terrifying phenomenon
highlights once again the importance of strengthening
Libyan institutions so as to confront the grave
challenges facing the country and enhance their
national capacity to protect the most vulnerable groups
of persons, especially women and children. Egypt has
spared no effort to unite the armed forces of Libya.
In order to support the efforts of the United Nations,
the Egyptian Committee on Libya recently hosted a
group of Libyan officers in Cairo. We are also making
every possible effort to support the political process,
aimed primarily at enabling the Libyans to reach their
own comprehensive and sustainable solutions to the
situation in their country.

We cannot discuss the risks confronting Libya
without discussing the security, economic and social
situation in the Sahel region. The security vacuum, the
difficulty in controlling borders in the remote desert
areas and the countries of the region, and the fact
that the latter are now safe havens for terrorist groups
and organized criminal gangs - thereby facilitating
their illegal activities and ability to terrorize
civilians - has led to a difficult security situation now
confronting Libya.

In that regard, we stress the importance of the role
played by the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel in confronting those risks. The international
community has a responsibility to support that
ambitious initiative. Investing in support for the Joint
Force will bear fruit in the form of enhanced security
and stability in the region and around the world.

The wide-ranging systematic violations of
human rights that accompany large flows of refugees
and migrants, including human trafficking and
the smuggling of migrants, require us to redouble
international efforts to enhance the management of
those flows. In that regard, we believe that we need
to adopt a comprehensive approach to addressing the
root causes of migration, including economic, political,
cultural and humanitarian measures, while focusing on
the development dimension in countries of origin and
host countries.

We must also open a new legal path for accepting
migrants and refugees; we must do more than merely
close borders, which contravenes the 1951 Convention
Relating to the Status of Refugees. We welcome
efforts to adopt the global compact on refugees, in
addition to the global compact for safe, orderly and
regular migration.

In conclusion, we stress that Egypt supports
the central role of the United Nations in enhancing
international efforts to combat human trafficking.
The Security Council adopted resolution 2388 (2017)
a few days ago to that end, in addition to resolution
2331 (2016); the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime;
and the political declaration on the implementation of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons (General Assembly resolution 72/1). We call on Member States to enhance those
efforts in the upcoming period.

