The President: I shall now make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"For nearly half a century, the lives, security
and future of countless individuals across the globe
have depended on United Nations peacekeeping
efforts and on the peacekeepers participating in
them.

"Today, we express our gratitude to all those
who have served the United Nations in the cause of
peace. Over 750,000 men and women have served in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. More than
1,500 have lost their life; many more have been
wounded. This solemn meeting of the Security
Council is held in tribute to their service and
sacrifice.

"Today, the Council is establishing the Dag
Hammarskjold Medal in recognition and
commemoration of those who have lost their life as
a result of service in peacekeeping operations under
the operational control and authority of the United
Nations. The Medal is named after Dag
Hammarskjold, the second Secretary-General of this
Organization, who greatly contributed to the
development of the concept of peacekeeping
operations, whose own commitment to the cause of
peacekeeping was unwavering, and who lost his life
while on mission to one of the many countries in
which the United Nations has tried to build peace.

"As we honour those who have died in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, we must never
 

forget our own responsibility as members of the
Security Council towards those participating in the
operations whose mandates we establish. The Security
Council must continue to ensure the proper discharge
of its mandates and take every possible measure to
enhance the safety and security of all those serving the
United Nations in conflict situations. This we owe
those men and women who are prepared to risk their
lives for peace.

"Dag Hammarskjold once wrote that

'no life was more satisfactory than one of selfless
service to your country - or humanity. This service
required a sacrifice of all personal interests, but
likewise the courage to stand up unflinchingly for
your convictions:

"His life and death are perhaps a fitting symbol
of what we honour today: commitment, service and
sacrifice."

In accordance with the understanding reached in
prior consultations among members of the Council, it is
my understanding that the Council is ready to adopt the
draft resolution (S/1997/569) before it without a vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The draft resolution has been adopted without a vote
as resolution 1121 (1997).

I now invite all present to stand and observe a
minute of silence in memory of all those who have lost
their life while serving in peacekeeping operations under
the auspices of the United Nations.

The members of the Council observed a minute of
silence.

The President: The Security Council has thus
concluded its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.40 pm.

