Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes to thank Mr. Jean-
Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, and Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa,
for their informative briefings.

Equatorial Guinea would like to express its
gratitude to the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA) and the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism for the stabilizing role they
have played in the Abyei region through their continued
efforts to communicate and mediate among the various
communities in the region, which demonstrate the
Mission's commitment to ensuring the welfare of the
population of Abyei and the border region. In that
regard, the Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
continues to be an essential tool for decisions on
border issues.

We commend the efforts being made and
encouraging steps being taken by the leaders of both
the Sudan and South Sudan with a View to improving
their relations and paving the way for new momentum
for both countries. We also welcomed the visit to
Khartoum in August by President Salva Kiir of South
Sudan to attend the ceremony of the historic signing
of the political and constitutional declarations marking
the start of transitional rule in the Sudan, as well as
the visit to Juba on 12 September by Mr. Abdalla
Hamdok, the new Prime Minister of the Sudan, aimed
at improving bilateral relations with regard to borders
and trade. We applaud the commitment to restoring
relations among people living in the border region as a
first step towards resolving the border disputes between
the Sudan and South Sudan. We ask the Council to take
advantage of this opportunity to extend its support to
both countries in their efforts to overcome their years
of conflict and division.

Notwithstanding the progress made, we are
concerned about the general security situation in Abyei,
which remains fragile, as well as the continuing tensions
among communities, the increase in crime, the scattered
presence of armed elements in the area, the levels of
widespread poverty and unemployment, the lack of any
legal agreement or unity between the two parties on
dealing with criminals detained in the Abyei area, and
the failure of both parties to sign the memorandum of
understanding on establishing procedures for dealing
with such criminals, despite several reminders that
have been issued since November 2016.

My country remains extremely concerned about
the lack of progress towards establishing a political
process, owing to the latest political developments in
the Sudan and South Sudan, to conclude negotiations
related to the border between the two countries.
That should not overshadow the importance of the
stabilizing role that UNISFA and the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism continue to
play along the borders between the two countries. In
that regard, we hope that this stalemate will be broken
with the establishment of the transitional Government
in Khartoum and its pledge to end all remaining
conflicts in the Sudan. We urge the two parties to
pursue their talks to overcome their disagreements
over disputed and claimed areas along the border, in
accordance with resolution 2416 (2018), taking into
account the concept of flexible borders agreed in 2012
in order to reach agreement on the final demarcation of
the common border.

We believe that the 2011 agreements remain the only

way to achieve lasting stability in the Abyei region and
the Sudan-South Sudan border. Therefore, all parties
involved must clearly reaffirm their commitment to
those agreements and make the necessary efforts to
take measures that will lead to peace and stability as
soon as possible.
In conclusion, we congratulate all those who
have facilitated progress in the Abyei Area, such as
the African Union, UNISFA and the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, which
have shown commendable determination in the
pursuit of peace and security in the border area. We
urge them to maintain the necessary momentum and
spirit of compromise for the implementation of the
signed agreements.

We urge the transitional Government in Khartoum
to hold talks with South Sudan and with regional,
continental and international partners, particularly
UNISFA, in order to expeditiously address the country's
challenges with regard to Abyei, in particular, and
relations with South Sudan, in general.

