Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate.
I also want to thank the Secretary-General and
Commissioner Chergui for their valuable briefings.

Ireland aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union.

At the outset, as a country with a long tradition
of peacekeeping, the people and the Government of
Ireland want to express their sincere sympathy to the
peoples and the Governments of Tanzania and Malawi
for the very tragic losses ofbrave peacekeepers recently
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Ireland fully supports the need to mobilize the
international community to focus on and, perhaps more
important, to invest in African peace and security. We
are inspired by your useful concept note (S/2018/1004, annex), Mr. President. I want to touch on a few areas
that we see as particularly useful, using your concept
note as a guide.

First, improving cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) is absolutely
fundamental. Ireland's first deployment of an armed
peacekeeping contingent was in the Congo in 1960.
Nearly 60 years later, we are still actively contributing
to United Nations peacekeeping missions in Africa
and the Middle East. We, as peacekeepers, are acutely
aware of the growing and diverse challenges facing
United Nations peace operations in different countries
and regions. The range and complexity ofthe challenges
underscore the importance of working closely with
regional partners, such as the African Union, and, very
important, of empowering local stakeholders.

Equally, Ireland believes it is important to ensure
that the peacekeeping efforts we make respond to
local needs. Mandates must match the realities of the
conflict on the ground where it is happening. Resources
must match the mandate; and they must of course be
reinforced by political will around this table. Ireland
has endorsed the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations as part
of the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. The Declaration highlights the importance
of enhanced partnerships with regional organizations.
Our collective challenge now, of course, is to actually
turn those commitments into action and reality on
the ground.

That brings me to my second point, namely, that
we must learn from the mechanisms in place and build
upon the daily efforts we are already making. We should
ensure that there is full use of the opportunities of the
Joint United Nations-AU Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security. We also encourage
greater communication between the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council. Emphasis
should be placed on operational cooperation that makes
a real difference on the ground. Joint analysis, planning
and reviews are all fundamental.

We must also implement the Secretary General's
zero-tolerance policy for all forms of sexual exploitation
and abuse. That problem has been shamefully evident
in peacekeeping operations in many regions. Efforts
to enhance the United Nations-AU partnership should
also place emphasis on preventing sexual exploitation
and abuse and finding justice for victims. For its part,
Ireland has signed the voluntary compact on preventing
and addressing sexual exploitation and abuse, and we
encourage all States to do the same. Ireland's Taoiseach,
our Prime Minister, is a committed member of the
Secretary-General's Circle of Leadership on that issue.

Thirdly, in line with the concept note (S/2018/1004, annex), we believe we must look again at financing
options from within, but also beyond the Organization's
budget. It is clear that the current United Nations
financing structure for African- led peace operations
is unsustainable. The ongoing question of the role of
the Organization's regular budget is an important
one, and it warrants serious discussion. However, it
cannot detract from the broader question of how the
international community can best support Africa to
finance its own initiatives for peace and security. That
is a serious question that we all need to address. Ireland
welcomes the launch of the African Union Peace Fund,
just last week, and its ambitious targets.

The transformative potential of the African Union
Agenda 2063 and the United Nations 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development will substantially reinforce
efforts to achieve sustainable peace and security in
the region. My country, Ireland, sees the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission as central to those efforts.

Finally, we see scope for continuing to invest
in capacity-building and training. Ireland's Defence
Forces are currently on the ground in Burkina Faso,
training troops in countering improvised explosive
devices as they deploy to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali in neighbouring Mali. We also provide training
in the protection of civilians, which is a core mandate
of all peacekeeping missions. That sort of capacity-
building is really essential for successful peacekeeping
missions. Council members can rest assured that
Ireland will continue to prioritize peacekeeping both
now and as an aspiring member of the Council for the
2021-2022 term.

African-led peacekeeping operations are crucial
to global peace and security. Africa's own investment
and ownership of those operations is fundamental.
Ireland therefore not only supports but speaks out in
favour of reforming the Security Council so that the
historic injustices of African underrepresentation can
be addressed and more voices brought to the table
to support the discussion on peace and security in
the region.

Allow me to conclude by highlighting that the first
step in strengthening international support for African-
led peace operations is listening. We want to listen to
the informed and committed peacebuilders from the
region itself, and I am delighted we are doing that today.
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate,
which provides us a much-needed opportunity to listen.

