Mr. Alasania (Georgia): I suppose that most
members of the Security Council expected the
Georgian representative to become emotional.
However, today we see the representative of the
Russian Federation becoming very emotional about the
facts, about the legal analysis and about the
consequences of this meeting. I would like to say that I
feel that he is a very honest man who does not really
feel comfortable with the arguments supplied to him
from his capital to respond to the arguments of the
majority of the members of the Council. Those
arguments were only intended to denounce as
illegitimate the actions carried out by the Russian
Federation. I shall start by briefly referring to history,
because my colleague mentioned a lot of history.

First, all the historic and legal analyses are set
against the backdrop of the Soviet Union. I believe it is
very clear that 90 per cent of the population of Georgia
voted in the referendum on independence, with 61 per
cent of the Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia also
voting for the independence of Georgia from the Soviet
Union. I understand that it is hard for some members of
the Russian leadership to believe that the Soviet Union
is dead. You can do nothing about it. As much as you
wish it, you cannot resurrect the Soviet Union by
recognizing parts of the State of Georgia.

But, anyway, regarding the history of 1921, on
which Mr. Churkin touched here, this is precisely
another example of the twisting of historical facts by
the Russian Federation, because in 1918 Georgian
independence was declared - with Abkhazia and other
parts of Georgian territory - and it was recognized by
Russia itself. But less than nine months later they
occupied it and barbarically exiled the democratically
elected Government. I see this as truly reminiscent of
the things - as I have mentioned in previous
interventions - that are happening now in Georgia and
the nature of the real intent of the Russian Federation
during this military campaign against Georgia.

In terms of the recognition of the principles of
international law and the principle of territorial
integrity, I clearly remember that just a few months
ago, after Mr. Medvedev's election as President of the
Russian Federation, he addressed the diplomatic corps
on foreign policy issues. It was specifically mentioned
that his country would continue to support this
principle and that this was the most universal principle
that its foreign policy should be based on. I do not
understand what the U-turn is about a few months after
the statement made by the Russian President.

So, clearly, this all was pre-planned. I think we
should not judge the events starting from what
happened in August. Just remember: a year ago, when
in the Security Council we were cautioning and
alerting members of the bombardments by the Russian
Federation on Tsitelubani, very close to the vicinity of
the South Ossetian conflict zone. Then, Council
members, you will remember that insurgents, led by
Russian Special Forces officers, were detained and
neutralized by Georgian forces inside Abkhazia,
Georgia. You will remember how authoritatively we
were sounding the alarm that there was an imminent
threat against Upper Abkhazia, Georgia, just a few
months ago, and that infrastructure was being built by
the Russian Federation precisely to accommodate their
offensive military operation, namely the building of the
railroad infrastructure which, as we were saying, was
unfortunately used to occupy my country, to attack
Upper Abkhazia and to ethnically cleanse Georgians
from Upper Abkhazia.

What I want to say now is that I do not want to
get further involved in this word-fight here. What I
want to ask everyone is to support the initiatives
voiced here by members of the Security Council: first,
to get as best we can, as soon as we can, a
humanitarian fact-finding team on the ground. We want
this, and Georgia fully commits itself to collaborate
and to help this fact-finding mission on the ground -
from the United Nations, if that is the decision - to
identify what kind of humanitarian catastrophe we are
looking at. We want to have very accurate, impartial
observation and reporting coming to the Security
Council. That is the first thing.

The other thing is this: it is evident that most of
the Council members are condemning Russia's
unilateral action. I think the valid thing would be to
again reiterate the commitment of member States to the
existing Security Council resolutions, which
specifically set out full support for the territorial
integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders.
And of course I must not fail to say that we
cannot only highlight the South Ossetia conflict, with
the ongoing humanitarian catastrophe there, and forget
about the Abkhaz situation, as was voiced here by a
few Security Council members: that attack on Upper
Abkhazia was illegal, and we need to get
representation by the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia up there as soon possible. I know that the
Russian peacekeepers and the Abkhaz militia are
against this, but we have to find the courage and
willingness to persuade them that we need to have full
observation in Upper Abkhazia as soon as possible, in
order to start returning the internally displaced persons
who were ethnically cleansed from there.

Those are the points I wanted to share after
colleagues voiced their concerns. I want to thank all of
them for their comments, and we count on their
continuing support.

