I deliver this statement on the humanitarian situation in Syria on behalf of the co-penholders, namely, Germany and Belgium. We would like to thank Under- Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing today. As Mr. Lowcock mentioned, the Syrian city of Afrin was shaken by a devastating terrorist attack yesterday that reportedly killed dozens of civilians, including many children. We strongly condemn that crime, and our deepest sympathy goes to the families and the relatives of the victims. We wish the injured a speedy and complete recovery. Mr. Lowcock has once more given an insider's perspective on what humanitarian work is about and how important humanitarian assistance is in places where we have to protect the most vulnerable populations, not only from conflict and hunger but now also from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We bow our head to all humanitarian and medical workers throughout Syria. We need them more than ever in this humanitarian battle. The Secretary-General's Special Envoys to the Middle East put it rightly: silence the guns, de-escalate tensions, reach out across conflict lines and facilitate humanitarian access and assistance wherever needed. Nine years of war have already taken an extreme toll. Nearly half of all health-care facilities have been severely damaged or destroyed, and there is a shortage of medical equipment and health-care professionals. The World Health Organization has counted 494 attacks on health- care workers and installations in the last three years. More than 6 million internally displaced persons, as well as detainees and abductees, are living in conditions that make them extremely vulnerable to COVID-19 and other respiratory infections. Reading carefully the Secretary-General's bimonthly humanitarian report (S/2020/327) and listening to Mr. Lowcock's words, we can only conclude that access is crucial in order to stop the spread of the virus. But we have to face the facts: in Government-controlled areas, the United Nations was able to conduct only 25 per cent of the humanitarian missions it submitted for approval as a result of unrelenting bureaucratic hurdles and safety concerns. In the north-west, the ceasefire between Russia and Turkey seems to be holding, fragile though it may be, thus allowing for more humanitarian assistance than ever before to cross the border, although restrictions because of the pandemic are in place. To cite the Secretary-General's report, in the north-east, only 31 per cent of the medical facilities that were previously supported by cross-border deliveries from Al-Yarubiyah were reached by recent cross-line supplies. In order to prepare for the worst, that is simply not enough. Moreover, according to the World Health Organization, the weakened health system in north-east Syria has minimal capacity to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, and all modalities are urgently required to prepare for and respond to the pandemic. In the conclusions of his report, the Secretary-General underscores that three months after the removal of Al-Yarubiyah, the remaining gaps in assistance underscore the importance of using all modalities, cross-border and cross-line. In other words, three months after the closure, cross-line assistance via Damascus is falling woefully short, and COVID-19 only makes the situation more acute. The United Nations and non-governmental partners agree that the cross-line option cannot be adequately expanded and propose the reopening of a land crossing for greater amounts of cargo. The Council and its members cannot ignore the effects of closing the Al-Yarubiyah crossing. The facts and figures are indisputable. Hence, from a humanitarian point of view, Germany and Belgium, echoing the Secretary-General's call for more cross-line and cross-border access, think that the Council should consider urgently reopening a crossing point in the north-east of the country. The spread of the virus cannot be stopped by Council tactics, but only by test kits, protection equipment and ventilators. Finally, we renew our call for accountability for the most serious crimes under international criminal law. In that regard, we welcome the recommendation of the Secretary-General to appoint a senior independent adviser on the findings of the board of inquiry. The results of the board of inquiry must be followed up. Impunity for those responsible for these serious violations of international law is not an option. We pledge full support once more for the work of the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to investigate such crimes and look forward to the results of the trial of officers of the Syrian regime accused of crimes against humanity being held in Koblenz, Germany. In my national capacity, I would like to add that we have just provided another €22 million for the Syria Cross-border Humanitarian Fund, thus increasing our total contribution to the Fund in 2020 to €30 million. The Fund remains a key instrument to address the enormous humanitarian needs in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic.
