Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the French delegation for your
timely initiative to organize today's meeting of the
Security Council to consider threats to international
peace and security and to adopt the important draft
presidential statement before us. We are also grateful to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for setting out the
strategic approach of the United Nations to these
issues. We would also like to thank Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa, Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for his thorough
briefing.

Illicit drug trafficking associated with organized
crime and terrorism has assumed dangerous
proportions in various regions of the world. We support
the focus of the Security Council, as the principal
organ responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, in helping to resolve this issue.

The drug threat from Afghanistan is global in
nature and as acute as ever. In that regard, we believe
that we are facing a threat to international peace and
security that requires the Security Council to take
appropriate action. Russia believes that the decisions
adopted in the context of the ongoing Paris-Moscow
process being carried out under the auspices of the
United Nations form the basis for stepping up
international cooperation to combat the global drug
threat from Afghanistan. We also believe that this
process is one of the most effective and promising
instruments available to the international community.
The time has come to give some thought to how we can
build upon those decisions on the basis of recent
narcotics trends in and around Afghanistan.

We also believe it advisable to hold the third
conference of the Paris-Moscow process at the level of
relevant agency heads the end of this year. At that
conference, the international community could adopt a
specific programme of action on the Afghan counter-
narcotics track on the basis of previously adopted
policy decisions. We suggest that the conference give
detailed attention to increasing the effectiveness of the
provision of technical and other assistance to the
Governments of Afghanistan and the States of Central
Asia. In assisting the Afghan Government to undertake
counter-narcotics activities, we must also make full use
of the capabilities of the International Security
Assistance Force in Afghanistan.

Another very important element in countering the
flow of drugs from Afghanistan is to cut off the illegal
supply to that country of precursors for the production
of heroin. We are prepared to work closely with our
partners to implement the provisions of resolution
1817 (2008). In that regard, we believe that there is an
important role for the work of the International
Narcotics Control Board and the UNODC. We believe
it important to involve them in developing initiatives
aimed at strengthening the international regime for the
control of precursors. In that regard, I refer to measures
to mark precursors in order to enable us to identify
specific producers and suppliers of such substances to
Afghanistan; to strengthen international monitoring of
the movement of precursors on the basis of a system of
notifications on pre-export, re-export and resale to
third countries; to monitor heavy-freight transport on
the Afghan border; and to license any activities related
to the supply of precursors and their substitutes.

We believe that, in implementing programmes
and projects aimed at combating the illegal Afghan
trade in drugs and precursors for their production, it is
important the we do our utmost to exploit the
capacities of regional organizations and agencies -
first and foremost the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization and the Central Asian Regional
Information and Coordination Centre - so as to
combat the illegal trade in narcotics, psychotropic
substances and their precursors.

We are focusing our attention on the importance
of broadening the follow-on qualitative work of the
sanctions Committee mechanism established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) in order to fully implement
the relevant provisions of resolutions 1735 (2006) and
1904 (2009). Additional efforts are needed for the
practical implementation of those resolutions to
provide for the listing, under the sanctions regime of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), of Afghan drug lords who finance
terrorism through the illegal proceeds of the drug trade.

We believe that one of the priorities of counter-
terrorism efforts is to counter terrorist ideology and
propaganda and to overcome the radical tendencies that
fuel terrorism. We must deprive terrorist groups of that
fuel and of logistical resources. In those efforts, it is
important to involve the capabilities of civil society
and the business community in an equal and engaged
public-private partnership, as called for in the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and key
resolutions of the Security Council.

The issue of ensuring international information
security has recently taken on great importance. We
believe it important to consider a system of measures
to counter the use of information and communication
technologies for terrorist ends and the undermining of
international peace, stability and security by terrorists
and criminals. In that regard, we believe that there is a
pressing need to develop and adopt a universal
international convention to combat cybercrime,
including a general code of conduct for States in the
area of global information.

In conclusion, I affirm that the adoption of the
draft presidential statement today will illustrate the
decisiveness and unity of the Council in countering the
increasing threats to international stability. We believe
that this important document will help to intensify
international cooperation in this area.

