Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
is appalled by the result of the voting as a result of
Russia's veto - its third on the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM), its fifth on the Syrian
chemical dossier this year, and its eleventh on Syria. Let
us be clear. We respect and will always respect Russia,
to which we are linked by many ties, but this growing
number of vetoes raises questions. The question
raised today is especially grave because it is fraught
with potential consequences for the fight against the
proliferation and use of chemical weapons. Today's
veto poses a serious threat to our common security.

What is at stake? If the JIM. mandate is not renewed
before midnight, it will be dissolved. That means
that months of joint and good faith effort against the
proliferation and use of chemical weapons in Syria
will disappear with it. The goal of draft resolution
S/2017/970, submitted by Japan - whose commitment
I warmly commend - was a purely technical renewal
of the regime for one month. It did not require a political
statement of position, much less of ideology. It was
a neutral, technical text that would have given us the
time necessary to consider and discuss - in a word,
to reach agreement and demonstrate to the entire world
that the Council can meet its responsibilities.

If we do not take care, the outcome of today's
voting as a result of Russia's veto could have a threefold
effect. First, without any new development before
midnight, it would signify ipso facto the end ofthe JIM,
a mechanism created by the Council at the initiative of
Russia and the United States to combat the proliferation
and use of chemical weapons in Syria. Secondly, the
vote threatens to undermine the mechanics of the
international chemical non-proliferation regime. It will
be interpreted by some as giving carte blanche to the
proliferation and use of such weapons elsewhere, since
we have been collectively incapable of preventing or
punishing it in Syria. Moreover, it threatens to create a
fertile breeding ground for chemical terrorism, which
we will fear. Thirdly, given the fact that the international
chemical non-proliferation regime is highly evolved, its
weakening could establish a dangerous and potentially
fatal precedent for the other non-proliferation regimes,
which the community of nations drafted and developed
patiently year after year, stone upon stone, over
preceding decades and which constitute the backbone
of our collective security.

If all ofthis should come about, we will pay a heavy
price for it. We must therefore not be discouraged by
these disastrous possibilities. If we believe in what we
do - if each ofus believes that we are here for a reason
and with a mission - it is impossible to give up. We
have no right to do so. I therefore wish to share France's
deep conviction that today's disastrous vote cannot
be the final word. France will resign itself neither to
this apparent failure nor to political games that fall far
short of what is at stake. In the face of the enormity
and gravity of those stakes, we have no right to give up
while the eyes of the entire world are upon us. We have
no right to be discouraged. My country can be relied
upon to pursue its efforts in all appropriate forums in
order to combat impunity in Syria and elsewhere and to
promote, everywhere and at all times, the strengthening
of the non-proliferation regimes on which everyone's
security depends.

