Mr. Butagira (Uganda): I will try to keep within
five minutes, but if I speak for a minute more, it is
because Uganda is mentioned many times in the report,
and I need to respond.

The delegation of Uganda is grateful to the
Security Council for having afforded us the
opportunity to take part in this important debate. I
should like to thank the Secretary-General for the
comprehensive report on this subject and for the
commendable proposals to address the poor conditions
of civilian populations caught up in armed conflicts.

As we focus attention on addressing humanitarian
crises, we should not forget to ask why there is conflict
in the first place. In other words, the international
community should address the root causes of conflicts,
such as poverty and lack of democratic participation.

In Uganda, in addition to the usual causes of
conflict, we have been fighting a fanatical, satanic
rebel group, the self-styled Lord's Resistance Army.
We have told the world that this group is not interested
in peace and that they must be eliminated. Despite
several peace proposals, Kony and his gang have not
responded. Even now, the "celebrated" Betty Bigombe
has not used a magic wand to bring Kony to the
negotiating table.

This morning Mr. Egeland reminded us that the
military option is not a solution. We must be realistic.
The group we are being urged to talk to does not want
peace. They are simply seeking to manipulate the
device of peace talks to give themselves a breather, to
get supplies and reorganize themselves to carry out
their murderous activities. The international
community just watched as civilians were brutally
killed. Sadly, even when displaced persons in a refugee
camp known as Barlonyo in northern Uganda were
massacred in a most brutal manner, not even a word of
condemnation came from this Council by way of a
presidential statement.

Some of the remnants of these rebels have now
fled to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We call
on the Security Council to have them arrested and
disarmed. It is sad that very often, instead of blaming
the aggressor, the victim - in this case Uganda - has
been blamed for not ending the war.

Let me now touch on some aspects of the report
that make specific reference to Uganda. Paragraphs 8
and 17 refer to displaced persons. It is not correct to
assert that 90 per cent of the population in the districts
of Gulu, Pader and Kitgum are displaced. Most areas,
especially in Gulu and Kitgum, are now safe, and
people are returning home. The Government is
carrying out reconstruction and rehabilitation
programmes in those areas as well as a northern
Uganda reconstruction programme. The departments of
government are functioning. The town of Gulu, for
instance, is one of the fastest-growing towns in the
country.

The conditions in the camps for internally
displaced persons are far from perfect. The
Government, in partnership with some non-
governmental organizations, is addressing issues such
as sanitation, security and provision of food. It should
be remembered that these camps are only a temporary
measure to protect civilians from marauding Kony
rebels.

Now that Kony has been militarily defeated and
the Government is carrying out mop-up operations,
these people will soon go back to their homes. In fact,
the Government has announced the resettlement of
about 700,000 people now in displaced persons camps
in Arua and Teso to their home areas. The Government
will need international assistance to resettle them. In
this regard, the Uganda Government welcomes the
recent launch of humanitarian appeals by the
Secretary-General, whereby Uganda is earmarked to
benefit from a grant of $223 million.

It is asserted in paragraph 20 that the right to
freedom of movement in northern Uganda has been
effectively eliminated as the result of the Government's
establishment of free-fire zones, where persons moving
outside desert settlements or camps are automatically
considered legitimate targets of attack. With due
respect, this is an alarmist statement. There is no such
policy. When the Uganda Government unilaterally
offered a ceasefire to rebels in order to encourage them
to come to peace talks, it designated some areas where
the rebels should assemble and nothing would happen
to them. Any rebels found outside these areas would be
treated as enemy combatants and dealt with
accordingly. This restriction, however, was never
meant to restrict the free movement of civilian
population.

Since the rebels did not respond positively to this
good gesture for peace, the designated areas are no
longer there. There is free movement of people
throughout northern Uganda. The Government is
effectively in control of the entire area. The few
remaining bandits roaming around are being hunted
down. Northern Uganda is not in turmoil, so there
should not be the remotest consideration of
entertaining any idea of sending peacekeepers there, or
any idea of putting Uganda on the agenda of the
Security Council, as was suggested by Canada this
morning.

It is common knowledge that Canada has been
leading a sustained, uncalled-for and unjustified
crusade to have northern Uganda put on the Security
Council agenda. It is indeed sad and ironic that when
we are reaching the tail end of the rebellion there are
calls for such a course of action. The military
campaign so far has yielded tremendous results. For
many months now, there have been no abductions
whatsoever by the so-called Resistance Army, nor has
there been any recruitment or attacks on internally
displaced persons camps. The rebels' capacity to
commit such acts has been completely curtailed. The
few remnants of the rebel forces are on the run. These
are positive developments for which the Government
of Uganda should be commended, not demonized.
What we need is international assistance to resettle the
displaced people. Uganda, therefore, strongly resists
any move to put northern Uganda on the agenda of the
Security Council. It is not helpful at all. We ask the
Council to reject such a suggestion as uncalled for.

Lastly, in paragraph 30, the report states that the
Government's inability to guarantee security continues
to hamper access to northern Uganda. Certainly this is
not correct. The Government has been providing
escorts and, where the food programme has justified it,
relief convoys as well. In some instances where some
relief workers have unfortunately lost their lives as the
result of being targeted by the few rebels remaining,
those concerned had chosen not to ask for Government
escorts, against the Government's advice. No
Government anywhere in the world can be expected to
guarantee one hundred per cent security to its citizens.
Otherwise, every country would be on the agenda of
the Security Council.

With the cooperation of Sudan and the region,
soon the menace of Kony and his gang will be history.
We appeal to the international community to assist in
executing the warrants of arrest issued by the
International Criminal Court against the top leadership
of the Kony gang who have been indicted. Even at this
late hour, the peace talks option is still on the table.
Further, any rebel who surrenders would benefit from
amnesty extended by the Government.

