Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the presence at today's meeting
of Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Timor-Leste. We listened closely to his very
substantive statement. We also thank Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Timor-Leste, for presenting the Secretary-
General's end of mandate report on the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) (S/2006/251) and for
his useful briefing.

Russia welcomes the steady progress made in
Timor-Leste in the area of nation-building. We are
pleased at the continued strengthening of State
institutions, including law enforcement agencies, and
the consolidation of the legislative infrastructure.

At the same time, we must acknowledge that
Timor-Leste's potential for nationhood is still far from
being sufficiently solid and that the country continues
to need multifaceted international assistance in order to
ensure security, stability and sustainable development.
This was reaffirmed by the recent rioting in Dili, which
unfortunately had tragic consequences. We sincerely
hope that the Timorese authorities will find a
universally acceptable solution to the conflict in the
army in order to prevent a destabilization of the
situation in the country. In that regard, we listened very
closely to Mr. Ramos-Horta's assessment.

Russia commends the development of
cooperation between Timor-Leste and Indonesia. We
note the importance of the bilateral Commission for
Truth and Friendship and anticipate that the
Commission will successfully discharge its duties and
that it will contribute to a further strengthening of the
relationship between Indonesia and Timor-Leste,
including by addressing issues related to human rights
violations in Timor-Leste during the years of its fight
for independence.

We welcome the activities of the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste, headed by Mr. Hasegawa. We
note the important role of other United Nations
agencies and the donor community.

Given the ongoing process of the establishment
of Timorese State institutions, including the defence
and security structures, and the need to ensure the
successful organization of presidential and
parliamentary elections in 2007, and taking into
account the urgent request from the Timorese
leadership to maintain a United Nations presence in
that country, the Russian Federation supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to establish
for 12 months a small follow-on integrated United
Nations office, replacing UNOTIL, within the
parameters proposed by the Secretary-General.

