Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to join the other members of the Security
Council in welcoming Minister Leonid Kozhara
and congratulating him on his assumption of the
chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I also thank him for
his briefing on the priorities that his country has set
for its chairmanship of that organization and on the
prospects for cooperation between the OSCE and the
United Nations.

Argentina values the contributions made by regional
and subregional organizations to the maintenance of
international peace and security. We believe that not
only are they essential for strengthening the multilateral
system, but they also give greater legitimacy and
effectiveness to the actions of the international
community in responding to challenges to peace and
promoting dialogue and cooperation.

In that context, we welcome the important work
done by the OSCE in the areas of early warning,
conflict prevention, crisis management and post-
conflict situations. In connection with those issues,
I wish to refer to some of the aspects highlighted by
Minister Kozhara.

Cooperation between the United Nations, the OSCE
and other organizations, on both regional and thematic
issues, has made it possible to have a better-coordinated
focus between the various international stakeholders.
Other examples, as mentioned by other members of the
Council, include the cooperation between the United

Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
and the OSCE. We believe that that cooperation has
contributed to the efforts under way to normalize and
stabilize relations in the region.

We also deem it important to highlight the close
cooperation between the OSCE and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy
for Central Asia. There can be no doubt that that
cooperation has bolstered the contribution made by
the Regional Centre in responding both to domestic
issues that have repercussions on regional stability and
to the trans-boundary impact of the threats posed by
terrorism, organized crime and drug trafficking, as well
as environmental deterioration and problems related to
the management of water resources.

We welcome the inclusion of the issue of
prolonged conflicts among Ukraine's priorities for its
chairmanship, as they pose a threat to regional stability.
In that vein, we welcome the determination to contribute
to the process of resolving the Transdniestrian question,
as made clear by the visit carried out by Mr. Kozhara
and his special representative to Chisinau at the
beginning of the year, as well as the role played in the
talks that took place in Leopolis last April. We hope
that the next meeting, to be held in Odessa, will enable
political progress to be made towards a lasting solution.

We also welcome the commitment made in the
context of the Geneva talks on the 2008 conflict in
Georgia and the talks on Nagorno Karabakh, led by the
co-Chairs of the OSCE Minsk Group.

When it comes to topics on the agenda of the
Security Council, such as Afghanistan, we agree with
the Minister of Ukraine that there is a need to consider
the implications of the upcoming Withdrawal of
international forces in 2014 and the potential responses
that the OSCE and other bodies could possibly provide
with a view to ensuring stability in the region.

We also welcome the importance given by
the Ukrainian chairmanship to efforts aimed at
strengthening arms control mechanisms and security-
and confidence-building measures, as well as its
commitment to fighting transnational threats such as
those as I mentioned previously, namely, organized
crime and trafficking in persons, weapons and drugs.

In conclusion, Argentina values in particular
the attention given to the implementation of existing
commitments in the areas of the freedom of the press,
youth education and human rights. We support the
vision and priorities set out by Ukraine for the work
of the OSCE over the coming year. We trust that both
the Security Council and the United Nations system as
a whole will deepen their cooperation with the OSCE
during the Ukrainian chairmanship.

