Mr. Skau (Sweden): I too would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate you on your presidency,
Mr. President.

During the past week, the Security Council opened
its eyes and ears to focus on the people of the Lake
Chad basin. What we have seen and heard will not be
easily forgotten, nor should it be. Millions of people
across four countries have been displaced as a result of
the brutal insurgency of Boko Haram. We heard of lives
disrupted and livelihoods destroyed. Displacement
has led to vulnerability, particularly for women and
girls. We heard chilling stories of husbands murdered,
children abducted and killed and women subjected
to sexual violence. Millions more are suffering from
hunger and malnutrition, and we heard that the threat
of famine looms.

Yet alongside the desperation there is hope. We
have seen how host communities have welcomed the
displaced into their homes and villages, sharing already
scarce resources. and I would like to pay special tribute
to them. We commend the efforts being made by the
relevant authorities to mitigate the consequences of the
crisis, as well as the work of humanitarian workers and
the staff of local non-governmental organizations, who
are on the front lines of the response.

However, more is needed if we are to avoid a
humanitarian disaster of historic proportions. To begin
with, the pledges made in Oslo must be disbursed as
quickly as possible. I am happy to report that Sweden
has already done so, and I call on others to follow.
Secondly, every effort must be made to ensure that
the assistance reaches even the most remote and
inaccessible areas.

It is clear that the regional nature of the Boko Haram
threat requires a regional response. The countries of
the region are working together, including through the
Multinational Joint Task Force, which is making progress
and deserves further international support. We also
call for rapid deployment of the African Union civilian
component of the Task Force. We must ensure that the
response does not increase the suffering of an already
brutalized population, and in that regard, we welcome
the commitment expressed by all the Governments of
the region to protecting civilians and human rights, in
line with the 2016 Abuja Action Statement. Counter-
terrorism measures must comply with international
law, including international humanitarian and human
rights law. We urge the United Nations to enhance its
human rights presence on the ground in order to support
monitoring and capacity-building in that regard. We
encourage Governments to enhance their prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration approaches for dealing
with persons associated with Boko Haram and to
improve countries' coordination in that effort. Children
must always be treated as children, and handover
protocols that prioritize children should be adopted.

The roots of the conflict run deeper than the Boko
Haram insurgency. They include abject poverty, climate
change and underdevelopment. Indeed, the situation in
the Lake Chad basin is a vivid illustration of the links
between security, development and human rights,
as well as climate-change-related risks. In Niamey,
President Issoufou of the Niger cited the shrinking of
Lake Chad as a direct and major reason for the rise
of Boko Haram. This is exactly the type of situation
that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the sustaining peace agenda were created to
respond to. Working within the framework of the 2030
Agenda, we must ensure a coordinated and better
linked humanitarian, reconstruction and development
response. This multidimensional crisis is an example
of one to which the United Nations system can take an
integrated approach, and we look forward to supporting
the Deputy Secretary-General as she leads the reform
of the Organization's development system so that it can
better respond to such crises.

Yesterday we celebrated International Women's
Day. The women we met in Maroua and Maiduguri,
despite the challenges they face on a daily basis, are
survivors and leaders, not victims. Meeting the visiting
Security Council, they clearly told us their stories so
that we would know their realities, and set out their
needs so that we would know how to respond. We must
not let them down. It is clear that women play a vital
role in prevention, peacebuilding and de-radicalization
efforts. Improving education, particularly for girls, and
ending early marriage are issues that will be central
to development in the region. We were encouraged by
the development of national action plans on women
and peace and security, and those words must now be
translated into actions with adequate resources and
meaningful implementation.

Now that we have seen the crisis that has been
unfolding in the Lake Chad basin, we must ensure
that we actively follow up on our engagement and on
the trip's findings. That is why we would like to see
the Council agree a presidential statement setting out
a road map for the way forward that encourages the
following actions, among others.
The first is for the Secretary-General to show
leadership, including by visiting the region and
reporting back to the Council. Secondly, the semi-annual
briefings of the United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWAS) and the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA), as well as the recurring
Security Council meetings under the agenda item on
peace and security in Africa, should be used as forums
for following up on the findings of our visit. Thirdly, we
should work on developing a comprehensive regional
strategy for addressing the drivers of the conflict, in
line with existing plans and supported by development
partners and international financial institutions.
Fourthly, we should support efforts to strengthen the
links between humanitarian assistance and long-term
development measures, focusing on early recovery and
the provision of alternative livelihoods. Fifthly, we
should encourage the organization in 2018 of a third
Regional Security Summit, focusing on post-conflict
stabilization and on early recovery and reconstruction.
Lastly, we should enhance the capacity of UNOWAS
and UNOCA to jointly coordinate United Nations
engagement in the region and report on progress in
that regard.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the Governments
of Nigeria, the Niger, Chad and Cameroon, as well
as the co-leaders, the United Nations Secretariat and
their colleagues on the ground, for making our visit a
true success.

