Mr. Swan: The year 2020 has the potential to be a transformative year for Somalia. A number of key national priorities are due to conclude and will impact Somalia's trajectory for years to come. Last October, at the Somalia Partnership Forum, Somalia and its international partners agreed on the main priorities on which Somalia must not fail in 2020. Those include achieving debt relief, holding one-person-one-vote elections, finalizing the federal constitution, advancing the fight against Al-Shabaab and consolidating the federal State. Already, there has been good progress on Somalia's economic priorities. The Executive Boards of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank have confirmed Somalia's eligibility for debt reliefunder the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative. That milestone demonstrates that, with unity and common purpose, the federal Government and federal member states can achieve even highly ambitious goals. There has been progress, too, in the passage of key legislation to strengthen Somalia's fiscal framework, such as the Companies Act and the Public Financial Management Act. The 2020 budget, approved by Parliament and signed by President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo, reflects steadily increasing revenue generation. In the area of human rights, Somalia has submitted its first-ever treaty report on the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, signed the African Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) in Africa and approved its national policy on refugees, returnees and IDPs. As I reported to the Council in November (see S/PV.8671), for Somalia to navigate the remaining challenges and achieve its ambitious priorities, all Somalia's stakeholders must work together in the national interest. That responsibility begins with Somalia's leaders. It is for them to engage in dialogue in a spirit of national unity and set aside narrow political interests to strengthen Somalia's State, security and prosperity. In my last remarks to the Council, I welcomed the meeting in November between the President and some political party leaders. Regrettably, those consultations have not continued. Meanwhile, the Federal President and federal member state leaders have not met together as a group since May 2019. The protracted absence of a broad political consensus on the way forward in 2020 remains a threat to further progress. In December, I led representatives of the African Union, the European Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in a series of consultations with political leaders and civil society groups in the federal member states, as well as with the federal executive and legislative branches and other key stakeholders. We briefed President Farmajo on our findings and emphasized the urgent need to resume dialogue. We and international partners stand ready to support that, as required. While technical advances across political, security, economic and humanitarian agendas have continued, I must underscore that those gains will quickly reach their limits without the necessary political agreements. I call on Somalia's leaders as a matter of urgency to meet and engage in dialogue on Somalia's national priorities. In 2020, Somalia will face a critical test of its State-building progress through the holding of historic one-person-one-vote elections. In recent years, Somalia has established a track record of regular, peaceful transfers of power. That commendable achievement must now be preserved in 2020. In addition, a move to one-person-one vote elections will mean a shift from the elders-based selection of recent political cycles to direct voting by the people of Somalia. The new electoral code has now been approved by the House of the People and the Upper House and signed into law by the President. While an important step, the new law, regrettably, does not address many outstanding questions necessary to implement the code. Those questions relate to the locations of constituencies, how to guarantee 30 per cent of seats for women and the modalities to enable Somalis from across the country to participate. I call on the Federal Parliament, in collaboration with the National Independent Electoral Commission (NIEC) and in consultation with the Federal Government, the federal member states and other stakeholders, to resolve those issues urgently so that technical preparations can get under way. That must include the federal member States ensuring that the NIEC can maintain offices across the country to organize elections. Elections must also be held in Somaliland, where parliamentary elections were last held in 2005. I urge the authorities and all political actors to find a way through the current impasse for both parliamentary and local elections to take place in Somaliland before the end of 2020. Political space and debate will be an essential component in the year ahead in Somalia to enable candidates, journalists, civil society and international partners to engage frankly in the political discourse. We especially look forward to hearing the voices of women, young people and minorities in an open debate on Somalia's future. Continued efforts towards reconciliation will also be necessary to forge unity on Somalia's future. We call on political actors in Galmudug and Jubaland in particular to engage in dialogue, refrain from violence and avoid divisions that will be exploited by Al-Shabaab.We note that recent security deployments in Jubaland's Gedo region have led instead to increased tension. Turning to the security situation, let me first pay tribute to the courage of the Somali National Army (SNA) and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in confronting Al-Shabaab. There has been steady, commendable progress in rebuilding Somalia's security institutions, including implementation of biometric registration, electronic payment of salaries for the security forces and personnel records. Unfortunately, military operations have slowed since mid-2019 and force generation has, to date, not been sufficient for the tasks required in 2020, including priority operations against Al-Shabaab and reopening main supply routes. Despite the efforts of the SNA, AMISOM and international partners, regrettably, Al-Shabaab retains the ability to conduct large-scale attacks in Mogadishu, including against the United Nations and the international community. In the recently recovered areas in Lower Shabelle, it is also able to generate significant revenue through extortion, as well as conduct operations beyond Somalia's borders. It is essential that the Somali Government clarify its operational priorities and generate the forces necessary to enable operations to degrade Al-Shabaab, defend recently recovered areas and reopen main supply routes. Those operations must be conducted with respect for human rights and sequenced with the return of legitimate local governance, the rule of law and stabilization activities in order to be sustainable. AMISOM has committed to implementing the reduction of 1,000 soldiers by 28 February, as decided by the Security Council in resolution 2472 (2019). Prior to the drawdown, the Somali Government, AMISOM and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia prepared a joint threat assessment, as requested by the Council and by the African Union Peace and Security Council. AMISOM remains essential to maintaining security under current circumstances, but it is also time to begin inclusive discussions on the strategic outlook and requirements to enable AMISOM to progressively hand over security ownership to the Somali authorities in a manner that preserves hard-won gains while achieving greater strategic effect against Al-Shabaab. Vulnerable Somalis continue to face extreme humanitarian challenges. Back-to-back droughts, flooding, conflict and insecurity have left 5.2 million people in Somalia in need of assistance - that was before the worst locust outbreak Somalia has experienced in 25 years. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations is supporting the Government in mitigating the potentially catastrophic impact on food security. I call on donors to urgently provide funding and support for the 2020 humanitarian response plan. In the longer term, we must align behind the Somali Government's national development plan to advance humanitarian, development and peacebuilding goals. Regional cooperation is essential to addressing the many challenges in the Horn of Africa. I welcome the efforts of the President and regional leaders to resolve differences and strengthen ties. In that regard, we note that the Ethiopian Prime Minister, Mr. Abiy Ahmed, arranged a meeting earlier this month between President Farmajo and the Somaliland President, Mr. Muse Bihi Abdi. We look forward to their further engagement with a view to constructive dialogue. There is much to do in the year ahead. Only by working together - as Somalis, as partners, and in a spirit of unity and compromise - will progress be made. Further impetus and consensus-building are needed to ensure that key 2020 benchmarks for elections, security and relations between the Federal Government and federal member states do not fall further behind schedule. I look forward to Somalia's leaders taking the bold steps necessary to enable such progress in this critical year. I also look forward to the United Nations continuing to play its role through the full implementation of the mandate authorized by the Council.
