Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his complete
briefing on the security and humanitarian situation in
eastern Chad. I wish, however, to stress, on behalf of
the Chadian Government, that overall there has been an
improvement in the situation compared with a year
ago. We owe that to the mobilization of our own
resources and to support from the international
community, especially the Security Council, which
5
took the decision to deploy the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) / European Union operation in eastern
Chad and Central African Republic (EUFOR Chad/CAR).

To be sure, there have been shortcomings, which
have sometimes been criticized by non-governmental
organizations, which are rightly demanding in that
regard. We hope that the new MINURCAT, expanded
through a military component, will be effective in
meeting the expectations of those who will be its
beneficiaries: refugees, displaced persons and, of
course, the local populations, which have felt the
pressure of this situation, as Mr. Holmes has just
indicated, as well as humanitarians. Let us hope that
the new operation will help us to demilitarize the
camps in order to address what has been said regarding
the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) and other
Sudanese actors who would take advantage of the
situation in order to carry out recruitment in the camps.

My Government reiterates its complete readiness
to fully cooperate with the United Nations mission in
the eastern part of our country. I also wish to express
my satisfaction with the positive results we have just
received in our consultations with the Secretariat,
regarding the deployment of the new United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad II
(MINURCAT II).

With regard to the neutralization of the camps
just mentioned - a situation that has resulted from the
lack of effective neutralization of those camps - the
fact that the Sudanese are recruiting there is not the
sole responsibility of Chad. Those who claim that we
support the Sudanese rebels are unable to provide us
with any tangible proof. Chad does not manufacture
weapons. Chad does not have weapons to provide to
any rebellion. Chad is a poor country that cannot allow
itself the luxury of supporting rebels from another
country, and even less able to those from a friendly,
neighbourly country such as the Sudan.

On the contrary, Chad could contribute positively
in the Sudan in the context of a dialogue among
Sudanese. Chad is prepared to actively support all
efforts to bring peace to Darfur. We welcome the
normalization of relations with the Sudan in the
context of the Dakar agreement, and we will work
towards the consolidation of friendly relations and
good-neighbourliness with our Sudanese brothers. For
6

us, as long as the tragic situation in Darfur is not
settled, our fear is that relations between the two
countries could run the risk of being negatively
affected.

We have no internal problems. The hundreds of
political parties in Chad have signed a platform of
understanding, known as the political agreement of
13 August 2007. All who signed that agreement are
within the country and we are making our way towards
free and transparent elections under the supervision of
the international community.

Those who have taken up arms should give them
up and should return to the country in accordance with
the Sirte Agreement, which for us still remains valid.

