Ms. Power (United States of America): The
United States deeply appreciates the support from
our colleagues around the table and from the many
States that have called for a peaceful end to the crisis
in Ukraine. This is, however, a sad and remarkable
moment. It is the seventh time that the Security Council
has convened to discuss the urgent crisis in Ukraine.
The Council is meeting on Ukraine because it is the job
of this body to stand up for peace and to defend those
in danger.

We have heard a lot, each time that the Security
Council has met, about the echoes and relevance of
history. We have heard, for example, about the pleas of
the brave democrats of Hungary in 1956 and about the
dark chill that dashed the dreams of Czechs in 1968. We
still have the time and the collective power to ensure
that the past does not become prologue. But history
has lessons, for those of us who are willing to listen.
Unfortunately, not everyone was willing to listen today.
Under the Charter of the United Nations, the
Russian Federation has the power to veto a Security
Council draft resolution. But it does not have the power
to veto the truth. As we know, the word "truth" - or
"pravda" - has aprominent place in the story ofmodern
Russia. From the days of Lenin and Trotsky until the
fall of the Berlin Wall, Pravda was the name of the
house newspaper of the Soviet communist regime. But
throughout that period, one could search in vain to find
"pravda" in pravda.

Today one again searches in vain to find truth in
the Russian position on Crimea, on Ukraine or on the
proposed Security Council resolution (S/2014/189)
considered and vetoed a few moments ago. The truth
is that the draft resolution should not have been
controversial. It was grounded in principles that
provide the foundation for international stability and
law, Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations,
the prohibition of the use of force to acquire territory
and respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Member States. Those
are principles that Russia agrees with and defends
vigorously, all around the world; except, it seems, in
circumstances that involve Russia.

The draft resolution broke no new legal or
normative ground. It simply called on all parties
to do what they had previously pledged through
internationally binding agreements to do. It recalled
specifically the 1975 Helsinki Final Act and the 1994
Budapest Memorandum, in which Russia and other
signatories reaffirmed their commitments themselves
to respect Ukraine's territorial integrity and to refrain
from aggressive military action toward that country.

The draft resolution called on the Government of
Ukraine to do what it had promised it would do: to
protect the rights of all Ukrainians, including those
belonging to minority groups.

Finally, the draft resolution noted that the planned
Crimean referendum, scheduled for tomorrow, has no
legal validity and will have no legal effect on the status
of Crimea.

From the beginning of the crisis, the Russian
position has been at odds not only with the law, but
also with the facts. Russia claimed that the rights of
people inside Ukraine were under attack, but that
claim had validity only in the parts of Ukraine where
Russia and Russian military forces were exercising
undue influence. Russia denied that it was intervening
militarily, but Russian troops have helped to surround
and occupy public buildings, shut down airports,
obstruct transit points and prevent the entry into
Ukraine of international observers and human rights
monitors. Russian leadership has disclaimed any
intention of trying to annex Crimea, then reversed
itself and concocted a rationale for justifying just such
an illegal act.

Russia claims that its intentions are peaceful, but
Russian officials have shown little interest in United
Nations, European and American efforts at diplomacy,
including Secretary of State Kerry's efforts yesterday
in London. Russia has refused Ukraine's outstretched
hand while, as we speak, Russian armed forces are
massing across Ukraine's eastern border. Two days
ago, in this very Chamber, Ukraine's Prime Minister
appealed to Russia to embrace peace (see S/PV.7134).
Instead, Russia has rejected a draft resolution that had
peace at its heart and law flowing through its veins.

The United States offered the draft resolution
in a spirit of reconciliation, in the desire for peace,
in keeping with the rule of law, in recognition of the
facts and in fulfilment of the obligation of the Council
to promote and preserve stability among nations. At
the moment of decision, only one hand was raised to
oppose those principles. Russia - isolated, alone and
wrong - blocked the draft resolution's adoption, just
as it has blocked Ukrainian ships and international
observers. Russia put itself outside the international
norms that we have painstakingly developed to serve as
the bedrock foundation for peaceful relations between
States.

The reason only one country voted against the
draft resolution today is that the world believes
that international borders are more than mere
suggestions. The world believes that people within
those internationally recognized borders have the
right to chart their own future, free from intimidation.
The world believes that the lawless pursuit of one's
ambitions serves none of us.

Russia has used its veto as an accomplice to
unlawful military incursion. That very veto was given
nearly 70 years ago to countries that had led an epic
fight against aggression. But in so doing, Russia
cannot change the fact that moving forward in blatant
defiance of the international rules of the road will have
consequences, nor can it change Crimea's status. Crimea
is part of Ukraine today. It will be part of Ukraine
tomorrow. It will be part of Ukraine next week. It will
be part of Ukraine unless and until its status is changed
in accordance with Ukrainian and international law.

Russia prevented the adoption of a resolution
today, but it cannot change the aspirations and
destiny of the Ukrainian people, and it cannot deny
the truth, displayed today, that there is overwhelming
international opposition to its dangerous actions.

