Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in Libya.

It has been over four months since the adoption
of resolution 1973 (2011) and the start of the military
campaign in Libya. We should remind ourselves that
the intention of resolution 1973 (2011) was to ensure
the protection of civilians, and not regime change or
the targeting of individuals.

Clearly, action focused on the military solution
has not had its intended purpose. Instead, it has worked
to destabilize the country even further, and therefore
the long-term security and stability of Libya remain
uncertain as the situation deteriorates, with more loss
of civilian lives and massive destruction of
infrastructure.

What is required is a commitment to full
compliance with resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973
(2011) in their entirety, in letter and spirit. This will
include focusing our energies on finding a political
solution to the crisis, as emphasized in paragraph 2 of
resolution 1973 (2011), which stresses the need to
intensify efforts aimed at a political outcome.
In further contributing towards a political
solution, the seventeenth ordinary session of the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
African Union (AU) was held in Malabo recently and
endorsed a set of proposals for a framework agreement
on a political solution to the crisis in Libya. The
framework agreement, which is based on the AU road
map and resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011),
reiterates Libyan leader Colonel Muammar
Al-Qadhafi's commitment to an inclusive dialogue
process, with the participation of the Interim
Transitional National Council. This is all based on the
agreement of Colonel Al-Qadhafi not to participate in
the negotiations on the future of Libya.

Allow me to touch on the key elements of the
framework agreement, which include, first, national
dialogue. The Libyan parties commit to immediately
start negotiations in accordance with paragraph 2 of
resolution 1973 (2011) and the AU road map. That will
address the following issues: an immediate suspension
of hostilities, a humanitarian pause, a comprehensive
ceasefire, national reconciliation, arrangements relating
to the transition, and the agenda for democratic
transformation. The national dialogue shall be held
under the auspices of the AU Ad Hoc High-level
Committee on Libya and the United Nations, through
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Al-Khatib, with the support of the League of Arab
States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)
and the European Union (EU).

Secondly, with respect to confidence-building and
other combining measures, the parties will commit
themselves to work towards healing and national
reconciliation, including considering the establishment
of a truth and reconciliation commission. The parties
will commit themselves to requesting the Security
Council to lift the freeze of Libyan assets, as provided
for in resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011), to the
benefit of the interim Government.

Thirdly, the international community, represented
by the AU, the United Nations, the League of Arab
States, the OIC and the EU, commits itself to
supporting the process and agreements reached among
the Libyan stakeholders.

These proposals for a framework agreement have
been submitted to the Government of Libya and to the
Transitional National Council for their consideration.
The AU has asked the Libyan parties "to demonstrate
the required political will and place the supreme
interest of their country and people above any other
consideration". It is thus imperative for them to
commit to a political solution. The Council and the
wider international community should impress upon
them the necessity for such a political process.

We have noted the calls for Al-Qadhafi to go. We
maintain that such statements do not bring us any
closer to a political solution. We call on all parties to
focus on genuinely assisting the Libyan parties to
immediately begin a political dialogue in line with the
AU road map, as elaborated in the framework
agreement. It is only through a Libyan-led and owned
political process that a decision on the future of Libya,
including that of Colonel Al-Qadhafi, can be based.
This is a Charter-given right that will reaffirm the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity of Libya.

South Africa remains concerned about the
implementation of resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973
(2011). Taking sides in any internal conflict situation in
an effort to institute regime change in Libya sets a
dangerous precedent that will surely damage the
credibility of the Council and its resolutions. We have
also noted the call encouraging the unfreezing of
Libyan assets. Unfreezing assets to support one side of
the conflict would, in our View, be in violation of the
sanctions regime and further complicate the situation.
11-43499

The recent report of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the
humanitarian situation in Libya provides a big picture,
as has been confirmed by Mr. Pascoe. The report shows
that there are significant shortages in water, fuel, spare
parts, cash, medicine and other basic amenities. This
situation is ever more worrying in light of the
approaching month of Ramadan.

Given this dire humanitarian situation, we echo
the AU's demand for

"an immediate pause in the fighting and in
NATO-led bombings, to provide respite to the
civilian population, alleviate its suffering and
make it possible to deliver the much needed
humanitarian assistance to all those in need".

In conclusion, we call on all of the parties to put
aside their differences and begin negotiations without
preconditions with a view to finding a sustainable
political solution that will fulfil the aspirations of the
Libyan people. It is our responsibility as the
international community to assist the parties in this
quest.

