Mr. Siniora (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
invitation to address the members of the Security
Council. I would also like to take this opportunity to
express Lebanon's thanks to the Security Council for
all the support it has provided in enhancing Lebanon's
sovereignty and prosperity. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts and
positive and constructive role for Lebanon on the
various aspects of the issue.
(spoke in English)

It gives me great pleasure to address the Council
today, first, to update it on recent developments in
Lebanon and, secondly, to share our thoughts on a
number of issues of common interest and concern.

But let me first express our deep gratitude for the
great support that the United Nations including,
especially, the Secretary-General and the Security
Council, has provided to Lebanon over the past 19
months. This support has been instrumental in helping
Lebanon move along in its transition towards the
achievement of its territorial integrity, full
independence and sovereignty and, most important, in
reaching those results by peaceful means. United
Nations support has not only been important for
Lebanon, but it has also meant a great deal for the
region, as the achievement of peace and security in
Lebanon contributes to peace and security in the
Middle East. The positive role of the United Nations is
also important because it demonstrates that
international institutions can be effective in protecting
the legitimate rights of small countries and in making it
possible for them to achieve those rights through
peaceful means.

Today's meeting is timely as it comes after the
preparation of the third report of the Secretary-General
on Security Council resolution 1559 (2004) and before
the Council convenes to discuss that report. In this
connection, I would like to commend the Secretary-
General and his special representative, Mr. Terje Roed-
Larsen, and to thank them for an objective and accurate
report.

The great historic transition that the Lebanese
people started a year ago is not yet complete. There are
certainly a number of serious challenges before us. But
let me start with what I believe are important strides
that have already been made on the road towards the
Lebanon that we want: a self-governing, stable,
democratic, moderate and more prosperous country.

After many years of civil strife, Israeli occupation
and Syrian presence, during which most major policy
issues were being either managed by non-Lebanese or
were in some cases considered taboo or too sensitive to
tackle, the Lebanese started to engage in real and
serious debate over all policy matters. The conference
of national dialogue, which was initiated last March,
was a clear expression of the readiness of the Lebanese
to address difficult national issues in a serious and
peaceful manner.

This process of national dialogue, which brings
together 14 representatives of all the parliamentary
blocs, has already achieved significant progress.
Consensus has been reached on important matters such
as relations with Syria, the delimitation of all common
borders between Lebanon and Syria, including, first
and foremost, the Sheba'a farms area, the policy
towards the Palestinians in Lebanon and the
international investigation and judicial process relating
to the assassination of Prime Minister Hariri and his
companions. The significance of reaching an
agreement on those issues should not be
underestimated.

The Lebanese people have shown remarkable
resilience in the face of a systematic attempt to
terrorize and intimidate them by means of bombings
and the assassination of a number of pro-independence
political figures and media personalities. This
collective resilience has demonstrated that the
Lebanese people have indeed moved a long way
towards a strong, united and stable country - a
country that cannot be easily fractured or intimidated.

It is a major challenge to put Lebanese-Syrian
relations on the right footing. The scars left by the
dramatic developments of the past 19 months and by
the heavy-handed interference in Lebanese domestic
affairs by the Syrian security establishment for many
years are not easy to heal. However, for the sake of
fairness, we should admit that Syria, for a significant
part of the past 30 years, played a very important and
constructive role in ending attempts to partition
Lebanon and in helping Lebanon achieve the
withdrawal of Israeli forces from most of southern
Lebanon in the year 2000. In the national dialogue it
has been unanimously agreed that the relations
between the two sister countries should be strong and
positive and based on mutual respect, parity and non-
interference, and I personally strongly believe in that.

Such relations require, first and foremost, an
effort to re-establish confidence between the two
countries, genuine acceptance by the Syrian
Government of a truly independent Lebanon and a
genuine recognition that a free and sovereign Lebanon
can have good relations with Syria and can serve
Syrian and Arab interests better. That is a challenge. In
our view, a positive response by Syria with regard to
the steps agreed by all the parties in the national
dialogue - including the establishment of diplomatic
relations and the delineation of the borders between the
two countries, including in the Sheba'a farms area -
will be an indication that the Syrian Government is
beginning to accept the idea that good relations
between Syria and an independent Lebanon are
possible. However long it takes, good relations
between Lebanon and Syria, based on mutual respect,
will be achieved and have to be achieved, because that
is in the interests of both countries.

Since 1978, Lebanon has suffered from the Israeli
occupation of large parts of its territory and from
several other invasions and aggressions, which have all
resulted in major destruction and dislocation. In May
of 2000, Israeli forces withdrew from most of the
occupied territories, with the exception of an area
bordering Syria's Golan Heights, which is referred to
as the Sheba'a farms. For us, the liberation of this still-
occupied Lebanese land is a priority national issue. It
is incumbent upon Israel to withdraw from that land, to
hand over the Lebanese detainees in its prisons, to
submit the maps of the landmines it left in the south
and to stop its infringements on Lebanese sovereignty.
We look forward to an active United Nations role in
helping us to achieve those rightful demands.

The delineation of the Lebanese Sheba'a farms
area - which Israel has continued to occupy, even
after its withdrawal from south Lebanon in 2000 - is
important in that context, because it has major
implications for our ability to liberate that area.
Agreeing with Syria on the border line that separates
the Sheba'a farms from the Syrian Golan Heights will
be an important step towards achieving the full
withdrawal of the Israelis from Lebanon to the
internationally recognized borders, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 425 (1978). The Syrian
Government has already declared verbally that the
Sheba'a farms region is part of Lebanese territory.
Also, and as indicated in the Secretary-General's
report, President Assad himself stated in June of 2001
that

"according to international law, it is up to the
bordering States concerned to identify the status
of a territory. Once that discussion is completed,
an accord must be registered with the
international authorities. In the case of Sheba'a,
this is the strict responsibility of Syria and
Lebanon".

Accordingly, and in line with the Lebanese
consensus on this matter, we have approached the
Syrian Government in order to delineate the border in
that region. The two Governments will then deposit the
border agreement with the United Nations, which will
draw the appropriate conclusions. We are still awaiting
a positive response from Syria. In any event, we will
be requesting the Secretary-General to confirm the
specific steps required by the United Nations to
recognize Lebanese sovereignty over the territory of
the Sheba'a farms.

Another Government priority is the
implementation of policies towards the Palestinians in
Lebanon through dialogue, as unanimously agreed by
all the national dialogue parties. That includes
discussions with the Palestinian side to end all the
armed presence outside the refugee camps within six
months and subsequently to address the issue of
weapons and security within the camps - all in
accordance with Lebanon's sovereignty and the State's
obligation to provide security for everyone throughout
its territory, in accordance with the Taif national
reconciliation pact of 1989.

The Government has also initiated a major effort
to improve the living conditions of Palestinian refugees
in cooperation with the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), which embodies the responsibility of the
international community towards those refugees who
were forced out of their country, Palestine, when Israel
was established.

It is no secret that for many years Lebanon's
relationship with the Palestinian refugees on its
territory has been difficult; in certain periods, it has
been one of armed conflict. It is also a fact that the
difficult living conditions in the refugee camps have
allowed the camps to become breeding grounds and a
safe haven for various armed factions. We intend to do
our utmost, in association with the international
community and donor countries, to help change the
living conditions in the refugee camps. We have started
discussions with the Palestinians to address economic
and humanitarian needs, in addition to the issues of
arms and security. In the period ahead, we intend to
press forward on all those issues, especially with donor
countries with a view to providing the necessary aid
through UNRWA to improve the conditions of the
Palestinian refugees in Lebanon until a final solution is
reached for them in the context of the peace process
and in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions and the Arab peace initiative.

In addition to implementing decisions already
taken by the National Dialogue Conference, another
challenge is to reach agreement on two remaining
issues that have yet to be addressed. The first is the
issue of the presidency of the Republic. Currently, the
majority in parliament considers the extension of
President Lahoud's term in September 2004 for three
more years to have been the result of interference and
coercion by Syria - which had great influence over
the Lebanese parliament at that time - against all of
the advice discouraging such heavy-handed
interference. Because the majority in parliament is not
sufficient to constitutionally shorten President
Lahoud's extended term, thus paving the way for the
election of a new President, the issue has been referred
to the national dialogue in the hope that consensus can
be reached. That has proved difficult so far. The
national dialogue will convene on 28 April to take up
the issue again. Agreement on the matter remains a
challenge.

Another issue which will be taken up when the
national dialogue is resumed is Hizbollah's weapons
and their role in the defence of Lebanon. While there is
consensus throughout Lebanon on the important role
that the resistance, spearheaded by Hizbollah, played in
forcing Israel's withdrawal from the south in May
2000, as well as on the fact that the south-eastern
corner of the country, namely the Sheba'a farms,
remains occupied, the future role of Hizbollah's
weapons in defending Lebanon is a matter of national
debate. That debate will be carried out in the context of
a strategy agreed upon by all Lebanese concerning how
best to defend Lebanon, against the backdrop of the
provisions of the Taif Agreement of 1989, United
Nations resolutions regarding Lebanon and the
continued occupation of the Sheba'a farms, as well as
the long history of incursions and violations of
Lebanese territory by Israel. Reconciling those
considerations with the natural obligation of the State
to be the sole provider of security to all its citizens and
residents, and the right of the State to have a monopoly
over arms and to exercise its full authority throughout
the country, is a major challenge to be addressed in the
period ahead.

Today's meeting also takes place in the midst of
our consultations with the United Nations on the
formation of a tribunal of an international character to
try those involved in the assassination of late Prime
Minister Hariri and his companions. I would like here
to express our deep appreciation for the professional
work carried out by Mr. Serge Brammertz and the
Investigation Commission, which we hope will succeed
in identifying the perpetrators of that terrorist crime
and bringing them to justice. This is important not only
with regard to the Hariri assassination - which is a
very important aspect - but also because Lebanon has
suffered most in the region from political
assassinations over the past two decades. Revealing the
truth and serving justice on those found guilty will be a
major deterrent to those who might in the future
contemplate such heinous crimes in Lebanon or
elsewhere. In order to ensure continuity in the
investigation and help to bring it to a successful
conclusion, we would strongly support an extension of
Mr. Brammertz's term, which we view as necessary.

With regard to the setting up of a tribunal of an
international character, I would like to thank the
Security Council for putting this issue on the fast
track - something to which we attach utmost
importance. We stand ready to conclude our
discussions with the legal team of the United Nations
as soon as possible so as to make sure that there is a
smooth transition from the investigation to the tribunal.

Our region is in turmoil. What happens in
Lebanon has a significant impact on the whole region.
As Lebanese, and also as part of the Arab and Muslim
worlds, we have an interest in and a responsibility for
working together against the forces of extremism and
despair by addressing the reasons that lie behind them.
We want to go back to the true principles of
moderation and tolerance which characterized our
region and the religions that emanated from it.

The international community also has an interest
in and a responsibility for helping the peoples of the
region to shake off their feelings of hopelessness and
despair and for contributing to their efforts in building
more democratic and prosperous societies. The
increasingly widespread prejudice against Arabs and
Muslims and the stereotyping of them as violent or
inherently hostile to the West only feed into their
pervasive sense of humiliation and anger - as does the
failure of the international community to correct the
great injustice done to the Palestinian people. This
sense of grave injustice, spanning six decades, has
undoubtedly contributed to the feeling of helplessness
and humiliation in the Arab and Muslim worlds. It has
also provided fertile ground for extremist and violent
minds to engage - in the name of religion - in
activities against innocent people that contradict the
principles of all religions. Moreover, Israel continues
to reject the Arab peace initiative, thus maintaining the
instability in the region and throughout the Muslim
world.

If we could all cooperate and mobilize our joint
efforts to achieve a just and comprehensive peace
between the Israelis and the Palestinians, as well as
with the other Arab countries, we would be
contributing to the cause of democracy and peace in
the Arab and Muslim worlds. That should be a priority
objective of the international community. A great deal
is at stake. The Council's responsibilities, and ours, are
great. Lebanon is staying the course. We hope that,
together, we will all succeed.

