Mr. Quifiones Senchez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of Cuba prays your
indulgence, Mr. President, but we cannot allow the
manipulation and deception. We feel obliged to
respond to the comments made by the delegation of the
United States concerning the well-known international
terrorist Luis Posada Carriles.

Once again, in this Chamber, we reiterate that the
claim that the United States authorities were guided by
international law is false. If the United States
authorities had acted in conformity with international
law and had abided by the commitments they
undertook through a number of international treaties to
which the United States is party and complied with the
relevant Security Council resolutions on the fight
against terrorism, including 1373 (2001), Posada
Carriles would have already been charged with
terrorism in the United States, or at the very least
extradited to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
That, unfortunately, has not happened.

We still await a response to the questions posed
by our delegation, and it seems that we will never get
one. They have to avoid at all costs the international
community becoming aware of the terrorist actions
carried out by Luis Posada Carriles when he acted on
behalf of the Central Intelligence Agency. Despite the
great deal of evidence to back this up, at no time has
the Government of the United States manifested its
intention to prosecute Luis Posada Carriles for his
terrorist activities.
The fight against terrorism requires seriousness,
commitment and, above all, political will. Statements
to the media are insufficient. Double standards in the
fight against terrorism should cease. It will not be
possible to eradicate terrorism if only some acts of
terrorism are condemned while others are tolerated,
justified or ignored, or when the question is simply
manipulated to promote petty political interests.

Cuba reaffirms its urgent appeal to the Security
Council to appropriately consider its complaints and to
act upon them.
