Mr. Annen (Germany): Sometimes we find hope
in unlikely places. Recently, the Sudan became one of
them. German Foreign Minister Heiko Maas visited the
country last month. He met Government representatives
willing to listen to people's demands. And he met the
brave men and women who brought down the Al-Bashir
regime through peaceful protests. Their hunger for
justice, democracy and peace will be the best assurance
for steering the Sudan through the difficult transition
that lies ahead, but the people of the Sudan are also
telling us that they will need our support.
My first message today, therefore, is that we have to
put the African people at the centre of our efforts. They
deserve our support. That is why we are promoting the
leadership of African women in political processes
through the African Women Leaders Network and
FemWise Africa. That is why we are working to
implement resolution 2467 (2019), for example, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Sexual violence in
conflict must end once and for all, and that is why the
Council must address the situation of those suffering
from displacement, violence, malnutrition or disease.
I am glad to announce that Germany will contribute
an additional €7 million to the €60 million that it has
already contributed to combating the Ebola epidemic.

My second message today is that we must remain
committed beyond the immediate crisis phase. The
seamless transition frompeacekeepingtopeacebuilding,
and from peacebuilding to building stable, inclusive
societies is what we should be aiming for together.
Germany will therefore increase its contribution to the
Peacebuilding Fund by €15 million this year.

As a Council, however, we also need to focus
more on the drivers of conflict. One key element is
the control of small arms and light weapons. They
cause more casualties among civilians than any other
type of weapon. We will therefore continue to support
the African Union (AU) Silencing the Guns by 2020
initiative and to address the security implications of
climate change that affect many regions, especially in
Africa. Mitigating climate change must become a key
component of all our efforts, including our resolutions
and activities.

My third message is that we need stronger and
smarter partnerships with Africa that build on African
solutions and African leadership. We are proud that
the European Union is one of the African Union's top
security partners, having provided €2.7 billion for
African-led peace missions over the past 15 years. We
are willing to build on that. We should aim for even
closer cooperation between the Security Council and the
AU Peace and Security Council. In that regard, I would
like to say here that we look forward to their meeting
planned for October in Addis Ababa. We welcome the
efforts of the European Union, the African Union and
the United Nations to explore ways to enhance that
trilateral cooperation.

We will continue to invest in lasting partnerships.
In answering the call from leaders of the region for
greater support, Germany and France have initiated an
international partnership for security and stability in
the Sahel region. It focuses on the central elements in
the fight for peace and security, namely, well-managed,
well-trained and well-equipped security forces that
provide safety for their people. It is a platform to
coordinate international support for the security
sector of the countries in the region and a basis for
more effectively linking security activities involving
stabilization measures and conflict prevention.

In conclusion, the brave civil society representatives
in the Sudan, the women rebuilding their lives in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Villagers in the
Sahel, who want to live free of terrorist threats, are
all looking to us with hope. Let us make sure that the
Council is the place to which they can turn.

