Ms. Rice (United States of America): I also want
to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Menkerios and President Mkapa for their
important briefings today.

This is a historic moment. I join President Obama
in congratulating the people and leaders of the Sudan
on the successful completion of voting on the
referendum on independence. The people of Southern
Sudan, after decades of war and more than 2 million
killed, have cast their votes peacefully and expressed
their will. The promise of self-determination was made
to the Southern Sudanese people in 2005. Thanks to the
commitment of the people of the Sudan and the support
of the international community, that promise was
finally fulfilled. Let us not underestimate what this
referendum means to the people of Southern Sudan. We
have all heard reports of long lines forming overnight
on 8 January and of people standing in line for hours to
vote. We have even heard of a case in which a river
ferry broke down and voters jumped into the
presumably crocodile-infested river and swam across
to reach the polling station. As President Obama said
after the polling closed,

"The past week has given the world renewed faith
in the prospect of a peaceful, prosperous future
for all of the Sudanese people a future that the
American people long to see in Sudan."

 

The United States commends the men and women
of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS)
for their outstanding work. Thanks to their tireless
efforts under daunting challenges and difficult
circumstances, the people of the Sudan have been able
to take a huge step forward on the path towards the full
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), which ended a 23-year civil war.

My Government congratulates Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Menkerios,
who is performing an incredibly difficult job with
grace and wisdom. We thank him.

We also welcome the work that the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission, the Southern Sudan
Referendum Bureau, the Government of the Sudan and
the Government of Southern Sudan have done to
ensure that this historic referendum occurred on time
and peacefully and reflected the will of the people.
We welcome the 16 January statement from the
Secretary-General's Panel on the Referenda in the

Sudan, in which it stated that it was satisfied that the
referendum process had "allowed the people of
Southern Sudan to express their will freely". A number
of other observer missions have also already released
preliminary statements. On 17 January, the Carter
Center called the referendum peaceful and credible and
broadly consistent with international standards. The
Arab League stated that the process was "in line with
international standards". The European Union observer
mission commended a "peaceful, credible voting
process with overwhelming turnout". On 16 January,
the Inter-Governmental Authority on Development and
the African Union called the referendum "free, fair and
credible." We commend the work of the hundreds of
international and thousands of domestic observers. The
United States continues to urge everyone to respect the
results of the referendum.

Of course, we must all focus on the challenging
and promising road ahead. We urge the parties to return
to the negotiating table as soon as possible to negotiate
a rapid and sustainable resolution to the question of
Abyei and other outstanding CPA issues. The United
States fully supports the efforts of the Chair of the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel,
President Thabo Mbeki, to facilitate these agreements.
We reiterate that any resolution regarding the future of
the Abyei area must be reached with the consent of
both parties and through a political settlement or a
process that respects the rights and needs of those
communities traditionally associated with the area.

Along with the status of Abyei, there are other
outstanding issues that require urgent attention, such as
border demarcation, citizenship, wealth-sharing
agreements, natural resource management, the division
of the national debt, security arrangements, currency
arrangements and international treaties and legal
obligations, which are all equally important. We also
consider peaceful, inclusive popular consultations in
Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan states that reflect the
will of the people to be essential components of the
implementation of the CPA. We call on the parties to
bring the same spirit to those negotiations as they have
brought to the conduct of the referendum itself.

For all of the inspiring events in the Sudan over
the past week, the United States laments the loss of life
in Abyei and the border region and reiterates its deep
concern regarding the arrest, detention and harassment
of human rights activists and journalists by the
Government of the Sudan's security forces, which

prevented both a Sudan People's Liberation Movement
leader and an Umma Party leader from conducting
television interviews. In addition, four university
students were arrested in separate incidents for trying
to host discussions. We urge Council members to join
us in calling on the Government of the Sudan to release
those who have been imprisoned unjustly, including
those jailed for exercising such basic rights as freedom
of speech, freedom of expression and freedom of
assembly.

As President Obama has made Clear, the United
States wants the leaders in the Sudan to choose the
path of peace and prosperity for all of the Sudanese
people. He has extended the hand of the United States
in that spirit. In order for that future to be realized,
however, the Sudan, too, must work with the
international community. That includes cooperating
with UNMIS and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to facilitate
full freedom of access and movement for United
Nations peacekeepers and for humanitarian workers.

That access is especially important given the
alarming reports that Sudanese armed forces have
burned homes and blocked civilians' access to
UNAMID in Khor Abeche and that the Government of
the Sudan violated the North-South ceasefire with
repeated aerial bombardments into the Kiir River
valley. That is in addition to the all-too-frequent
reports of aerial bombardment in Jebel Marra and the
Government of the Sudan's ongoing refusal to grant
UNAMID patrols access to affected populations in
spite of the status-of-forces agreement.

We are deeply saddened and troubled by the news
that on 13 January three Bulgarian helicopter crew
members contracted to the World Food Programme
were kidnapped in Darfur. We convey our condolences
to their families and we urge the Government of the
Sudan to do its utmost to facilitate their safe return.

We recall that 40,000 residents of Darfur were
displaced from their homes in December alone.
Civilians continue to live under the threat of attack and
sexual and gender-based violence. It is therefore in all
of our interests to continue to work to prevent
genocide.

The United States again calls on the Government
of the Sudan to immediately halt aerial bombardments.
We condemn attacks on civilians in the strongest
possible terms. Obtaining a ceasefire between the

Government of the Sudan and the armed movements
should be the immediate objective of the peace
process. The political process for a Darfur peace
agreement must be reinvigorated. All relevant parties
must come back to the negotiating table.

As we discussed during consultations on the
Sudan on 6 January, the unity shown by the Council
has gone a long way towards supporting the parties as
they have stayed on the path of peace. We need to
continue to watch closely as the parties continue to
implement the CPA. As progress is made, we should
welcome it and offer continued encouragement. But
just as important, we need to be prepared to insist upon
and to support the full and final implementation of the
CPA on such issues as protection of minorities and
rejection of proxy militias and other threats to peace
and security in the Sudan.

