Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the American penholder
for its in-depth consultations and efforts to take all
views on board in drafting the text. I will focus on
three issues.

First, France welcomes the adoption of resolution
2440 (2018), which renews the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO). The consultations held on 11 October
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Western Sahara, Colin Stewart, emphasized
the key role played by MINURSO to maintain calm and
preserve the ceasefire in the area. As underscored in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/889), the force
plays an indispensable preventive role in maintaining
regional stability. That essential point was also
highlighted by the independent assessment.

I would like to pay tribute to the Special
Representative and his teams who, through their
presence, are mitigating tensions and helping to reduce
the risk of escalation. On the basis of these elements,
France reiterates its commitment to a stable mandate
of 12 months. The six-month renewal contained in
resolution 2440 (2018), which we have just adopted,
must remain exceptional, as it is our responsibility
not to disrupt the management and planning of the
Mission's resources. This is as true for MINURSO as
it is for the other operations mandated by the Council.
The shortening of mandates seems to be a false good
idea that has no real effect on the political process but
could weaken the United Nations system. Maintaining
an annual framework is important to ensuring the
stability of peacekeeping operations.

It is the calm on the ground that MINURSO has
achieved that makes progress in the political sphere
possible. We therefore welcome the absence of a
major threat to the ceasefire, as acknowledged in the
resolution, and the improved situation on the ground
since our last renewal. The Council sent clear messages
in April (see S/PV.8246) that have borne fruit. Our role
is to be vigilant in recalling that the ceasefire must
continue to be fully respected.

Finally, in the context of a more peaceful
atmosphere, the Council fully supports the efforts of
the Personal Envoy in the political process, which is
also illustrated by the text adopted today. Following
the success of his visit to the region in late June and
early July, the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Western Sahara, Mr. Horst Kohler, laid the
groundwork for bringing Morocco, the Frente Popular
para la Liberacion de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro,
Algeria and Mauritania together at a preliminary round
of talks in early December in Geneva. The resolution
also welcomes the positive response of these four actors
to the invitation to participate in this discussion.

To that end, it will be very useful for the Personal
Envoy to continue his advance consultations so as
to better prepare this exercise. We encourage the
participants to play a constructive role therein, and
recall that, for France, the autonomy plan proposed
by Morocco constitutes a serious basis for future
discussions. I welcome the fact that the Security
Council is lending its full support to the dynamic I have
just recalled.

