Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council and to
thank Ambassador Kafando and the delegation of
Burkina Faso for the skill with which they conducted
the September presidency. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe and Ambassador
Viotti for their briefings today.

The United States is pleased to note that
legislative elections remain on track for 16 November.
We thank the African Union, the European Union, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the United Nations and others for
providing election observers. We hope that the
elections will be transparent and that any
disagreements will be handled only by judicial and
constitutional means.

We welcome the arrangements to establish a
national peacebuilding fund secretariat office for
Guinea-Bissau. We hope that implementing partners
will expedite the implementation of the peacebuilding
funds for short-term target projects, electoral support,
youth employment and the rehabilitation of prisons and
military barracks.

The United States is, however, growing
increasingly concerned that the steps towards Guinea-
Bissau's democratic development may prove
unsustainable as the spectre of narcotrafficking
threatens to overwhelm the country. Guinea-Bissau is
emerging as a major marketplace in the drug trade, as
well as continuing to be a hub for the transshipment of
drugs.

We are deeply concerned by the events
surrounding the 12 July arrival of a plane from
Venezuela at Bissau Airport, described in the
Secretary-General's report. We understand that the
plane arrived without landing rights or the prior
knowledge of airport officials. We are very
disappointed that military personnel unloaded the plane
and took custody of the cargo, which remains
unaccounted for, and that a domestic court ordered the
release of crew members despite an outstanding
international arrest warrant against one of them,
notwithstanding protests by the Minister of Justice and
the Prosecutor General. We call upon the Government
to Guinea-Bissau to give a full accounting of the
actions of all officials involved in that episode.

We applaud the proposed regional conference on
combating drug trafficking led by ECOWAS and we
support greater international attention to that issue, but
this is not the whole answer. The Government of
Guinea-Bissau needs, in our view, to take a strong
leadership position in combating drug trafficking in the
country.

Last year at this time, the Security Council
expressed its concern with the fragility of the
democratization process in Guinea-Bissau, as well as
persistent economic and social crisis. While some
progress has been made towards growth and
sustainable development, we continue to worry that the
impact of narcotrafficking and the tensions between
political parties will stall Guinea-Bissau's hard-won
progress.

