Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to welcome the
presence of Mr. Sergey Vershinin, Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation. We
also welcome the presence of the Secretary-General.
Equatorial Guinea very much appreciates the convening
of this meeting by the Russian Federation because it
allows us to analyse the situation in the Middle East
and North Africa impartially.

The overall situation in the Middle East and North
Africa greatly influences the stability and security
in other regions of the world. Achieving peace and
stability in those regions should therefore become
the foremost priority of the international community.
The complexity of the situation lies in the fact that
it involves political, religious, ethnic and economic
aspects. The most direct repercussions are seen in
human tragedies, terrorist threats, migration crises and
so on, which, moreover, also transcend the borders of
the areas directly affected.

The importance of meetings such as today's lies in
the fact that they give us an opportunity to at least recall
that such problems exist and that the Security Council,
which is mandated to find viable and common solutions
to issues, is expected to do its utmost to find lasting
solutions wherever peace and security in the world
are threatened. I believe that I am right in saying that
the peoples of the Middle East and North Africa pin
their hopes for peace, security and stability on action
by the Security Council. Implementing and achieving
a lasting and satisfactory resolution of conflicts may
be complex. However, the Security Council is the most
appropriate body to undertake that complex task.

The continuation of many of the ongoing conflicts
in the Middle East and North Africa is today fuelled
not only by the differences of the parties to the conflict
but also by the lack of a common position on the part
of the international actors with influence in the region.
My delegation therefore urges the members of the
Security Council to come closer together and to seek
common ground so that the Council can facilitate and
promote work towards a lasting resolution of such
issues. The situation in the Middle East, specifically
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, has continued for
more than 70 years, with all its ups and downs and
complexities. We have seen many victims, destruction
and so on. So much violence has not led to anything
positive. However, the only viable solution is for the
parties to sit at the negotiating table and seek a political
solution to their differences. That solution means the
establishment of two States - one Palestinian and
the other Israeli - living side by side in peace. Both
parties must respect each other's right to exist. The
relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative are the legal instruments that support
such proposals.

The Libyan crisis, which has already had a negative
impact on the southern part of its territory, since its
repercussions have further exacerbated the ongoing
problems in those areas. There has also been a negative
impact on the northern part of the country in the form
of migration crises that European countries face today.
The worst aspect is the human trafficking that we are
seeing. It is positive to note that the Libyan political
actors are now seeking to resolve such problems through
a political process, which, we hope, will be successful.

The Syrian crisis has also lasted for a number of
years, with all its complexities. The suffering must
come to an end. The Syrians themselves must be able
to find and decide upon the best solution for their
country, clearly with the support of the international
community, by which I mean the Security Council.
As the Secretary-General underscored this morning,
everyone's wish is to see a democratic and strong Syria
that can fulfil its clear potential in peace.

The numbers of people fleeing from such conflicts
are becoming increasingly problematic. Today we see
how Syrian refugees flee to neighbouring countries and
beyond. It is impossible to contain the humanitarian
consequences as a result ofthe lack ofpolitical solutions.
What is needed is a political solution that puts an end
to that human suffering. The neighbouring countries
hosting millions of Syrians deserve our praise. We
would also urge the Syrian stakeholders to continue the
dialogue, however difficult it may be.

Long-term conflicts, such as that of Yemen,
Lebanon and Iraq, where the use of weapons has
claimed numerous human lives, as well as causing
great material damage and forced displacement, must
be dealt with under international human rights law.
The adoption of local measures of partial and limited
scope is not the answer. The solution is consistent and
coordinated international efforts. We believe that all
such conflicts should be resolved through direct and
frank negotiations.

Terrorism has been a common denominator of
all the crises, both in North Africa and in the Middle
East. In that regard, the international community must
remain united and combat that scourge, which has only
aggravated the human tragedy in that region. As the
Ambassador of Ethiopia emphasized this morning,
it is pleasing to note that the threat posed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in the region has
significantly decreased.

The situation in the Middle East and North Africa
is not a coincidence but the result of history and
reflects structural problems that cannot be explained
only by internal situations. Many such problems have
been inherited from the past. Resolving the problems
facing us requires establishing a more democratic
global structure where there are no double standards
in the pursuit of solutions. The search for solutions
should never be confused with interference in the
internal affairs of countries. The sovereignty of the
States in question must always be respected. A poor
analysis of foreign situations and wrong decisions have
unnecessarily complicated many conflicts facing us
today. None of those conflicts has a military solution.
We continue to believe that the United Nations must
play a fundamental role through all its mechanisms to
seek lasting solutions to such issues. Bias and groups
have no place in the various conflicts.

