Mrs. Gueguen (France) (Spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his very useful briefing, in
particular on peace efforts and the electoral process. I
would also like to thank the Executive Director of United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for his
briefing on the fight against narcotics in Afghanistan, a
very important subject for France. I thank Ambassador
Umarov for his briefing on the latest activities of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011), a sanctions regime whose
effective implementation is of major importance in the
context of ongoing peace efforts. Finally, allow me to
express my special thanks to Ms. Ghizaal Haress for
her insight into the current elections and institutional
issues and the crucial importance of the political
participation of women and young people. I will make
three observations.

My first point involves elections. The holding of
parliamentary elections in October illustrated the
progress made in recent years. The elections, in which
women took a large part, which is to be welcomed,
showed the desire for peace of the Afghan people, who
mobilized courageously, despite the threats and attacks.
With a view to the 2019 presidential elections, the
consolidation ofa free, credible and transparent electoral
process must continue. The weaknesses identified
during the parliamentary elections must be corrected.
In particular, the Independent Election Commission
must continue to work to ensure the widest possible
participation of the population in the elections and to
create the conditions for a fair, free and transparent
election. Indeed, it is trust in credible institutions and
legitimate representatives that guarantees peace. France
is very committed to ensuring that the European Union
continues to support these efforts, as well as the United
Nations and NATO, in order to help Afghan forces
prevent and combat terrorism and all forms of violence,
the objective of which is to prevent the Afghan people
from expressing their free sovereign will.

My second point is about peace efforts. The
seriousness of the security situation and the human
cost of the conflict should encourage renewed efforts
to achieve lasting peace in Afghanistan. The peace
process must be inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghan-
led, and must take the form of a negotiated peace with
the Taliban, with a view to achieving lasting stability.
This requires both sides to express acceptable and
necessary conditions for an integrated exercise of
power within the institutional framework provided for
by the Constitution.

Progress has been made, thanks in particular to the
initiative of President Ghani, who recently proposed a
road map. These gestures deserve to be commended,
and France reiterates its call to the Taliban to respond
to the peace offer on the table. It is also important that
women and young people can participate in a direct and
meaningful way. Finally, it is essential that all States in
the region unambiguously support the process and that
the international community's efforts be both concerted
and not in competition with one another.

My third point relates to the fight against drugs.
The decrease seen this year is only temporary. We
remain concerned about the high levels of poppy
cultivation and opium production in Afghanistan. The
continued drug trafficking fuels the Taliban insurgency
and terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant-Khorasan Province. It is also a public
health issue. Poppy cultivation and drug trafficking in
the country threaten the lives of thousands of Afghans.
We are aware of the magnitude of the task and the need
for a collective approach in the context of the principle
of shared responsibility. We count on the Afghan
Government to continue the important efforts needed to
curb the production and trafficking of drugs, with the
support of UNODC and the international community,
particularly as part of the Paris Pact initiative. The
situation calls for an ambitious response and reforms in
the areas of governance and the fight against corruption
and organized crime.

In conclusion, allow me to thank the delegation
of the Netherlands for its significant efforts and its
clear and coherent stance on the Afghan issue during
this year. We would also like to reaffirm France's full
support for Afghanistan in this pivotal period and for
the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan in support of the Afghan authorities.
Finally, I would like to reiterate the importance that
France attaches to the unity of the international
community in support of Afghanistan. More than
ever, we must remain united to support Afghanistan's
path to peace, stability, democracy and economic and
social development. Together with the international
community, we reaffirmed that message of unity at the
Geneva conference on 28 November, and we must now
live up to it.

