Mr. Danesh-Yazdi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Today the Council is debating a matter of major
importance to the international community. The
continued existence and development of weapons of
mass destruction (WMD) and the prospect of non-State
actors acquiring such weapons are serious threats faced
by the whole world. In addition, the possibility of the
use or the threat of use of those weapons by those who
possess them is a major threat to international peace
and security. Given the gravity and seriousness of those
threats, we have never wavered in our support for all
efforts genuinely aimed at dealing with this menace,
within the parameters of international law.

As a State party to all international instruments
banning WMD - namely, the Treaty on the Non-
proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention, the Biological and Toxin

Weapons Convention and the 1925 Geneva Protocol -
and on the basis of our ideological as well as various
international commitments, the Islamic Republic of
Iran has always considered the possession, acquisition,
development and use of WMD to be inhumane,
immoral and illegal, and believes that the most
effective way to prevent non-State actors from
acquiring WMD is through the total elimination of
such weapons. Iran, as a recent victim of weapons of
mass destruction, strongly believes that the
international community must strive to ensure that the
nightmare visited by the United States upon the people
of Hiroshima and Nagasaki never happens again.
Therefore, the only absolute guarantee is the total
elimination of nuclear weapons, as stipulated by the
NPT and emphasized in the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice.

The growing risk of the acquisition of WMD by
terrorists and non-State actors has been a matter of
grave concern to all of us in the international
community in recent years. The recent heinous terrorist
attack in Iraq, in which chlorine gas was used by
terrorists, resulting in the death and injury of many
innocent Iraqi people, made clear once again the
seriousness of this appalling threat. That same concern
prompted the general membership in 2003 to adopt
General Assembly resolution 57/83, which calls upon
all Member States to support international efforts to
prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery.

The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) and the
formation of the relevant Committee by the Security
Council was a step along those same lines. By taking
this initiative, the Council intended to fill the gap in
the non-proliferation regime. However, a number of
serious and important questions were arising at the
time - questions that remain valid - especially
concerning the compatibility of the resolution with the
letter and spirit of the United Nations Charter as well
as international disarmament instruments.

Mindful of the importance of the tasks with
which the 1540 Committee has been entrusted, we
should make every effort to ensure that actions by the
Security Council do not undermine the United Nations
Charter, existing multilateral treaties on weapons of
mass destruction or international organizations
established in that regard, and do not encroach on the
prerogatives and authority of the General Assembly.

We believe that a major deficiency of resolutions

1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006) is their silence on the

essential and important issue of disarmament. Equally

noticeable, and also unfortunate, is the failure of those

resolutions to acknowledge the linkage between non-
proliferation and disarmament.

That negligence is in sharp contrast to the
relevant General Assembly resolutions and the will of
the general membership, which call for urgent progress
in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation in
order to help maintain international peace and security
and contribute to global efforts against terrorism.

The Islamic Republic of Iran shares the View that
the objectives of non-proliferation and disarmament
are mutually reinforcing and that efforts directed
towards non-proliferation should be paralleled by
simultaneous efforts aimed at disarmament.

Iran has submitted two national reports to the
1540 Committee. As a State party to all international
instruments banning WMD, my country, even before
the adoption of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673
(2006), had been implementing the measures called for
by those resolutions.

Iran has also enacted a set of national laws and
regulations to ban, combat and make punishable the
smuggling and illicit trafficking of all types of
weapons and ammunition.

However, we are of the strong view that the
provisions of those resolutions should not be
interpreted or implemented in a manner that conflicts
with, or alters, the rights and obligations enshrined in
internationally negotiated instruments such as the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT), the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), and
the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention
(BTWC), as well as the Statute of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).

As we have indicated time and again, Iran
considers the pursuit and development of nuclear
technology for peaceful purposes to be its inalienable
right, as recognized under the NPT. Upholding the
rights of States parties under international treaties is as
essential as ensuring respect for their obligations.
Indeed, these regimes, including the NPT, are sustained
by a balance between rights and obligations. Iran has
clearly and continuously stressed that nuclear and other
weapons of mass destruction have no place in its

military doctrine. Therefore, the reference made by a
very few speakers at this meeting to Iran's peaceful
nuclear programme was irrelevant and irresponsible.

In order to dispel any doubts about our peaceful
nuclear programme, we have enabled the IAEA to
carry out a series of inspections that amounts to the
most robust inspection of any IAEA member State. All
reports by the IAEA since 2003 have been indicative of
the peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme,
and the Agency has repeatedly reaffirmed that it has
not seen any diversion of nuclear material to nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices in Iran's
peaceful nuclear programme. That has also been
stressed by the Director General of the IAEA in various
public statements.

It is, however, regrettable that despite all these
unambiguous acknowledgements, an ill-intended and
extensive campaign with political motivations has been
under way that is attempting to distort and fabricate
facts and realities concerning Iran's peaceful nuclear
programme, as we have witnessed at today's meeting in
the form of the baseless allegations made against my
country by the representatives of the United States, the
United Kingdom and the Israeli regime. Yet, in spite of
the massive political and propaganda machine that is at
work, no one in today's world can accept the
convoluted logic that it is all right for them to have
nuclear weapons and threaten others with their massive
arsenals and aggressive policies, while crying wolf
about others' peaceful nuclear programmes.

We have demonstrated our resolve not to give in
to the pressure resulting from groundless and
unsubstantiated allegations and ulterior political
motives. Iran has abided by its obligations under
international treaties. It has adhered to them and
continues to do so.

