Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank
Mr. Alexander Zouev, Assistant Secretary-General for
Rule of Law and Security Institutions, for his briefing.
We also appreciate Sweden's efforts in its role as Chair
of the Liberia configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and we thank Ambassador Irina Schoulgin
Nyoni for her briefing, including on the Chair's recent
visit to the country. We were also pleased to hear the
views of Mr. Liberty.
Liberia has indeed made remarkable progress in
consolidating its peace and stability and strengthening
its democratic institutions. The peaceful and successful
holding of the recent legislative and presidential
elections clearly demonstrated the resilience of the
country's democratic institutions. We congratulate
the people and the Government of Liberia on their
achievement in ensuring a democratic transfer of
power. That is a success for Africa as a whole, as well
as for Liberia and the region.

The United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
completed its mandate last month at a time of great
hope and optimism, and we appreciate its important
contribution to promoting peace, stability and
development in Liberia. In the words of the country's
newly elected President George Weah, the UnitedNations
has had a positive impact on the lives of Liberians, as
well as on every part of the fabric of Liberian society,
since its arrival in 2003. We appreciate the dedicated
efforts of Special Representative Zarif and the civilian
and military personnel of UNMIL, as well as the
contributions of the troop- and police-contributing
countries. We pay tribute to the 202 peacekeepers
who made the ultimate sacrifice in advancing peace in
Liberia. Ethiopia is proud to have played its part in the
stabilization of Liberia through its contribution of three
infantry battalions to UNMIL.

We welcome the adoption today of presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/8, which, among other things,
requests the Secretary-General to undertake a study of
the role of UNMIL in the resolution of conflicts and
challenges in Liberia, with a view to drawing lessons
for the best practices of United Nations peacekeeping
missions in transition. We believe that will be vital
to enhancing the overall effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping.

In spite of the remarkable progress made over the
past decade and a half, Liberia still faces enormous
challenges. That is why it needs the continued support
of the international community, post-UNMIL, to
sustain peace. We believe that the efforts to address the
root causes of conflict should be enhanced by fostering
reconciliation, strengthening democratic institutions,
promoting popular participation and expanding social
services. In that regard, we welcome the alignment
of Liberia's national development agenda with the
Sustainable Development Goals, which will help to
address poverty in Liberia and improve the economic
situation of its society's most vulnerable sections,
particularly women and young people. We also note the
continued implementation of the Liberia peacebuilding
plan, developed in close consultation between the
United Nations, the Government of Liberia and
partners. Its implementation will be vital to sustaining
peace in the country, and we hope that all stakeholders
will fulfil their commitments and support its full
implementation. The Peacebuilding Commission and
its Liberia configuration play an important role in
that regard, and their ongoing active engagement will
continue to be absolutely vital.

Finally, as Liberia opens a new chapter in its history,
we hope that the United Nations, the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States and
other bilateral and multilateral partners will continue
to support and accompany the country's efforts to build
and sustain peace.

