Mr. Jeremie (Serbia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting of the Security Council.

Once again, we are gathered to discuss the
dangerous consequences of the 17 February 2008
unilateral declaration of independence by the ethnic
Albanian authorities of Serbia's southern province of
Kosovo and Metohij a.

I welcome the presence of Special Representative
Lamberto Zannier, and I wish to underline the
Secretary-General's observation, contained in his most
recent report, that the cooperation, constructive
engagement and "continuing support of the Security
Council and of the broader international community for
a reconfigured UNMIK is of crucial importance"
(S/2009/300, para. 44).

Reconfiguration has been brought to its end-state,
as the report indicates. Therefore, no further reduction
in the resources of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) should be
undertaken.

The United Nations remains the overall authority
in Kosovo, as mandated by this Council in resolution
1244 (1999). It must continue to play a vital role in
coordinating all the international organizations that
operate under its umbrella. The capacity of UNMIK to
cooperate effectively with the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) in particular must
not be constrained. Our amendments to the UNMIK
budget for the coming fiscal year have sought to
reinforce that essential element of its mandate.
09-37195

At the very beginning of my remarks, I would
like to express my country's deep gratitude to the vast
majority of Member States, which respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia. The
solidarity we have received from all over the globe
encourages us to persevere in our efforts to resolve the
future status of Kosovo in a way that is acceptable to
all responsible stakeholders. It is my sincere hope that
we will continue to work together in defence of the
basic principles of international law, thus strengthening
the universal case for the consensual resolution of
disputes throughout the world.

At the same time, we note with deep regret the
dismissal of resolution 1244 (1999) by Pristina. As the
Secretary-General's report makes plain, the ethnic
Albanian authorities in Kosovo asserted that "they had
no legal obligation to abide by it" (ibid., para. 2).

No one should be permitted to ignore the
decisions of the Security Council. I therefore urge the
Council to insist that all parties uphold the
commitments that arise from resolution 1244 (1999). It
was passed under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter, which binds all to respect its provisions in
full. This is our common legal imperative and our
moral obligation.

Serbia will never, under any circumstances,
implicitly or explicitly recognize the unilateral
declaration of independence by the ethnic Albanian
authorities of our southern province. On this issue, we
will not yield, come what may. We will continue to
defend our integrity in a non-confrontational manner,
using all peaceful means at our disposal.

As a result of our measured response to the
unilateral declaration of independence, the unstable
equilibrium on the ground has largely been kept in
check. We have sought to contain flashpoints despite
numerous provocations, such as the targeted power
cuts, pressure to sign loyalty oaths and the construction
of new, unauthorized housing settlements.

Kosovo should not stand outside the rules of the
international system. It is no exception, not a unique
case, nor is it sui generis. As a result of the unilateral
declaration of independence, that declaration has
become a test of global significance. Should it be
allowed to stand, a door would open for challenging
the territorial integrity of any United Nations Member
State.

On 8 October 2008, the General Assembly
approved, by an overwhelming margin, resolution 63/3
to refer the unilateral declaration of independence issue
to the International Court of Justice (ICJ). The judicial
proceeding has begun, and it marks the first time that
the ICJ has been asked to consider the legality of a
unilateral attempt by an ethnic minority to secede from
a United Nations Member State, in defiance of that
State's democratic constitution and the will of the
Security Council.

The case has attracted attention across the globe,
as the active presence at the Court of representatives of
countries from all continents to participate in the
unilateral declaration of independence hearings makes
clear. The ICJ conclusions will have far-reaching
consequences for the international system as a whole.
It is therefore vitally important that the legal process be
allowed to run its course, free of political interference.

We should all respect the fact that the Court is
deliberating on the issue. Therefore, new recognitions
of the unilateral declaration of independence should
not be encouraged, and multilateral bodies should
refrain from extending membership to the secessionist
authorities in Pristina. Once the ICJ hands down its
opinion, we will have cause to look again into the
issue, informed by the findings of the Court.

In the meantime, we should find the strength to
put our differences on status to one side for the sake of
peace and stability and for the residents of the
province. This is a time for leadership and working
together, armed with prudence and strategic Vision. Let
us not increase the divide. Some countries have
recognized the unilateral declaration of independence.
Others have not. We all have our constraints, and they
should be respected. Let the Court do its work, while
we focus on improving the lives of citizens instead of
making them the Victims of our disagreements.

Let us engage with each other so as to rebuild
holy sites, alleviate poverty, create jobs, provide health
care and education, reduce crime and improve public
security. Working at cross purposes should stop. Let us
create new opportunities for achieving practical results
by engaging with one another on a whole host of
questions.

I propose that we begin with the central
humanitarian issue of internally displaced persons
(IDPs). According to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), more

than 200,000 Kosovo Serb IDPs have not returned to
the province. Last year, only around 500 returned; and,
during the latest reporting period, no more than 30.
That is a failure of monumental proportions. Kosovo
Serb IDPs want to exercise their right of return, and we
must do everything to bring them back home. That
means improving conditions on the ground to make
them feel safe. Few destroyed houses have been
rebuilt, and most remain empty. That is not, however,
where the biggest problem lies. More than 40,000
claims have been filed by Kosovo Serb IDPs for the
return of illegally seized private property, and they
have not had any response. The first step, therefore, is
to make sure that those claims are delivered. Right
now, that is impossible. Sadly, the UNMIK-
administered Kosovo Property Agency has ceased to
exist.

We urge the international community to embrace
the initiative of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to get UNHCR to take over the
functions previously performed by the Kosovo
Property Agency. Through its Office in Belgrade and
others in Serbia that United Nations agency can serve
as a focal point of our engagement.

On 6 April, the European Union announced that
EULEX had reached full operational capacity,
following the visit to Belgrade by the head of EULEX,
Mr. Yves de Kermabon. While the United Nations has
not transferred all rule of law functions to the
European Law and Order Mission in Kosovo, it has
adhered to the assumption by EULEX of operational
responsibility within the parameters set out in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2008/692). That report
affirms that EULEX will fully respect resolution 1244
(1999) and operate under the overall authority and
within the status-neutral framework of the United
Nations.

Since that time, the Republic of Serbia has
engaged with EULEX and UNMIK on a whole host of
practical issues of common concern within the
parameters welcomed by the Security Council. The
Secretary-General's six-point arrangement (8/2008/354, annex I) must be applied in full. Some progress in that
direction has been achieved, although "comprehensive or
long-term solutions have not yet been agreed"
(S/2008/300, para. 43).
We deeply regret that more has not been
accomplished to date. That is due in part to the
reluctance of Pristina to accept that the infamous
Ahtisaari Plan was not endorsed by the Security
Council, thanks, in large part, to the principled position
of the Russian Federation.

I turn to a brief discussion of the six points and
related practical issues. Regarding the police, the
question of senior positions for qualified Kosovo Serbs
has not yet been resolved. That has left hundreds of
ethnic Serb officers in the province feeling that they
would return to a hostile work environment. At the
same time, EULEX police and the Serbian Ministry of
the Interior have begun to work successfully together
in addressing a number of technical matters related to
cooperation across the administrative line. Those
include organized crime and smuggling and build upon
the best practices of our long-standing cooperation
with UNMIK police on those matters.

On the courts, some progress has occurred.
Unfortunately, some of the broader issues have not yet
been resolved, including the appointment of local
judges and prosecutors in accordance with procedures
consistent with resolution 1244 (1999). The question of
the territorial jurisdiction of the northern Mitrovica
courthouse remains unanswered, as does the
applicability of UNMIK law only. On the other hand,
partial progress has been achieved. Urgent cases are
being processed. Some trials have been concluded, and
cooperation between EULEX prosecutors and Serbia's
Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor has been
established.

On customs, preliminary meetings have taken
place, resulting in certain technical progress on that
delicate matter. Resolving it will require enhanced
coordination and a renewed dedication to work
together on achieving acceptable operating modalities,
such as co-location and the distribution of revenues.

That brings me to the Central European Free-
Trade Agreement, CEFTA. The success of that
important regional trade agreement depends on the
consistent application of unanimously agreed rules.
UNMIK is a signatory to CEFTA, as the report plainly
states. The introduction of new customs stamps by the
so-called Kosovo Customs Director-General has
regretfully politicized that commercial issue.

We very much hope that, in the months ahead, we
will be able to arrive at a set of practical arrangements
acceptable to responsible stakeholders. It is clear that a
more active role by EULEX, consistent with its
mandate, will be required, as will closer coordination
with UNMIK.

I would like to draw the attention of the Security
Council to a critically important issue, namely
facilitating the entry of Serbian officials into the
province. That question has, unfortunately, been
accumulating ill will for several months and threatens
to derail constructive efforts on all other fronts. It is
difficult to imagine how we can positively contribute
to developments on the ground if our ability to work
closely with the Kosovo Serb community throughout
the province is hindered. Serbian officials must be able
to visit churches and monasteries, assist in the return of
IDPs to reconstructed homes, provide food and medical
aid, help maintain educational standards and engage on
a whole host of other similar activities.

The assignment of operational responsibility to
EULEX was welcomed on the presupposition that
EULEX would make use of its executive functions
when required. Now is such a time. We demand that all
necessary measures be taken to swiftly resolve this
issue of paramount importance.

Before coming to the end of my remarks, I would
like to acknowledge the useful role played by the
International Security Force in Kosovo (KFOR) in
Kosovo. It had the responsibility to protect our
enclaves and holy sites from potential threats,
incursions and attacks. KFOR's status-neutral presence
in the province is still required in order to satisfy the
legitimate security needs of the local population,
irrespective of ethnicity. We believe that, under the
present circumstances, a troop reduction would be
counter-productive.

We will continue to be a reliable partner of
KFOR, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999) and
the Kumanovo Military Technical Agreement. The so-
called Kosovo Security Force is an illegal paramilitary
organization. Its existence and activities, present and
future, constitute a direct danger to the consolidation of
peace and stability in the Western Balkans and it must
be disbanded immediately.

Serbia's democracy is secure, our society has
grown strong and our values are safely entrenched in
law. We strongly believe in the shared destiny of all
European nations. We have demonstrated time and
again, through concrete deeds and under difficult
circumstances, our determination to become a member
of the European Union. This remains our central

strategic priority. We therefore welcome the
conclusions reached on 15 June by the EU Foreign
Ministers. The decision to commit to placing the
Western Balkans States on the white Schengen List
rescinds at last the final vestiges of the 1990s.

The Security Council must continue to play a key
role in the Kosovo dispute. We believe it would be
beneficial for the Council to visit Serbia: Belgrade,
Pristina, North Kosovo and the enclaves in order to see
first-hand how much work still needs to be done on the
ground, within the framework of resolution 1244
(1999). The only conclusion that I believe could be
drawn is that coming to an agreement is the way
forward. Regretfully, this has not yet been attempted.

A world leader said:

"All of us share this world for but a brief moment
in time. The question is whether we spend that
time focused on what pushes us apart, or whether
we commit ourselves to an effort - a sustained
effort - to find common ground, to focus on the
future we seek for our children and, choose the
right path, not just the easy path."

Taking the right path will not be easy.
Unfortunately, there are those who are not yet ready to
begin the journey towards compromise. But we must
not be discouraged. We must cease pushing each other
apart. We must find that common ground. The Republic
of Serbia has taken the first step. The next one, we
cannot take alone. We wait patiently for a partner to
join us in turning away from the painful past and
towards a hopeful future.

