Mr. Le Roy (Spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for this opportunity to brief the Council on the
situation in Haiti just over a year after the devastating
earthquake of 12 January 2010. I would, of course, like
to begin by once again paying tribute to the memory of
the victims of the earthquake, who numbered more
than 220,000, and especially to the 102 United Nations
staff members who lost their lives.

A few significant developments have taken place
since my last briefing on 10 December. Council
members will recall that the announcement of the
preliminary results of the first round of presidential
elections by the Provisional Electoral Council (CEP)
on 7 December sparked demonstrations in a number of
areas throughout the country. The demonstrators and
many political and civil society actors denounced what
they presumed to be massive fraud in favour of the
candidate of the presidential camp.

On 14 December, the President of the Republic
decided to invite a mission of electoral experts from
the Organization of American States (OAS) to assess
the electoral process. On 29 December, the Haitian
Government, the CEP and the Joint OAS-Caribbean
Community Electoral Observation Mission signed an
agreement defining the terms of reference of that
mission, the objectives of which included the
2
evaluation of the practices and procedures used during
the presidential elections of 28 November 2010, in
particular the tabulation of votes, and to issue
recommendations aimed at correcting the irregularities
that had marred the first round of elections.

The OAS mission submitted its report to the
Haitian Government on 13 January. On 17 January,
during a visit to Port-au-Prince by the Secretary-
General of the OAS, Mr. Jose' Miguel Insulza, the
Government committed itself to submitting the OAS
report to the CEP in order to ensure that it would take
its recommendations into account during the dispute
procedure leading to the announcement of the
definitive results of the first round. The report was then
distributed to the member States of the OAS and
published yesterday, 19 January.

The dispute procedure should resume tomorrow,
21 January. It is now up to the CEP to continue its
work and bring the process to fruition, in accordance
with the provisions of the Haitian Constitution and the
Electoral Law. Only then will the CEP be in a position
to announce the final results of the first round.

According to the terms of the agreement between
the Government, the CEP and the OAS, a second OAS
mission will soon be deployed to provide the CEP with
technical and legal assistance for this contentious
phase of the electoral process. According to the latest
information we possess, the CEP intends to announce
the final results of the first round on 31 January so as
to be in a position to organize the second round of
voting around mid-February. This is of course
preliminary information.

In the meantime, it is now well known that on
16 January former President Jean-Claude Duvalier
arrived in Port-au-Prince. On 18 January, he was
brought before the Prosecutor's Office and questioned
by the Public Prosecutor, who had filed a complaint
against him. He was then released, but must remain
available to the court. A number of other complaints
have been filed against him since then, in particular
yesterday.

(spoke in English)

Since the announcement of the preliminary results
of the presidential elections in December, Haiti has
been paralysed by political uncertainty. After a year
marked by the devastating earthquake of 12 January
2010 and the ongoing cholera epidemic, it is of
11-21162
paramount importance that the current political crisis be
brought to a swift conclusion so that the Government
and the people of Haiti can focus on the challenges of
reconstruction and recovery.

President Preval's decision to invite the OAS to
undertake an assessment of the first round of the
28 November elections was an important first step
towards finding a peaceful way out of the current
impasse. Having officially received the report of the
OAS technical mission, the CEP must now honour its
commitment to fully take into account the report's
recommendations with a view to ensuring that the
results of the elections truly reflect the will of the
Haitian people.

Should the CEP decide otherwise, Haiti may well
be faced with a constitutional crisis and the possibility
of considerable unrest and insecurity. At this critical
juncture, it is vital that the CEP be allowed to carry out
its work without political interference and in full
accordance with Haiti's Constitution and laws. I urge
Member States to continue working with all parties to
ensure that the CEP is able to steer the electoral
process towards an outcome that is both credible and
legitimate.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Haiti, Mr. Edmond Mulet, and his team
have remained in close and constant contact with all
key stakeholders on the ground, including President
Pre'val, the main presidential candidates, the private
sector, civil society and key members of the
international community. Last week, I myself travelled
to Haiti to participate in the one-year commemoration
of the 12 January earthquake, where I also met with
President Pre'val, Prime Minister Bellerive, the core
group of ambassadors and other key stakeholders. In
the critical days and weeks ahead, it is vital that the
international community stand united in impressing
upon all relevant actors in Haiti the need to set aside
their narrow partisan interests and work towards a
better future for their country.

For the time being, the overall security situation
remains calm, although there have been some sporadic
instances of violence related to the tense political
climate. The United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) continues to work closely with the
Haitian National Police to maintain public order and
protect the civilian population, as well as key
installations. Throughout this difficult period, the
11-21162

Haitian National Police have continued to conduct
themselves in a highly professional manner, for which
they should be commended. Nevertheless, the risk of
further violence and unrest is ever-present, especially
in this particular climate and in the coming weeks, and
MINUSTAH will of course continue to monitor the
situation very closely.

Under-Secretary-General Amos will brief
members on the current efforts to combat the ongoing
cholera epidemic. As Council members are aware,
MINUSTAH continues to play an active role in the
international response to the epidemic, in close
cooperation with the members of the United Nations
country team. While United Nations efforts remain
focused on stemming the spread of the disease and
limiting the death rate, we are also committed to
shedding further light on the origins of the epidemic.
To that end, on 6 January, the Secretary-General
announced the creation of an independent panel
composed of four world-class medical experts to
investigate the cause of the cholera epidemic in Haiti.
It is our hope that the panel will help to find the truth
and put to rest the issue of the origins of the outbreak.

In conclusion, Haiti is at a crossroads. The
choices made in coming days will determine whether
the country continues to move forward along the path
to stability and long-term development. The
recommendations of the OAS technical mission
provide the elements of a path out of the current crisis
and merit our full support. We intend to continue to
work with the Government, the CEP and all parties to
ensure that dialogue and respect for the country's laws
and institutions ultimately prevail.

