Mr. Roed-Larsen: The twenty-sixth of April
2005 was undoubtedly a historic day for the Lebanese
and the Syrian people and for the Middle East. The
visible withdrawal of Syrian forces from Lebanon;
Syria's formal notification of the United Nations,
through a letter from Foreign Minister Al-Shara' to the
President of the Security Council and to the Secretary-
General, that Syria had withdrawn all its troops,
military assets and the intelligence apparatus from
Lebanon: these are unquestionably momentous events.

It was the Lebanese civil war that led to the
deployment of foreign forces on Lebanese territory.
Now, 30 years after the eruption of the civil war, a full
and complete Syrian withdrawal from Lebanon would
represent a significant and important step towards
drawing a final line under the saddest chapter of
Lebanese history. A full Syrian withdrawal would also
represent significant and important action towards
ending, with finality, the foreign interference that has
characterized Lebanese politics for decades.

We therefore welcome the letter from the
Government of Syria to the Secretary-General formally
notifying him that Syria has completed its withdrawal
of all its troops, military assets and the intelligence
apparatus from Lebanon. We also welcome once again
Syria's commitment to the full implementation of
resolution 1559 (2004) and to the fulfilment of its
obligations under that resolution.

In order to verify the full and complete
withdrawal of Syrian forces, the Secretary-General has
dispatched a United Nations verification mission. That
mission, which was established in full agreement with
the Governments of Syria and Lebanon, arrived in
Damascus on 26 April. The Secretary-General has
requested the Governments of Syria and Lebanon to
cooperate fully with the mission and to provide all
relevant information and documentation concerning the
former deployment of Syrian troops, military assets
and the intelligence apparatus in Lebanon. Both
Governments assured the United Nations that they
would assist the mission in its important task. The
Secretary-General will forward his conclusions related
to the Syrian withdrawal as a supplement to his present
report to the Council in the near future.

A full and complete withdrawal of Syrian troops,
military assets and the intelligence apparatus from
Lebanon will require a wider-ranging redefinition of
the long-standing close ties between Syria and
Lebanon. In that regard, it is to be expected that the
two countries will make significant progress towards
the establishment of diplomatic representations in their
respective capitals and towards an appropriate
formalization of their special relationship. That, of
course, is a bilateral matter.

In his efforts over the past six months, the
Secretary-General has not only assigned a particularly
high priority to the provision of resolution 1559 (2004)
that calls for the withdrawal of all remaining foreign
forces from Lebanon; he has, overall, placed an
especially strong emphasis on respect for - and the
full restoration of - the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, unity and political independence of Lebanon.
The withdrawal of foreign forces is a precondition for
the restoration of the full sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Lebanon.

Another such precondition, and a most visible
indication of the sovereignty and political
independence of any democracy, is the holding of free
and credible parliamentary elections. The Secretary-
General has therefore also assigned a very high priority
to the matter of Lebanese parliamentary elections.

We commend the decision by Prime Minister
Mikati's Government to hold the elections on time and
as scheduled, beginning on 29 May 2005. We also
welcome the unequivocal confirmation Mr. Mikati's
new government has received in the Lebanese
parliament, where it passed a vote of confidence with
109 to one votes, with three abstentions, on 27 April.
We see the vote as a strong manifestation of the will of
the Lebanese people and as an endorsement of
Mr. Mikati's pledge to hold the elections on time.

We have been very concerned over a possible
delay of the elections. Such a delay could have
contributed to exacerbating the political divisions in
Lebanon and have threatened the security, stability and
prosperity of the country. It has therefore been the
Secretary-General's strong conviction that the elections
should be held on time and without delay.

The elections should also be held in accordance
with an electoral law that is broadly accepted by the
Lebanese people. Further, in order to ensure that the
parliamentary elections can be conducted in a free and
credible manner, we have been discussing with the
Government of Lebanon the possibility of extending
United Nations technical assistance. United Nations
electoral experts will arrive in Beirut early next week,
with the full understanding of the Government of
Lebanon. Those advisors will seek to assist the
Government in its preparations for such free and
credible elections.

The Secretary-General has also encouraged the
idea that international electoral observers be invited to
monitor the elections. In close cooperation with,
particularly, the European Union, we will continue our
constructive dialogue with the Government of Lebanon
on that matter.

The parties have made significant and noticeable
progress towards implementing some of the provisions
contained in resolution 1559 (2004). However, we
cannot yet certify that the requirements of resolution
1559 (2004) have been met. There has been a lack of
progress on the implementation of other provisions of
the resolution. We are also awaiting the report of our
verification mission.

Regarding the Council's call in resolution 1559
(2004) for all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias to
be disbanded and disarmed, the United Nations has
conducted a dialogue with some relevant parties on
that matter. We have not yet reached operational
conclusions on the matter, but expect that our dialogue
on the issue will intensify in the coming months.

With respect to the Council's support of the
extension of the control of the Government of Lebanon
over all Lebanese territory, the Government of
Lebanon does not yet fully exert control over all its
territory. It is the Secretary-General's strong belief that
more needs to be done to meet the Council's call for
extended measures to ensure the return of effective
governmental authority throughout the south of
Lebanon. That would include the deployment of
additional Lebanese armed forces, including along the
Blue Line. We also expect the Government of Lebanon
to extend its control over Lebanese territory vacated by
Syrian forces.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the Secretary-
General's call urging all parties concerned to comply
with all requirements of resolution 1559 (2004)
without delay. We also urge all parties, in keeping with
the resolution, to fully implement it and all other
resolutions related to the restoration of the territorial
integrity, full sovereignty and political independence of
Lebanon. It is our strong belief that the full
implementation of all requirements of the resolution
would help enable the people of Lebanon and of the
entire region to begin setting aside the enchaining and
constraining vestiges of a captive past.

It is also our belief that the full implementation of
resolution 1559 (2004), with the backing and active
engagement of the Secretary-General, would set an
important precedent, illustrating the commitment of the
international community to the full implementation of
all Security Council resolutions. In that context, allow

me to reiterate the Secretary-General's belief that the
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) should
continue to proceed in a way that would best ensure the
stability and unity of Lebanon, of Syria and of the
wider region.

The Secretary-General remains at the disposal of
the Council and stands ready to continue to assist the
parties in the full implementation of resolution 1559
(2004).

