The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations
for the maintenance of international peace and
security. The Council also recalls the statements made
by its President in relation to activities of the United
Nations in preventive diplomacy, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building.

"The Security Council has considered the matter
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
tax-combatants in a peacekeeping environment as part
of its overall and continuing effort to contribute to
enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping and peace-building activities in conflict
situations around the world.

"The Security Council is seriously concerned that
in a number of conflicts, armed fighting among
various parties or factions continues despite the
conclusion of peace agreements by warring parties and
the presence of United Nations peacekeeping missions
on the ground. It recognizes that a major contributory
factor to such a situation has been the continued
availability of large amounts of armaments, in
particular small arms and light weapons, to conflicting
parties. The Council emphasizes that, in order to
achieve settlement, parties to a conflict must work
towards the successful disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants, including child
soldiers whose special needs should be seriously addressed.

"The Security Council recognizes that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
cannot be seen in isolation, but rather as a
continuous process which is rooted in and feeds into
a broader search for peace, stability and
development. Effective disarmament of
ex-combatants represents an important indicator of
progress towards post-conflict peace-building and
normalization of the situation. The demobilization
effort is only possible when there is some level of
disarmament and its success can only be achieved
when there is effective rehabilitation and
reintegration into society of ex-combatants.
Disarmament and demobilization must take place in
a secure and safe environment which will give
ex-combatants the confidence to lay down their
arms. Taking into account that the process is closely
linked to economic and social issues, the question
must be addressed comprehensively so as to
facilitate a smooth transition from peacekeeping to
peace-building.

"The Security Council emphasizes that for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration to be
successful, there must be political will and a clear
commitment by the parties concerned to achieve
peace and stability. At the same time, it is vital that
such commitments by the parties be reinforced by
political will and consistent, effective and
determined support from the international
community to guarantee the achievement of
sustainable peace, including through its contributions
of long-term assistance for development and trade.

"The Security Council affirms its commitment
to the principles of the political independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States in
conducting peace-building activities, and the need
for States to comply with their obligations under
international law. Bearing this in mind, the Council
stresses the need for the implementation, with the
consent of the parties, of practical measures to
promote the success of the process which, inter alia,
may include the following:

"(a) The inclusion, as appropriate, within
specific peace agreements and, on a case-by-case
basis, within United Nations peacekeeping mandates,
of clear terms for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants, including the safe
and timely disposal of arms and ammunition;

 

"(b) The establishment by Governments

contributing to peacekeeping operations of databases
of experts on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants. In this context, training
in disarmament and demobilization could be a useful
component of national programmes for the preparation
of peacekeeping troops;

"(c) The prevention and reduction of the
excessive and destabilizing flow, accumulation and
illegitimate use of small arms and light weapons. In
this context, the relevant Security Council resolutions
and existing United Nations arms embargoes should
be strictly implemented.

"The Security Council is of the view that
techniques for executing and coordinating programmes
related to the process of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants and the problems
associated with it should be given in-depth
consideration. It takes note with appreciation of the
efforts made by the Secretary-General, United Nations
bodies, Member States and international and regional
organizations aimed at developing general principles
and practical guidelines for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants in
a peacekeeping environment.

"The Security Council underlines the need to
address this issue on a regular basis, and in this
regard, requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the Council, within a period of six months, a report
containing his analysis, observations and
recommendations, in particular those relating to
principles and guidelines as well as practices,
experiences and lessons learned to facilitate its
further consideration of the matter. The report
should pay special attention to the problems of
disarmament and demobilization of child soldiers
and their reintegration into society."

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1999/21.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.
