The United Arab Emirates would like to thank Indonesia for ensuring the Security Council's continued focus on coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and its effect on the most vulnerable people. It is already abundantly clear that the pandemic is worsening conditions that both lead to and amplify conflict and violence, from hunger to disruption of basic services to hate speech. These impacts serve to underscore that States Members of the United Nations and the Organization itself must take a holistic approach to peace and security. Accordingly, we would like to share four thoughts on how the Security Council and its partners can work to sustain and foster peace in the face of the pandemic and other shocks. First, we welcome the precedent set by resolution 2532 (2020) and its demand for ceasefires in the face of pandemics. The United Arab Emirates was one of the first countries to endorse the Secretary-General's original appeal for a global ceasefire in response to COVID-19, as we believe humanitarian pauses are a powerful tool for de-escalating conflicts, providing space for political processes and slowing the spread of disease, all with substantial associated peacebuilding benefits. Secondly, Member States and the United Nations system should continue to empower Resident Coordinators in order to facilitate the international response to COVID-19 and enhance the work of the Organization on preparedness and peacebuilding. Resident Coordinators are best placed to ensure that there is lockstep coordination among the United Nations development, humanitarian and security pillars, with a view to achieving collective outcomes. As one dimension of coordination, we would expect heads of missions authorized by the Security Council to systematically liaise with Resident Coordinators in order to identify the contributions they can make to pandemic recovery and to longer-term peace and security, on the one hand, and the support missions need from other agencies, on the other hand. The role of Resident Coordinators should also be front and centre in ensuring that the work of the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund coheres with the overall United Nations portfolio in a country. Thirdly, we must accelerate efforts aimed at mainstreaming gender in peace and security. The Council and other United Nations bodies have established that gender equality is central to durable peace and economic recovery, and we have unfortunately seen the pandemic - like other crises - have a disproportionate impact on women and girls. Accordingly, the pandemic is a further prompt to ensure that the Council is always briefed on the role of women in peacebuilding and peace processes, that Council-mandated missions have sufficient gender resources and that United Nations peace and security activities have clear gender metrics linked to personnel performance evaluations. To support mainstreaming, my country has made gender equality a cross-cutting requirement of its foreign aid by 2021, including in conflict-affected countries, and we have completed two cycles of training for women peacekeeping training in partnership with UN-Women at the Khawla Bint Al Azwar Military School for Women, in Abu Dhabi. Fourthly, we urge the United Nations to move towards anticipatory action. If there are credible warnings around health, climate change, violence and other factors that intensify or enable conflict, they should be matched by increased and coordinated development, humanitarian and peacebuilding activity to prevent or mitigate conflict. The United Arab Emirates is also working towards that end during the pandemic: of the over 100 countries to which we have shipped medical aid since March, a large percentage are countries on the Council's agenda. Our purpose is to reduce the pandemic's intensification of fragility. Similarly, risk-informed early warnings could result in the Security Council's rapid mobilization of mandates and resources. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and other humanitarian agencies have taken steps towards an anticipatory approach, including in their Security Council briefings. Their experience could inform how the Council and the United Nations system more broadly allocate resources and staff earlier with a view to preventing conflict.
