Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I would like to join previous
speakers in thanking Minister Kim Sung-hwan for
his timely initiative to discuss the crucial issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. This is a
question of vital importance that the Security Council
should address on a fixed timetable in order to keep
international attention focused. Violence committed
against civilians, often including women and children,
by Government forces or various types of armed groups
is a tragic reminder of the absolute importance of
protecting them.

I also wish to express great appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his intervention, and thank
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their very
important contributions.

Italy fully endorses the statements that will be made
by on behalf of the European Union and the Group of
Friends of Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflicts.
In a national capacity, we wish to focus on a few aspects
of ensuring the effective protection of civilians by
peacekeeping missions, and briefly touch on the issues
of humanitarian access, safety of humanitarian staff
and accountability.

United Nations peacekeeping operations have

a significant impact on enhancing protection of the
civilian population. The effective implementation of
a protection of civilians mandate requires not only
resources and capabilities, but also training, prevention,
interaction with local communities, political will and
communication.

It is crucial for all uniformed personnel deployed
on missions with a protection mandate to receive
predeployment training with specific protection of
civilians modules. The United Nations has distributed
excellent specialized materials, which we encourage
all training organizations to adopt as the bases for
their courses. This is particularly important for police
officers and formed police units. These United Nations
guidelines have already been adopted by training
institutes, such as the Centre of Excellence for Stability
Police Units, located in Vicenza, Italy.

I take this opportunity to highlight that, without
underestimating the importance of in-mission training,
Italy has always stressed the need for effective
predeployment training, considering that, from day
one, peacekeepers are exposed to critical protection
challenges and must be ready to face them immediately.
This is particularly compelling when it comes to child
protection, which is why we support a specific child
protection project with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and other relevant United Nations agencies.

Prevention is one of the most important aspects
of protecting civilians, and situational awareness is
essential to preventive action. Missions must therefore
use all possible assets to enhance situational awareness,
including the unarmed surveillance capability provided
by unmanned aerial systems, which are also vital to
deterrence. Early detection is important to timely
and effective preventive intervention. Italy thus
welcomes the Council's recent decision to authorize
the deployment of unmanned aerial systems in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Developing and sustaining a dialogue with the
local population is fundamental to understanding
the full range of threats that civilians face and their
particular vulnerability. It is also indispensable to
managing the expectations of the civilian population,
which are sometimes unrealistic because they exceed
the capabilities or mandate of the mission.

Political will is also of the utmost importance.
Protection mandates and specific rules of engagement
are not enough. The protection of civilians is a
whole-mission effort in which every component - from
leadership to the military, police and civilians - must
share the will to implement protection mandates.
Civilian populations expect protection from Blue
Helmets, regardless of the tasks officially assigned to
the individual components of a mission. The credibility
of the entire United Nations system is at stake.

There are two sides of communication that need to
be highlighted. The first is how to tell the peacekeeping
story better; the second is acknowledging the media's
role in reporting violence against civilians.
Why should we tell the peacekeeping story better?
Too often, the media simply denounces the failures
of United Nations peacekeeping and rarely, if ever,
highlights its successes. However, peacekeeping does
work and it is a success story that we must learn to tell
more effectively if we truly want world public opinion
to believe more firmly in the United Nations ability to
maintain peace and stability, protect civilians and move
national Governments to make the necessary human
and financial resources available to the United Nations.

When the media reports the violence committed
against civilians around the world, it keeps the
international community's attention focused on the
issue and brings us face to face with our responsibilities
and our moral conscience. It is journalists who, on the
front lines, strive to ensure that the world does not turn
a blind eye to these tragedies, and who pay an extremely
high price for their commitment. Social media have also
been a powerful means of communication, bringing
violence against civilians to global awareness. Our
sincerest gratitude goes to these men and women who
also expose themselves to the risk of violence.

I conclude by offering a few words on
humanitarian access, the safety of humanitarian staff
and accountability. Italy shares the concern over the
severity and prevalence of constraints on humanitarian
access, as well as the frequency and gravity of attacks
on humanitarian staff, and in particular on medical
personnel. We must promote a culture of protection,
ensuring that even the most reticent understand that
free access must always be guaranteed to humanitarian
assistance, and that the very same people who are on
the ground to assist other human beings should never
themselves become the targets of attacks. Let us not
forget, lastly, that in all cases of violence against
civilians, the Security Council has the crucial task of
ensuring appropriate monitoring for the assessment
of responsibilities and, when warranted, referring
situations to the International Criminal Court.

