Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate
and for the opportunity it provides Armenia to present
its views and reaffirm our united efforts to strengthen
dialogue and mutual understanding among States,
the United Nations and civil society in combating the
scourge of terrorism.

Let me join previous speakers by expressing our
deepest condolences to the Pakistani people with regard
to the horrific acts of terrorism of last week, which
claimed so many innocent lives.

The enormity of the threat of terrorism around the
world and its implications necessitate a multilayered
approach. Moreover, the strategy adopted to address
the problem can only be implemented successfully
with the coordinated action and support of various
United Nations counter-terrorism bodies, agencies and
other intergovernmental organizations that deal with
transnational crime.

At the national level, Armenia has developed
effective multilateral cooperation over the past decade
in the fight against transnational organized crime and
international terrorism. We work closely with various
international and regional partners, such as the Council
of Europe, the European Union, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization and NATO, in such areas as legal
reform, improving national law enforcement capacities,
border control and intelligence systems. A network of
bilateral agreements has also been established with
many countries.

Unilaterally, we have adopted practical and
effective border control measures and demonstrated
our strong interest in acquiring the technology and
equipment needed to further enhance the existing
border security regime. However, closed borders with
some of our neighbours discourage regional border
security cooperation in this very sensitive geostrategic
area.

Secure borders are particularly important in
volatile regions such as the South Caucuses, where still-
unresolved conflicts have become a convenient excuse
for the accumulation of enormous amounts of weaponry,
very often in violation of existing international treaties
and instruments. Illicit flows of armaments, drugs,
terrorist groups and terrorist activities remain a matter
of concern in a very global sense.

Because of the transnational nature of the crime of
terrorism and the lack of regional cooperation, we have
to be vigilant not to allow the situation to be exploited
again in our region by radical elements for the purposes
of terrorist recruitment or provocation. Armenia also
believes that terrorism should not be equated with the
legitimate struggle of peoples for self-determination.
We condemn the use of State power and mercenaries
to suppress the exercise of the inalienable right to self-
determination.

As we focus on a comprehensive approach to counter
the scourge of terrorism, given the fact that conditions
conducive to the spread of this international crime
include, among other things, prolonged unresolved
conflicts, we have to encourage public education
and awareness-raising programmes in conflict-prone
societies. The broadcast and dissimination ofhate speech
on a State level, which we sadly continue to witness in
our neighbourhood, is a preludeto the incitement and
ignition of terrorism. That behaviour has to be replaced
by the promotion of tolerance and inclusive dialogue.
Such engagement and confidence-building measures
play a key role in the prevention of extremism and
the radicalization of societies and are a way forward
to advance long-term development and security goals,
which we all are committed to achieving.

In conclusion, I cannot but agree with the statements
of previous speakers that countering terrorism and
violent extremism is a shared mission, and we have the
tools and the political will to do that. The scope and
magnitude of this assault require an even greater level
of innovation and enhanced coordination of our joined
efforts in this critical area.

I would also like to take this opportunity once again
to congratulate the incoming members and to wish the
Council a productive year ahead.

