Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French):
Permit me at the outset, Sir, very briefly to
congratulate you and your predecessor, Ambassador
Jean-Marc De La Sabliere. I also wish to thank you for
having granted the request of the chairmanship of the
Non-Aligned Movement to convene this open debate
on an issue that has continued to be central to the
concerns of the entire membership of the international
community ever since the debate we held in October
2002.

Like the rest of the international community,
Algeria has followed with keen concern the events that
have taken place since then and therefore cannot fail to
be anxious regarding the serious dangers now
threatening regional and international peace and
security.

It is nevertheless appropriate to stress here that,
since Iraq's acceptance on 16 September of the
unconditional return to its territory of the United
Nations inspectors, followed in November by its
unconditional acceptance of resolution 1441 (2002),
never in more than a decade have there been conditions
so conducive to a political and diplomatic settlement of
what is called the Iraqi crisis or have the prospects for
a peaceful disarmament of Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction been so near at hand.

We owe these positive developments, in contrast
to the period of defiance that characterized the
relationship between Iraq and the United Nations, in
particular over the past four years, first and foremost to
the determination of the international community to see
its decisions implemented and to the outstanding unity
demonstrated by the Security Council, which is the
international community's embodiment, during the
process that concluded on 8 November 2002 with the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1441 (2002).

However, it is equally correct to say that we owe
these positive developments to Iraq, which, in
demonstrating realism, wisdom and responsibility in its
relationship with the United Nations, has been able to
work in sync with the peaceful aspirations of the
international community and, in particular, with the
efforts to that end made by the Secretary-General and
by the leaders of the countries members of the League
of Arab States.

Ever since the resumption of inspections in Iraq
on 26 November 2002, the international community
has been able to measure progress achieved towards a
peaceful settlement of the thorny issue of the
disarmament of Iraq with respect to weapons of mass
destruction. Resolution 1441 (2002), in creating a
strengthened inspections regime, provided the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) with the means to
carry out their missions. During each of the stages
provided for in the adopted timetable, the effectiveness
of the established system has proved itself.
The interim reports made to the Security Council
by Mr. Hans Blix and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei on 27
January 2003 clearly highlighted the cooperation of the
Iraqi authorities with regard to the freedom of
movement and action of the inspection teams, which, it
should be recalled, is one of the strongest demands laid
down in resolution 1441 (2002). Those reports also had
the merit of placing these facts once again into context
by establishing that the disarmament of Iraq with
respect to weapons of mass destruction had been
achieved to a substantive, indeed decisive degree under
the old inspections regime established under earlier
Council resolutions that form an integral part of
resolution 1441 (2002).

The period between 1998 and 2002, when the
inspections were interrupted, was clearly of a nature to
give rise to questions as to the fate of the stocks of
weapons of mass destruction that were not destroyed or
to the potential resumption of the production of
prohibited weapons. The heads of the inspections
teams, however, objectively and solemnly raised these
legitimate issues on 27 January.

We believe that it is vital, however, to ensure that
the dynamic set in motion by the resumption of
inspections should contribute daily to a shrinking of
the remaining grey areas regarding the existence of
weapons of mass destruction in Iraq and to bringing us
closer to a comprehensive implementation of resolution
1441 (2002), which is the surest way to stave off the
prospect of the use of force.

Thus, Member States have been able to take
advantage of the resources provided by resolution 1441
(2002), paragraph 10 in particular, by providing
UNMOVIC and IAEA, in addition to sophisticated
material means, with a significant amount of the
information available to them, such as in the
presentation made to the Council by Mr. Colin Powell
on 5 February, which highlighted the full importance
and relevance of strengthening the inspections and the
need for Iraq to cooperate fully and promptly with
UNMOVIC and IAEA to achieve peaceful
disarmament.

The momentum of the inspections has clearly
been increased, as the presentation of the 14 February
reports of Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei before the
Security Council attests. The reports emphasized
significant progress and greater cooperation by Iraq
with the United Nations on substantive issues,
strengthened by the Iraq's adoption of legislation
prohibiting the production of weapons of mass
destruction, which shows that the country has
committed itself to abide by international legality. That
being the case, any proposal aimed at improving the
effectiveness of the inspections and allowing the
inspectors to discharge the duties entrusted to them
must be a subject of attention from the Council.

Despite these positive events, the threat of armed
conflict continues, unfortunately, to loom over the
region and give rise to the gravest of fears regarding
the extremely serious consequences that such a conflict
would bring about in Iraq itself and in other countries
of the region.

Algeria, for its part, notes with hope that since
the adoption of resolution 1441 (2002) nothing has
happened that is liable to justify the implementation of
the paragraphs that open the way to the use of force. A
military operation against Iraq would have a disastrous
impact on the Iraqi people - who for 12 years have
been subjected to sanctions, which are in many respects
inhumane - and on the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Iraq, to which the Security Council has
reaffirmed its dedication in resolution 1441 (2002). It
would also have serious consequences for the peace
process in the Middle East, which is already moribund,
as well as for the Israeli-Arab conflict as such.

From that point of View, the international
community expects that the Security Council will
maintain its authority and credibility, and that of the
United Nations, by knowing first of all how to find the
resources within the Organization that enable it to
remain in control of the process of a peaceful and
political settlement of the Iraqi crisis, through unity of
all its members. It can then work to strengthen the
authority and credibility that has been undermined by
Israeli intransigence by shouldering its responsibilities,
all its responsibilities, towards the Palestinian people
and by demonstrating equal determination and firmness
regarding all of those who are trampling under foot its
resolutions and by rejecting them.

It is extremely important here to emphasize that
the decision taken by the international community to
make the Middle East a zone free from weapons of
mass destruction, contained in paragraph 14 of Security
Council resolution 687 (1991), must not be limited to
Iraq. It is equally applicable to Israel, which has
arrogated to itself the right to be the sole nuclear power
in the region in defiance of international legality.

The future of the system of collective security,
carefully crafted, depends on equal treatment afforded
all the members of the international community, which
for us, nations large and small, constitutes the
guarantee that the law will prevail in any and all
circumstances.

