Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank the President and the Secretariat for making this meeting at United Nations Headquarters possible. I join others in warmly welcoming Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Her Excellency Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, and the Permanent Representative of Colombia to today'smeeting. I also thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu and Ms. Clemencia Carabali Rodallega for their informative briefings. My delegation wishes to make the following points. First, we share the concern, as noted in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/603), about the difficulties during the reporting period in implementing the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace and peace-related programmes in Colombia, especially owing to the adverse effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We highly commend the efforts of the Government, as well as the valuable assistance of the United Nations and the international community, to address the pandemic and overcome the difficult times. We believe in, and look forward to, the continued efforts by the Government of Colombia, the national political parties and other stakeholders, the United Nations and regional and international organizations to implement all the necessary measures to combat the COVID-19 pandemic for the benefit of the population, especially those living in the conflict-affected areas. Secondly, we support the efforts of the Government of Colombia and the Congress to discuss draft bills and constitutional reform. The Government, Parliament and all political parties bear the primary responsibility of serving the people of the country. In that regard, we call on the parties in Colombia to engage in constructive dialogue on issues relating to the implementation of the final peace agreement with a view to bringing about reconciliation, solidarity and progress for all. While efforts aimed at reintegration are highly appreciated, it is also important to note that the process will be long-term and will require patience, political will and practical steps. We commend the efforts of the Government and its partners to consider the specific needs and roles of women, children, youth and ethnic groups. Thirdly, we are concerned about the violence, clashes and continued killing of social leaders, former combatants and human rights defenders. We call on the relevant parties to heed the call of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire. We hope that the Government of Colombia and the Ejercito de Liberaci6n Nacional will continue to take the necessary measures and make full use of the security guarantees mechanism provided for in the final peace agreement to protect civilians in conflict-affected areas, especially women and children. In that regard, it is also important to redouble efforts to ensure security and bring about development in conflict- affected communities through practical measures. It is through the well-being of those communities that the values of peace will be proven and maintained. Fourthly, we take note of the progress on reintegrating former combatants through individual and collective socioeconomic development programmes and projects, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic. We look forward to the role to be played by the National Reintegration Council, together with the United Nations and regional and international organizations, in actively supporting the financial mechanisms and recommending appropriate initiatives to assist former combatants in stabilizing their lives. In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our support to the Colombian people in their pursuit of peace and stability. We are committed to working constructively with the United Nations, regional and international organizations and relevant stakeholders in contributing to the peace process in the country.
