Mr. Seenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): On behalf of the delegation of Costa Rica, I wish
to express the deepest gratitude to United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) and all its personnel,
and to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, for their extensive work on the
Angolan peace process. Costa Rica wishes to express its
satisfaction at the ongoing endeavours for Angola of the
Secretary-General and the entire Organization, and to
commend the three observer States for their broad
cooperation towards bringing about the success of the peace
process.

The establishment of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation, the demobilization of ex-
combatants of UNITA and the extension of State authority
throughout Angolan territory are the basic pillars for the
consolidation of peace and democracy. These will serve as
the basis for the prosperity and well-being that the people
of Angola so deserve. Nevertheless, Costa Rica is
concerned that military clashes continue in northern Angola
between Government forces and unidentified armed groups.
These clashes pose a serious threat to the peace process and
must stop immediately. Moreover, my country considers
that UNITA must provide full information on its armed
forces and its weapons so that Angola can take a step
towards full democracy and national reconciliation, in
which the constructive contest of ideas will replace the
clash of weapons. Here it is urgent that a meeting between
President Dos Santos and the President of UNITA be held;
Costa Rica urges them to meet, on Angolan territory, as
soon as possible.

Costa Rica stresses the need to accelerate the
demobilization of ex-combatants and their integration into
the Angolan Armed Forces, in accordance with the Lusaka
accords. For this process to be truly successful, much
assistance will be needed to integrate ex-combatants into
civil society so that they can contribute to progress of
Angola. If demobilization failed, the peace process would
be at great risk, as we have observed in other places.

The conclusion of the mandate of the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) must not
mean an end of United Nations support for the peace
process in Angola. To the contrary, in the light of the
positive changes taking place in the country, it must mean
a reorientation of the international community's
assistance. In this regard, the Secretary-General's
recommendation on the establishment of a United Nations
observer mission in Angola (MONUA) is most apt. Costa
Rica supports that recommendation, in the certainty that
it will continue the work of UNAVEM. III in this new
step of the peace process with the same degree of
success. My country will therefore vote in favour of the
draft resolution before the Security Council.

In this new stage of the peace process in Angola, the
rule of law and full respect for human rights must be
strengthened in a framework of tolerance and democracy,
opening the way to prosperity and a better future for all
the Angolan people. To that end, Costa Rica believes that
it is of the greatest importance to continue the presence of
the international community, represented by MONUA, in
order to achieve full implementation of the Lusaka
agreements.

