Mr. Davide (Philippines): The Philippine
delegation commends you, Mr. President, for
convening this open meeting to deliberate on the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2008/26) concerning
developments in Timor-Leste and on the
recommendations contained therein. We congratulate
Panama on a successful presidency of the Council. My
delegation also wishes to thank the Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste for his profound
statement and Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guehenno for his clear presentation of the report of the
Secretary-General.

The Philippines joins other Member States in
condemning in the strongest possible terms the attacks
on the President and the Prime Minister of Timor-Leste
on 11 February 2008. Designed to destabilize the
country, the attacks were inimical to the interests of
Timor-Leste and its people and affected the gains that
have been achieved thus far in Timor-Leste's journey
towards democracy along the path of justice, freedom,
progress and stability. We are relieved that, despite this
serious threat, Timor-Leste has remained calm and that
the dastardly act did not achieve its desired objective.
We commend the efforts of the Government of Timor-
Leste, the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT) and the International Security Forces
in preserving and maintaining peace and order in the
country.

This unfortunate incident also underscores the
need for continued engagement by the international
community, particularly by the United Nations, in
promoting peace, order and stability in Timor-Leste.
UNMIT has been performing very well in the
execution of its mandate; it should not be made to
cease carrying out its mandate. It must be pointed out
that all Timorese interlocutors conveyed both to the
Security Council mission that visited Timor-Leste last
year and to the Secretary-General their desire for
UNMIT to remain in the country. Complacency and a
false sense of security must not be allowed to diminish
the need for UNMIT. The gains earlier achieved under
United Nations auspices could have been maintained if
the mission had not been prematurely drawn down a
few years ago. The continuation of UNMIT is
necessary to preserve the gains as well as to support
Timor-Leste in addressing the challenges that lie
ahead. Thus, the Philippines supports the extension of
the mandate of UNMIT for at least 12 months at the
current authorized levels. This 12-month extended
mandate will provide continuity and stability for the
mission and will remove the anxieties to which the
people of Timor-Leste are exposed every time a
mandate is reviewed for a short period of time.
Moreover, the 12-month extension would also provide
troop contributors with adequate and sufficient time to
plan ahead in their deployments.

The Philippines will continue to support Timor-
Leste's nation-building efforts. It will endeavour to
improve Philippine troop contributions to UNMIT,
quantitatively and qualitatively, as the situation of the
Philippines allows. As mentioned before, the
Philippines has participated in all United Nations
missions in Timor-Leste from the beginning. The
Philippines is currently the largest contributor of
individual police officers to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and most of those individual
police officers are in the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste, which is the largest police-led
peacekeeping operation the Philippines currently takes
part in.

Aside from peacekeeping, the Philippines is also
working with other donors in the area of capacity-
building, particularly in human resources development.
The Philippines remains ready to explore other areas of
assistance in order to strengthen Timor-Leste's
capacities and institutions. We urge the international
community to do likewise.

As we proceed to contemplate the next phase of
Timor-Leste's nation-building efforts, the Philippines
wishes to highlight the following points raised in the
Secretary-General's report.

First, the Philippines fully recognizes that the
security sector is crucial for the long-term stability of
the country. The events of April and May 2006 and of
this month attest to the need to address problems in this
area. In view of this, the Philippines supports the
continuation of work to comprehensively review the
future role and needs of the security sector within the
framework of the three-tier coordination structure
established in August 2007, which is jointly led by the
President, the parliament and the Prime Minister. The
Philippines also supports UNMIT efforts to strengthen
the Timor-Leste police.

Secondly, the Philippines acknowledges that
socio-economic concerns, particularly poverty and
unemployment, continue to be major causes of
instability in Timor-Leste. It therefore welcomes the
commitment of the Government of Timor-Leste to
address these concerns, as indicated in its 2008 budget.
It hopes that United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and international financial institutions will
work closely with the Government of Timor-Leste in
supporting the implementation of that budget.

Thirdly, the Philippines continues to encourage
dialogue among the political leaders to achieve
national reconciliation and political stability. It is only
through the fostering of political consensus that
differences are resolved without violence and that
cooperation is engendered.

Fourthly, the Philippines strongly stresses the
importance of Timor-Leste's ownership of the whole
process. The international community should take the
views, aspirations and sentiments of the Government
and the people of Timor-Leste into consideration in any
decision to be taken about their country. The visits of
the Security Council mission in November and of the
Secretary-General in December are commendable
components of the consultation process. Visits of that
nature should be encouraged.

In conclusion, the Philippines continues to assert
and maintain that Timor-Leste is still one of the best
examples of a successful enterprise made possible
through the combined cooperative efforts of the United
Nations, regional players and other partners. This
success must be nurtured and preserved through the
continuing vigilance and support of the international
community.

