Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation agreed to the adoption of
the Security Council resolution to extend the mandate of
the United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP) on the basis of the recommendations of the
Secretary-General. In reaching that decision, we took into
account appeals to us from the leadership of Macedonia
and the position of our Security Council partners. It is no
secret that the initial goal of UNPREDEP in
Macedonia - to prevent conflicts in other regions of the
former Yugoslavia from spreading - has been attained.
The mandate that was given by the Security Council has
been successfully implemented. This is borne out by the
assessments contained in the report of the Secretary-
General on UNPREDEP. We note in particular that
further significant progress has been made in bilateral
relations between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
Macedonia.

The main reason for the extension of UNPREDEP
was the complicated situation in Albania, which has
created additional risks in the area around Macedonia.
This has resulted in the specific parameters and priorities
established for the operation at this stage. The most
urgent task is to work out ways for the proper
restructuring of UNPREDEP, concentrating it in the area
of Albania. In keeping with paragraph 2 of the resolution
that the Council has just adopted, the next report of the
Secretary-General should contain practical
recommendations, in particular with regard to the military
component of UNPREDEP, the deployment of the force
and the reorganization of the mission so as to enhance the
role of the civilian police, military observers and civilian
elements.

We expect the report to be prepared as soon as
possible, taking account of the developing situation in
Albania, and especially the results of the upcoming
elections to be held in Albania. A realistic analysis of the
functions and tasks of UNPREDEP at this stage should
include the question of a speedy reduction of its military
component as soon as circumstances in Albania allow.

