Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like, first of all, to thank Mr. Egeland for his briefing
today.

Throughout history, humankind has suffered
enormously as a result of armed conflict. Recent years
have seen an increase in armed conflict in various parts
of the world, as well as a notable change in the nature
of such conflicts. Urban areas have been transformed
into battlefields in the context of internal conflicts and
civil wars, leading to an increase in the number of
civilian victims. Increasingly, children and young
people are suffering as a result of armed conflict.

Armed conflicts can spiral out of control.
Civilians are no longer safe, and can be injured as a
result of combat that takes place in their vicinity. Not
only are they injured accidentally, but they are also
sometimes deliberately targeted.

Most of the parties to conflict today are non-State
actors who disregard humanitarian and international
law. That situation should be dealt with first and
foremost by the Governments concerned. We must not
ignore the fact that armed conflicts are caused by a
number of complex factors that cannot all be tackled
from the same angle. Nor can we forget that arbitrary
intervention will only complicate the situation and
cause further harm to civilians.

Qatar reaffirms the importance of respecting the
Charter and international law, given their role in
strengthening international relations. They provide a
framework for cooperation among States with a view to
dealing with common challenges.

To date, the Security Council has adopted six
presidential statements and three resolutions on the
protection of civilians. Despite the progress made in
the strengthening of such protection, our region, the
Middle East, remains a particular case - one that the
international community has not dealt with as it should.
More than 50 civilians, including children, have been
killed in the occupied Palestinian territories this month
alone. Even as we debate this issue, civilian
populations are suffering as a result of attacks by the
occupation forces. It goes without saying that we are
extremely concerned about the humanitarian situation
of the Palestinian population. The situation in Iraq is
no better. Civilians are suffering as a result of
terrorism- one of the most dangerous aspects of
armed conflict.

Those two cases cast a shadow over the
responsibility to protect civilians. Protection requires a
set of appropriate actions, approaches and measures,
which depend to a great extent on the conditions in a
region and the stage of the conflict there. The only
common factor is the suffering of civilians. We must be
prudent and avoid applying a one-size-fits-all solution
to the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Prevention is better than cure. We must treat the
symptoms, but, above all, we must deal with the root
causes. Hence, we must develop policies aimed at
promoting sustainable development in order to create
coherent, strong societies and to strengthen cooperation
and preventive diplomacy.

We need to take an approach that respects the
current mechanisms that are in use, and we must
implement such mechanisms in emergencies. We must
also reactivate the role of the humanitarian
organizations, while stressing the need for them to
respect neutrality, objectivity and independence.

