Mr. Umemoto (Japan): I would like to start by
expressing my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for your
initiative in holding this debate on the working methods
of the Security Council.

We believe that Japan has been a leading contributor
to improvements in Security Council working methods.
When Japan was on the Council, we, as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, issued presidential note
S/2006/507 in 2006, as well as its revision in 2010
(S/2010/507). We also issued a working methods
handbook, which included the presidential note and the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council.
Based on our proposals, the Council's interaction with
troop- and police-contributing countries has increased.
We are proud of our country's contribution to enhancing
the transparency of the Council's working methods
through such efforts.

We are pleased that the Informal Working Group
has continued to hold discussions on improving the
Council's working methods under the leadership of
subsequent Chairs, such as Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Portugal and Argentina. We can see progress in
efficiency in areas such as reviewing the mandate
cycles of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In that context, I would like to voice my appreciation
to Ambassador Maria Cristina Perceval, Permanent
Representative of Argentina and Chair of the Informal
Working Group, for her contribution, including her
work on the presidential note issued this August
(S/2013/515).

However are those achievements enough? Are
the Security Council working methods transparent
enough? I am afraid that the answer is "not quite".
For instance, many consultations in the Council are
still being held in a closed and exclusive format. We
even hear complaints from elected members of the
Council that they were not involved in the discussions
on the situation in Syria, which were conducted only
among permanent members. In that regard, I highly
appreciate the President's initiative in taking on the
topic of "Ensuring a transparent and inclusive process
of negotiation within the Council" in today's debate.

While we remain strongly committed to improving
the working methods, there are, unfortunately, limits
to what can be done from outside the Security Council
to ensure a transparent process of internal negotiations
within the Council. In that regard, I sincerely hope
that the members of the Council, especially those
with permanent seats, will do more to enhance its
transparency.

Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations
stipulates that we, the Member States, agree to accept
the decisions of the Security Council. Yet, that article
alone does not necessarily guarantee the legitimacy
of the Council's decisions. Improving the Council's
working methods is necessary, but insufficient in
enhancing the Council's legitimacy. It is crucial that
the States Members of the United Nations accelerate
negotiations on Security Council reform to generate
concrete outcomes in the matter.

The Security Council as is currently composed
does not reflect the geopolitical realities of the century
and does not function as designed. The situation in
Syria has clearly demonstrated that dysfunction of the
Security Council.

Let us recall our leaders' commitment made at
the 2005 World Summit and reflected in its Outcome
(General Assembly resolution 60/1) to achieve an
early reform of the Security Council. In that regard,
I appreciate the recent initiatives by His Excellency
Mr. John Ashe, current President of the General
Assembly, to promote proactively the reform process,
as he clearly stated in his letter of 22 October.

By 2015, when the United Nations marks its
seventieth anniversary, concrete outcomes in Security
Council reform will be necessary. I invite all Member
States to spare no effort towards that goal.

