Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you
on two fronts: first, on your country's presidency of the
Security Council for the month of June and the skill with
which you are carrying out your duties, and secondly,
on your country's organization of the FIFA World Cup,
which is creating such excitement. I also thank you for
convening today's very important meeting.

I had not intended to the floor after the very relevant
statements by all of the previous speakers, in particular
the briefing on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/611) by Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). What can
I add to the analysis we have heard of the security and
humanitarian situation in the country, not to mention
the area of human rights? I strongly support the Special
Representative's anxious calls to the Council to supply
MINUSCA with the capabilities it needs to respond
to its intensely challenging area of operations and the
increasing number of hotbeds of tension. The panel
of facilitators of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic is doing
commendable work under the leadership of Mr. Nebie.
We hope that the consultations will culminate in an
understanding among all the parties to the crisis in
the Central African Republic. The ultimate goal is to
establish dialogue in a calm environment, which is a
sine qua non for a genuine return to peace.

To respond to the remarks by the representative
of France, on behalf of my Government, I would
like to reiterate our sincere gratitude to the troop-
contributing countries whose citizens have given their
lives in the cause of peace. I thank all our bilateral and
international partners for their ongoing efforts and
unwavering support to the authorities of the Central
African Republic.

The meeting rose at 12.10p.m.
