Mr. Trejo Blanco (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Polish presidency for convening this open
debate. My delegation also takes note of and thanks the
Secretary-General for his latest report (S/2019/509) on
children and armed conflict.

El Salvador reiterates its deep commitment to the
maintenance of international peace and security by
addressing the heartbreaking consequences of armed
conflicts and reducing the widespread suffering they
cause against the civilian population, in particular
children and adolescents in conflict areas. We express
our deep concern that this sector of the population
continues to be seriously affected by armed conflicts.

Full compliance with the Convention on the Rights
of the Child is a high priority for El Salvador. My
country's Government believes that the best interests
of children is of the utmost importance regardless of the
circumstances they find themselves in. We therefore
find it inconceivable that the forced recruitment of
children continues in various regions throughout the
world. The use of children in conflict constitutes a
serious violation of their rights, while separating them
from their families and leading to their tragic maiming,
sexual abuse and, in the worst case scenario, pointless
deaths. We must continue to work for the promotion,
protection and full and effective enjoyment of the rights
of children and adolescents, and establish that goal as a
priority in our work.

We welcome the progress indicated in the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509) in this
area. We nevertheless regret the significant increase in
the number of confirmed violations of children's rights,
which is why we demand greater commitment from
the international community and condemn the use and
recruitment of children and adolescents in conflict.
El Salvador suffered the scourge of an armed
conflict that lasted more than 10 years, the aftermath of
which has afforded us with countless lessons learned and
has allowed us to strengthen our normative framework
with the main purpose of not repeating the errors of the
past. Emanating from that, we adopted the law for the
comprehensive protection of children and adolescents,
which established a series of rights, guarantees and
duties with regard to children and adolescents in line
with the international human rights framework. The
law ensures that, in the event ofa disaster or situation of
armed conflict, the State must provide all children with
special protection based on their rights. It also provides
for protection from sexual abuse and exploitation and
other forms of exploitation, including the forced and
compulsory recruitment of children and adolescents for
their use in conflict.

We express our gratitude for all the support that
UNICEF has provided at the national and international
levels in advocating for better results in the protection
of children in various environments, particularly with
regard to the work that it does in various regions for
their protection in conflict situations. We believe,
however, that it is necessary to step up socioeconomic,
psychological and educational support for children to
prevent them from continuing to suffer violations of
their rights.

At the same time, we believe that it necessary to
strengthen reintegration programmes for children
who have been released from and left military life so
that they can be properly reintegrated through viable
alternatives. That will reduce the chances of children
becoming vulnerable once again to abuse, social stigma
and renewed recruitment.

We believe that it is best to adopt preventive
approaches that ensure that all children and adolescents
are protected and have an opportunity to augment and
strengthen the capacities needed for building their
lives. To that end, El Salvador endorsed the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers in December
2017, as a comprehensive set of measures to end the
recruitment of child soldiers.

The Vancouver Principles, whose measures are
based on the promotion and protection of the rights of
children agenda, constitute an innovative initiative to
encourage the condemnation of all forms of abuse and
serious violations against children in armed conflict.
It is important to implement measures such as those
included in the Vancouver Principles in areas in which
peacekeeping operations are carried out, while taking
into account the impact that conflicts can have on
children and adolescents and how precarious achieving
the goals of the Organization can be should we fail to
take measures to prevent the violation of their rights.

We urge all parties to conflict to respect
international law, in particular human rights law and
international humanitarian law, and continue to take
the necessary measures to end violations of children's
rights in armed conflict, as well as prevention,
protection and rehabilitation measures as required on a
case-by-case basis.

Lastly, I reaffirm that El Salvador remains convinced
that the protection of all children in armed conflict
must be an important aspect of any conflict resolution
strategy and peacebuilding process. Addressing armed
conflicts from a comprehensive perspective will be the
key to ensuring the maintenance of peace in various
regions throughout the world and its longevity.

