Mr. Wali (Nigeria): I should like to thank you
once again, Sir, for presiding over this historic meeting
here in Nairobi, which reflects the importance of this
particular item of the agenda.

The African Union welcomes this opportunity to
make a statement on the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union. I would recall
that the Security Council, in its presidential statement
of 20 July 2004, reaffirmed the importance of a
stronger relationship between the United Nations and
the regional organizations. This is consistent with
articles 52 and 53 of the United Nations Charter.

In that connection, we are truly delighted with the
decision of the Security Council to convene this
meeting in Nairobi, Kenya. This is a confirmation of
the importance that the members of the Council attach
to African issues.

Over time, cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union has covered areas such
as conflict prevention, conflict resolution,
peacekeeping and peace-building, as well as the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants. Other areas include the field of
development, with particular attention to poverty
eradication and disease control, particularly the fight
against the HIV/AIDS pandemic, tuberculosis and
malaria. We welcome the increasing assistance
provided by the United Nations to Africa.

Also of particular significance is the assistance to
the African Union and the establishment of the Peace
and Security Council, the Military Staff Committee, the
African Standby Force and the early warning system in
Africa. We hope that the cooperation for capacity-
building in Africa will be further enhanced in all these
areas. The success so far recorded in this area has
resulted in the better coordination of the efforts of the
African Union in its response to the situation in Darfur.
Indeed, the United Nations played the lead role in
planning for all aspects of the African mission in the
Sudan.

We note with satisfaction the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
regarding the resolution of the crises in Sierra Leone
and Liberia, as well as the ongoing situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Cote
d'Ivoire. We hope that our already existing cooperative
relationship will be further strengthened through the
provision of additional and new resources as well as
logistical support for the African Union Commission,
which is the institutional and executive organ of the
African Union.

The determination of African leaders to
effectively cope with the challenges of peace and
development led to the establishment of the African
Union and its various institutions, including the
African Union Commission. It also inspired the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD), which
has provided a solid platform in the pursuit of the well-
being of the African people.

We laud the support so far provided to the AU
Commission and to NEPAD, but let me emphasize that
we have taken only the first few steps of a long
journey. The presence of the Security Council here in
Nairobi indeed represents our mutual resolve to also
deepen our institutional relationship, strengthen the
African Union and ensure that the NEPAD initiative
has a positive impact on Africa's efforts in the area of
conflict resolution and the development of the African
continent.

In conclusion, we reaffirm the commitment of the
African Union to continue to play a strong role in the
continent in the area of conflict resolution, sustainable
peace and development, and we expect continuous
complementary efforts from the Security Council,
which, after all, has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, as
provided for under Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter.

