Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we wish
to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Head of United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and the
Ambassador of Afghanistan, Mr. Mahmoud Saikal, for
their respective briefing and statement.

The Government of President Ashraf Ghani
Ahmadzai has been implementing a series of measures
to strengthen institutions in order to promote peace
and political stability with a view to ending the armed
conflict that has impacted the nation for decades.
Notwithstanding the progress achieved, the political
and security situation remains fragile.

The attacks by armed groups, particularly the
Taliban insurgency, have caused significant casualties
in the Afghan security forces, which have been
undermined in their capacity due to the low levels of
recruitment of staff and the high attrition rates within
the armed forces. That state of affairs is compounded
by the presence of the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham
and the Islamic Uzbekistan Movement. Given the
complexity of those challenges, it is necessary that
the international community support the efforts of the
Afghan authorities to strengthen their institutional
capacity at such a crucial crossroads. Otherwise, it
would be to condemn the country and its people to the
expansion and strengthening of terrorist groups, which
today have ravaged with their barbarity other countries
in the region and in Africa.

In that context, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reiterates the fact that a peaceful and
political negotiation among the major political actors
is the only path to bring an end to the armed conflict
and to achieve a stable and lasting peace. We support
the statement expressed by the Secretary-General in
his report (S/2016/218) that direct negotiations between
the Taliban and the Afghan Government are key in
this process. In that regard, we appreciate the positive
role played by the Quadrilateral Coordination Group,
composed of Afghanistan, China, Pakistan and the
United States, in support of the peace dialogue and
national reconciliation between the Afghan Government
and the Taliban.

Moreover, within the agenda of political reforms
agreed by the Government of National Unity, we should
highlight the implementation of the recommendations
of the Special Electoral Reform Commission of
December 2015 as a pending issue. Its implementation
is essential to the strengthening ofpolitical institutions.
Likewise, we are pleased that the interactions that have
been registered among the Cabinet Ministry with the
different local and regional Government levels. Those
meetings, which have been led by President Ghani,
constitute an advance towards better coordination at
all levels of the public administration, while ensuring
concrete results in governmental management to the
benefit of the Afghan people.

In the area of the political empowerment of
women, we recognize the efforts that the Government
of President Ghani has achieved in the implementation
of the national action plan on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). We must make particular
mention of the emergency fund created by the Ministry
of Women, which provides emergency medical care for
women who have suffered abuse and violence, and we
hope that this nefarious practice will become a thing of
the past as quickly as possible.

The Afghan Government's efforts in overcoming
obstacles to peace, stability and socioeconomic
development require the active support of the
international community. In that regard, we call on
donors to provide resources to assist the socioeconomic
development of the country and to bolster its
national capacities.

In the area of bilateral relations, we are pleased to
note the strengthening of bilateral cooperation between
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries, especially
India and Iran. The high-level visits are a clear,
unequivocal indication of the trend towards dialogue
and solving problems of common interest.

In another vein, Venezuela wishes to stress the
constructive work made by UNAMA in coordination
with the Government. The role of the Mission has
been essential in the promotion of peace, national
reconciliation, regional cooperation and socioeconomic
development. That is why our delegation supported
the renewal of the mandate of this special political
Mission, convinced that UNAMA's presence is of
the utmost importance to supporting the work done
by the Government of Afghanistan for the benefit of
its people. In that context, we would like to take this
opportunity to recognize the work of the achieved by
the Permanent Misssion of Spain to negotiate resolution
2274 (2016), just adopted. We would also like to pay
tribute to the UNAMA staff, who, with professionalism
and dedication, have carried out their tasks in a scenario
filled with risks and challenges.

Trafficking in narcotics continues to pose serious
threats to the peace and stability of Afghanistan,
while also being a public health issue with serious
consequences for its population. As indicated in
the report of the Secretary-General, 12.6 per cent of
adults - or 2.4 million people - use drugs, which
poses a real challenge to the future of the country,
taking into account the diminished capacity to deliver
health services that entails. Although the report
also notes that there has been a decrease in poppy
cultivation and in the number of seizures by the
Afghan authorities, this illegal activity is the main
source of financing for armed group. Combating the
illicit trafficking in drugs requires, on the one hand,
coordinated efforts among the various law enforcement
agencies and, on the otehr regional and international
cooperation. In that regard, we recognize the efforts
undertaken by the Government, which has also had
the support of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. We reiterate that the effective fight against
drugs requires international cooperation, including
that of neighbouring countries, to prevent, combat and
eliminate this scourge. It also requires the cooperation
of users. Without demand, there would be no offer.
Moreover, we urge the international community to
continue to support the people and the Government of
Afghanistan by providing resources and capacity to
promote their comprehensive development.

It is necessary to remember that achieving lasting
peace in Afghanistan requires the strengthening of
security and the creation of economic and social
conditions to allow the country to overcome the poverty,
exclusion and discrimination that have burdened its
citizens for decades and whose factors are main causes
of conflict in that nation.

Our country expresses its concern with the ongoing
attacks on the civilian population. The annual report
for 2015 on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
in Afghanistan registers 11,002 victims for that year,
making it the most lethal year reported by UNAMA
since 2009. We are particularly concerned by the fact
that boys and girls represented one-third of the victims
from November 2015 to January 2016, for a total of 562
young minors affected. We condemn the recruitment
of boys and girls. Moreover, United Nations personnel
have continued to be subject to attacks, which we also
condemn. All these acts are breaches of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
and carry criminal consequences. According to the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/218), in 2015
the humanitarian situation deteriorated throughout
the country, making it difficult for the humanitarian
agencies difficult to do their work.

In conclusion, we encourage the Government
of Afghanistan to maintain its efforts to achieve a
broad and inclusive political process leading to a firm
and lasting peace. Attaining that goal will need the
cooperation of all sectors of Afghan society, together
with the help of the international community and the
United Nations, particularly UNAMA.

