Ms. Ivanovie (Serbia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to address the Council today on
behalf of the Republic of Serbia.

At the outset, let me point out that Serbia fulfils
all its obligations regarding cooperation with the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. Serbia has proved its commitment to fighting
impunity time and again. My country continues to be
committed to prosecuting war crimes, regardless of
the nationality of the perpetrators of grievous crimes
against humanity.

I am here today for humanitarian reasons. We are
concerned about the health of some of those who have
been accused or convicted. I would specifically like to
take this opportunity to draw the Council's attention to
inadequate medical care in the case oer. Ratko Mladie.
We feel compelled to do so because the Mechanism
has rejected a request to release him temporarily
for medical treatment despite the guarantees of the
Government of the Republic of Serbia. As our Minister
of Justice pointed out during the Security Council
meeting on 6 June (see S/PV.8278), after months of
delay the prison doctors eventually prescribed therapy
for Mr. Mladic' identical to that proposed by Serbian
doctors much earlier.

Numerous official requests by members of
Mr. Mladie's family and his defence team to gain
access to relevant information about his health have
been denied. They appear to have encountered a wall
of silence, false claims and a lack of cooperation.
The request for a medical team from Serbia to visit
Mr. Mladie in prison, submitted in October of last
year in accordance with rule 31 of the rules governing
detention, was denied after a month of delay without
any explanation or even a suggestion that the visit could
take place at another time.

Our concerns are not unfounded. I would like to
remind the Council that 12 Serbian nationals have
died either during their trial before the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia or in prison during
their sentences. It is difficult to believe that such a large
number could have died in different prison units of The
Hague Tribunal or on temporary release granted at a late
stage of illness under an official explanation that they In conclusion, I would like to point out that Serbia
have had fair treatment. Human rights are universal, has "0 UUtStaNdiNg iSSUCS With the MCChalflsm and that
and we believe that providing adequate health care is a our cooperation With 11 15 "m hindered 1" any way.

question of basic human rights. The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
