Mr. Benkirane (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters is not
new. Regions such as Afghanistan and North Africa
have been witness to it. It has recently taken a new
dimension, particularly in the context of the Syrian and
Iraqi crises.

This phenomenon, which began as a local,
contained threat, has today become a danger for the
countries of origin, transit, residence, destination and
return. Therefore this high-level meeting ofthe Security
Council on threats caused by terrorist acts and foreign
terrorist fighters comes at just the right moment in
terms of the local, regional and international initiatives
aimed at adopting practical measures to deal with the
phenomenon in the framework of the United Nations
system. The international community has become
united in order to provide a unified, decisive response
to deal with the repercussions of this threat.

Awareness of the dangers and risks of this
development cannot be limited to a security approach.
That is seen very clearly in the Security Council
resolutions adopted in August, the meetings in Jeddah
and Paris and the resolutions of the League of Arab
States dealing with this phenomenon. It is actually a
much more complex issue, and managing it requires a
strategy that takes into account the varying phases of
extremism, polarization, recruitment and the fighting
itself, as well as the reintegration of those people.

This phenomenon has developed in regions that
previously had not experienced it at all. It cannot be
attributed to just a specific religion or nationality of any
kind. Therefore we need to disseminate principles of
tolerance and openness. This is where the Commander
of the Believers, His Majesty King Mohammed VI, is
working together with his fraternal Arab States and the
African States.

Morocco is prepared to take part and share its
best practices and experiences, developed within the
framework of its national, multidimensional strategy
to counter terrorism. We have seen tangible results
in terms of the effectiveness of cooperation with the
States with which we are working. Morocco continues
to be a victim of foreign terrorist fighter groups and is
continuing to take practical measures to deal with the
threat, relying on its comprehensive national counter-
terrorism strategy. We believe that the dismantling of
recruitment cells in order to deal with the transfer of
fighters to conflict regions is the direct outcome of
the efforts of the Moroccan authorities. Last week the
Government of Morocco adopted a new bill to ratchet
up our national efforts to deal with the threat posed
by those fighters, within the framework of an holistic
approach that is aimed at strengthening the legal and
institutional framework.

As part of the implementation of our early and
ongoing commitment to supporting international
efforts to deal with terrorism, particularly its latest
manifestations, we have undertaken major efforts to take
part in bilateral, regional and interregional cooperation.
This is complementary to the international efforts
being made to address this phenomenon. The Kingdom
of Morocco and the Netherlands, aware of the dangers
and threats posed by terrorism, launched an initiative
within the framework of the Global Counterterrorism
Forum, through which we were able to hold several
meetings in the United Arab Emirates, The Hague and
Marrakech. The outcomes were seen yesterday, when
we issued the Hague-Marrakech Memorandum on
Good Practices for a More Effective Response to the
Foreign Terrorist Fighters Phenomenon, particularly in
the legal and security areas.

Today's resolution 2178 (2014) notes this effort of
Morocco and the Netherlands in the framework of the
Forum, and encourages us to continue our cooperation,
particularly by bringing together experts. In December
in Marrakech, we will hold the first meeting of the
working group that was established as part of this
Forum. This will be followed by many more meetings.
We hope that we will be able to benefit from the support
of all.

