The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Timor-Leste, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gnterres
(Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/99, which contains the progress
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor. Members of the
Council also have before them document S/2005/267,
which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in
the course of the Council's prior consultations.

I should like to draw attention to document
S/2005/103, which contains the text of a letter dated
23 February 2005 from the Permanent Representative
of Timor-Leste to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America


The President (spoke in Chinese): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1599 (2005).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.45 am.

