Mr. Ay00b (Afghanistan): As Ambassador Tanin
is in Havana to lead the Afghan delegation at the
Ministerial Meeting of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, I have the honour to participate in this
meeting and to deliver, on his behalf and on behalf of
the delegation of Afghanistan, a statement on the
subject under the Council's consideration, a subject
that is very important for my country.
We thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's important debate to discuss the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2009/ 158) and for chairing of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. The
presence of Her Excellency the Foreign Minister of
Mexico at our meeting this morning reflects the level
of the commitment of your delegation and the
effectiveness of its work on this issue.

We welcome Mrs. Radhika Coomaraswamy,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and thank her for her
insightful briefing this morning. We also commend her
Office for its continuing efforts to protect children
affected by armed conflict. We welcome the recent
establishment of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism in Afghanistan.

My delegation was deeply touched by the
testimony this morning of Grace Akallo, who spoke as
a former child soldier. We sincerely commend her
courage and strength.

My delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict. In
November 2008, the Secretary-General's country-
specific report on children and armed conflict in
Afghanistan provided us with an initial opportunity to
carry out fruitful discussion with our partners in the
Security Council Working Group on ways and means to
better implement resolution 1612 (2005) in the
challenging environment of Afghanistan.

For this debate to continue effectively, we must
recognize two facts: that the chief threat to children in
Afghanistan is terrorism, and that to overcome that
threat the international community and the Government
of Afghanistan must work together.

First, terrorism drastically affects the daily lives
of our people, particularly children. The deterioration
of the security situation in Afghanistan is the product
of the surge of terrorist activities carried out by
Al-Qaida, the Taliban and other associated terrorist and
armed groups. It is the Taliban and other terrorist
groups that have been and remain the main violators of
human rights, including children's rights, in
Afghanistan, and those violations will continue as long
as the security situation does not improve.

Terrorists have increased attacks in our territory,
employing barbaric methods imported from outside
Afghanistan, including the use of car bombs, suicide
attacks and improvised explosive devices. These
attacks deliberately target heavily populated areas,
where children are the prime victims. Terrorists are
recruiting, training and exploiting children as
combatants and sending them to operate as suicide
bombers. The intensification of the Taliban
intimidation campaign, accomplished through the
burning of schools, the destruction of health care
centres and clinics and attacks on female teachers and
schoolchildren, has created an atmosphere of terror
which prevents our children from accessing basic
Government services. The recent acid attack on a group
of schoolgirls was a horrific demonstration of the
particular vulnerability of girls.

The reported cases of alleged recruitment,
detention and sexual violence by individuals in the
Afghan Government or the National Army and Police
are disturbing to us, but they are isolated cases. For its
part, the Government of Afghanistan is deeply
committed to fully implementing resolution 1612
(2005) and to protecting the rights of children through
all possible means and mechanisms.

Afghanistan has developed domestic laws
relating to children, established juvenile judicial
institutions and ratified most of the international
human rights treaties including, in 2002, the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two
Optional Protocols. Our penal code prohibits sexual
violence against children and prohibits the recruitment
of persons below 18 in our National Police and below
22 in our National Army. According to our juvenile
code, the legal age of criminal responsibility for a child
is 12 years of age; children can be prosecuted and
sentenced only by a juvenile court and can be confined
only in a juvenile detention centre. Afghan national
legislation, particularly a recent law on combating
terrorist offences, strictly prohibits the detention of
children in adult prisons even if a child is accused of
terrorism or threats to national security.

We recognize the importance of governance and
the rule of law to improving and better implementing
all those legal provisions. We are making the necessary
efforts in that direction; all those efforts need sustained
international involvement.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
sincere appreciation to the international community for
the military and civilian personnel serving in

Afghanistan, who are assisting us in ensuring security
and enabling the implementation of the rule of law,
good governance and human rights, including
children's rights. We are grateful for their sacrifices in
our common endeavour to preserve peace and security,
for their efforts to build the capacity of the Afghan
people and for their recent efforts to address, with us,
the issue of civilian casualties. We must continue to
move together to stop terrorism's menace to civilians,
in particular children.

Afghanistan has made substantial progress in
ensuring the rights of children through legal
frameworks and other mechanisms. However, terrorism
continues to threaten the attainment of our goals. It is
our hope that, with the continuing help and focus of the
international community and the ongoing
determination of the Afghan Government, we can
improve the implementation of resolution 1612 (2005)
and protect our children, as the hope for our future, to
the best of our ability.

