Mr. Barros Melet (Chile): Chile associates itself
with the statement made by the representative of Peru
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti. 1 would
also like to make the following remarks in my national
capacity.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore,
for her briefing, and we take this opportunity to
reiterate Chile's gratitude for her tireless efforts to
achieve a stable, democratic and prosperous Haiti. Her
commitment to the Haitian people and to the values of
the Organization have been exemplary. We also welcome
the presence today of the Permanent Representative of
Haiti, Ambassador Denis Regis.

Chile began its support to Haiti in early March
2004, with 340 troops, the largest contingent that Chile
had ever deployed to a United Nations peacekeeping
mission. Over the past 13 years, the total Chilean
presence in Haiti has amounted to more than 12,000
men and women, including troops and police officers.
As President Bachelet said when she greeted the last of
our troops on their return to Santiago, all the women and
men who were part of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) throughout the 13
years of its operation have been ambassadors for their
countries, working together with our Haitian brothers
on behalf of their countries and their people. Chile
and the international community will never forget the
sacrifices of those who served this Mission on behalf of
peace and security.

While the military presence of the United Nations
in Haiti has come to an end, the principles that led us
there are as valid as ever. Chile, through its support
and cooperation, together with that of other actors,
will continue to build on the achievements of the past
13 years, particularly in the area of cooperation for
development and in accordance with Haitian priorities.
Indeed, it is not that the United Nations is leaving
Haiti, but rather that its presence is changing in order
to launch a new phase, with new challenges to the
consolidation of peace and development in Haiti. We
hope that MINUSTAH's successor, the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
will reap the fruits of MINUSTAH in supporting the
Haitian people and make a concrete contribution to
enabling the rule of law and stability to reign.

The United Nations country team will also play
a key role in supporting Haiti in its economic and
social development and strengthening its institutions
and its respect for human rights. In that regard, Chile
welcomes the appointment of Ms. Josette Sheeran
as the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, and
assures her of our support for her important work in
designing a comprehensive strategy for implementing
the Organization's new approach to combating cholera
in Haiti and supporting Haitian efforts to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals.

We should also mention the importance of
continuing to strengthen the Haitian National Police,
which has a key role to play in consolidating Haiti's
stability. In that regard, we note the campaign launched
by the National Police, with the support of MINUSTAH
and in cooperation with the Ministry ofWomen's Affairs
and Rights, to strengthen the recruitment of women, and
we urge the authorities to continue to support women's
equal participation in the security sector, as well as in
the relevant decision-making bodies.

In conclusion, we reiterate Chile's commitment
to the country and the people of Haiti and reaffirm
the importance of continuing to support that sisterly
nation in its responsibility for its own development.
We also acknowledge the work of all the previous
Special Representatives. We thank Brazil, which
has contributed military personnel during all those
years, as well as all the military, police and civilian
personnel of MINUSTAH, and we pay tribute to the
memory of those who gave their lives in fulfilling this
noble mission.

