Ms. Diop: First of all, I would like to
congratulate the delegation of Burkina Faso on having
drafted the presidential statement on drug trafficking as
a threat to international security (S/PRST/2009/32) and
for including this topic on the agenda of the Security
Council. Burkina Faso has thus shown once again its
commitment to regional issues and to resolving this
very important problem.

On behalf of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), I have
the honour to deliver the following statement on the
situation of drug trafficking and organized crime in
West Africa and the ECOWAS Commission's response
to this scourge.

Drug trafficking has become a menace to West
African peace, security and development. Our region is
increasingly used as a transit route in the trafficking of
cocaine towards growing European markets and
demand. Fourteen per cent of Europe's cocaine
transited through West Africa in 2008 - some 40 tons
valued at billions of United States dollars. Since 2005,
90 per cent of the 1,400 couriers arrested carrying
drugs on commercial flights to Europe have hailed
from West African countries. According to United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) sources,
cocaine couriers have been detected at embarkation
from ll of the 15 ECOWAS member States, namely,
Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote d'Ivoire, the Gambia,
Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal
and Togo. Since 2005, cocaine seizures from West
Africa to Europe have more than doubled.

Why has West Africa become a transit route for
trafficking? There are many reasons. First, there has
been increased surveillance on traditional trafficking
routes. Secondly, there is West Africa's proximity to
7

Latin America. Thirdly, West African crime groups are
active and persistent, as well as flexible in their
operations. Fourthly, weak States naturally have great
difficulty in controlling their territory and the porous
borders and permissive working environment if West
Africa. Finally, there is, of course, the high rate of
youth unemployment in our subregion.

The effects of drug trafficking on ECOWAS
countries are devastating and dramatic. To name just a
few, we have seen increased security problems, crime,
violence and conflict. Drug trafficking has had a
negative impact on governance, including corruption,
the undermining of the rule of law and political
instability. Drug trafficking has had a negative impact
on the economy, with an unexplained high influx of
money. We have witnessed the rising use of cocaine,
which creates problems of public health, including
HIV/AIDS, and social problems.

In recent years, this phenomenon has worsened.
First, we have recently started to see local laboratories
transforming cocaine into amphetamines on the spot.
Secondly, it is a known fact that a country that traffics
is a country that consumes, and a region that traffics is
a region that consumes. Our region is becoming a
consuming region, and our youth is the most affected.
Thirdly, drug trafficking has a correlation to money-
laundering, arms and human trafficking. These are
three problems that ECOWAS is presently addressing.

Although policies and institutions to address the
drug problem are in place in individual ECOWAS
member States, they are not enough, given the nature
of the drug problem. It must also be stressed that
trafficking in drugs and other related crime transcends
national boundaries. Drug trafficking, in particular,
usually involves three or more countries - the
producing country, the transit country and the
consuming country. It has been said here over and over
again that no country and no region can do it alone. It
has therefore become a regional and international
issue, and institutions have to come together to combat
such a menace in a holistic manner.

The narcotics problem is a national security and
foreign policy issue of significant proportions. The
drug cartels are so large and powerful that they have
undermined some Governments. We have learned just
recently that, a few weeks ago, a Boeing 707 aircraft
violated a West African country's airspace. The aircraft
was suspected to be full of cocaine.
8

Money from the drug trade will continue to
undermine efforts at good governance in the region,
and the people who are addicted to the drugs will
continue to constitute security and health concerns for
their communities.

I may be painting a picture that looks grim and
hopeless. Yes, the picture is grim, but we are not
hopeless. We are glad that, based on the
recommendation of a ministerial conference held in
Praia, Cape Verde, the ECOWAS heads of State and
Government rose to the occasion in 2008 by adopting
the Political Declaration on the Prevention of Drug
Abuse, Illicit Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime in
West Africa and the Regional Response Action Plan,
which identified cooperation in preventing and
eradicating drug trafficking and abuse as a priority
programme for the ECOWAS Commission.

Since the Praia conference, the ECOWAS
Commission has taken a number of steps to fight
organized crime and the drug trade at the regional
level. With the support of UNODC, the ECOWAS
Commission developed an operational plan and a
monitoring and evaluation mechanism to translate the
Regional Response Action Plan and Political
Declaration into concrete, time-bound and costed
activities.

The plan is articulated around five thematic
areas: the mobilization of ECOWAS political
leadership and the need for allocation of adequate
national budgets by ECOWAS member States for
preventing and combating illicit drug trafficking,
related organized crime and drug abuse; enhancing the
effectiveness of law and enforcement cooperation;
developing and adopting legal frameworks for effective
criminal justice administration; addressing drug abuse
and associated health and security problems; and
creating valid and reliable data to monitor the
magnitude of the drug trafficking and abuse problems
affecting the region on a sustainable basis.

The ECOWAS operational plan will also focus on
programmes and projects aimed at harmonizing
national legislation, undertaking research, conducting
training programmes, providing treatment,
rehabilitation and alternative livelihood activities to
drug users, and exchanging information on known and
potential traffickers and drug users, to mention a few.

The revision of legal frameworks seeks to address
the following measures: the refusal of entry visas to or
expulsion from ECOWAS member States of suspected
drug traffickers and manufacturers, the signing of
extradition treaties covering drug cases on a bilateral
basis among ECOWAS member States, and a study of
the need for introducing in each ECOWAS member
State laws pertaining to the confiscation of the
properties and assets of those involved in the
trafficking of drugs. The operational plan will also
address the dearth of quality forensic services in the
region through capacity-building, enhancing
infrastructure, developing protocol and networking
among experts and laboratories in the region.

The plan does not place the onus of addressing
the drug problem on the region alone. Rather, it also
seeks to incorporate a strong communication strategy
aimed at drawing national and international attention to
the threat and potential impact of drug trafficking in
West Africa.

For the ECOWAS region, the operational plan is
not merely focused on enhancing policing, interdiction
and arrests, but also seeks to explore how we can
exploit our diversity, values and social assets to
address the drug problem. This is why the engagement
of civil society organizations, the media and traditional
institutions, as well as alternative development
programmes addressing cannabis production, are
priority areas in the operational plan.

However, the operational plan is just the
beginning. There is much work ahead. That is why we
look forward to the continued commitment and support
of the United Nations and other partners in our
common resolve to address a growing problem that
transcends beyond boundaries. I am pleased to
announce here that, just last week in Vienna, at a drug
donor roundtable organized jointly by ECOWAS,
UNODC and the Austrian Government, the European
Commission pledged to support the implementation of
the ECOWAS plan through its Regional Indicative
Programme. I would like also like to express at this
juncture our gratitude to all Member States and
institutions that have supported the implementation of
our operational plan.

Other regions that have faced similar challenges
have recorded some degree of success. They have been
tireless in their efforts, and if they could succeed, we in
West Africa can also succeed. I would like to conclude
my address by once again reiterating on behalf of the
ECOWAS Commission my profound gratitude for this
opportunity and for the interest expressed in the
development of the West African region.

