Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia would like to thank the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for
the presentation of his report (see S/2011/682) and for
the dedication and commitment that he shows to his
mission. We would also like to join the voices of
thanks for the serious and able contribution of
Ambassador Ivan Barbalic' and his delegation to the
work of the Security Council.

Today, we are again considering the situation and
future possibilities for Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
report submitted to the Council (see S/20ll/682) alerts
us to important matters still to be dealt with, but it also
points out that the people of the country, in the midst of
great challenges, are enjoying stability and have great
hopes for their future. The report states that,

"In spite of tensions and controversy surrounding
its formation, the Federation Government has
functioned well during the reporting period."
(S/2011/682,p. 4)

This is an achievement that we must protect in
order to avoid situations that affect the country's
security and that of the region. That is why Colombia
feels that it is important to maintain that friendly spirit
of unity, encouraging the parties involved to avoid
using nationalistic and inflammatory rhetoric. We call
for the strengthening of dialogue in order to solve
differences and thus consolidate a process that includes
many years of effort and commitment on the part of the
international community. We hope that progress will
continue to be made in strengthening Government
institutions and administering justice. The United
Nations can play a fundamental role in supporting
national institutions. Like the European Union, it has a
responsibility to collaborate in the reform process and
to engage politically with that great region.

If local authorities and the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina show commitment, the resulting increased
governability will lead to realizing the objectives of the
Dayton Peace Agreement with regard to development
and peace. Bosnia and Herzegovina has natural allies
in Europe. That friendship also extends to other parts
of the world. At the same time, conversely, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has played and can play an important role
in peacebuilding in other countries around the world,
which in turn binds the international community to
help them with their well-being and development. This
is an apt occasion to welcome the appointment of the
European Union Head of Delegation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Peter Sarensen, and we express our
willingness to cooperate with him to the best of our
ability.

We would like to reiterate our support for the
Dayton Agreement in the establishment of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as the decisions arising from it.
We stress the importance of the strict implementation
of the Agreement in accordance with its annex 10 and
of cooperating with the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Inzko, and we call on all actors
to scrupulously fulfil their commitments as stipulated
in the Agreement.

Meanwhile, if the objectives and conditions for
closing the Office of the High Representative are not
fulfilled - such as an agreement on the distribution of
State property, the issue of the military property
registry and the special status of the district of Brcko,
among others - we believe that that Office should
continue its work in implementing the Agreement, in
fostering good inter-ethnic relations and in creating a
political climate conducive to the better functioning of
institutions that fully represent the various regions and
give equal rights to all citizens. That is tied to the
presence of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force Althea, the continuation of whose mandate we
deem necessary.
