Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I shall respond directly to the direct question
put to me by Mr. Yatsenyuk. The Russians do not want
war, and I am sure that the Ukrainians do not want it
either. Furthermore - and this is something that I want
to underscore in particular - we see no grounds for
viewing the situation in such terms. We do not want any
further exacerbation of the situation.

Russia did not provoke the spiral of destabilizing
violence that has determined developments in Ukraine
in recebt months. Some colleagues who spoke here
before me today painted an almost idyllic picture of the
situation in Ukraine. They claimed that if it had not
been for Russia, everyone in Ukraine would live long
and happy lives. Some others simply tried to claim a
role in the crisis. For them, it seems to be a game; for
us, it is an issue of lives and the fundamental norms
of international law. If we are to understand how to
normalize the situation, we need to objectively analyse
the root causes of the current crisis.

We have already said in this Chamber that there
were no objective grounds for Ukraine's deteriorating
situation over the past few months. All that was at
stake was the need for President Yanukovych and
his Government to adopt a decision on whether it
was beneficial to Ukraine to sign the association
agreement with the European Union that was proposed
by Brussels. The reaction to Kyiv's decision to refrain
from that for now while still maintaining a so-called
European future outlook was totally unfounded. The
escalation was provoked both by forces in Ukraine and
by Western sympathizers with that country.

Having refused to engage in trilateral negotiations
on the economic problems of Ukraine, under the
European Union-Ukraine-Russia format, Brussels and,
for some reason, Washington, DC, started to demand,
almost in the form of an ultimatum, that Kyiv sign the
association agreement, which had significant economic
consequences for Ukraine. They appealed not only to
the Government but also to the street.

Of course, the people of Ukraine have the right
to peaceful political protests, but why turn the
Maidan into a militarized camp? Why send columns
of militants, well-trained and well-equipped by
someone, into the centre of Kyiv? Why provoke the
representatives of law-enforcement agencies by pelting
them with paving stones and Molotov cocktails,
using bulldozers as weapons of street terror? Are the
seizure of administrative buildings and political party
headquarters, and the killing and torturing of those
arrested there - for example, in the torture chambers
set up in the trade unions building - consistent with
democracy? The acts ofviolence that took place in Kyiv
clearly require careful international investigation.

The picture painted by Kyiv and Western
propaganda completely contradicts those reports, which
show that the same people fired on positions held by the
law-enforcement agencies and by the demonstrators.
There were also recent reports that they also fired on
the headquarters of the so-called Commandant of the
Maidan who now leads Ukraine's National Security
Council.

Why have the representatives of Western countries
fuelled the enmity and unrest? Why did the Speaker of
the Parliament of Lithuania, in a speech to the Maidan,
call for continued anti-governmental actions? Why
were there Ministers for Foreign Affairs and other
high-level civil servants and representatives of some
Western States among the demonstrators? Why was
there such blatant interference in the domestic affairs
of a State, in blatant disregard for its sovereignty?

However the activities of Victor Yanukovych
during that period may be judged, no one in this
Chamber can claim that he did not seek a possible
compromise with the opposition. The post of Prime
Minister was offered to Mr. Yatsenyuk. Why did he
not seize that opportunity to prevent the country from
falling into economic disaster? Why not seize not only
the opportunity provided by offers from the European
Union and the United States, but also by readiness of
the Russian Federation to help with credits and lower
fuel prices to begin to stabilize the economic situation?

Finally, why not seize the opportunity of the
agreement of 21 February to end the stand-off,
re-establish the normal political process, and cement
the economic and political integrity of the country?
Could it be that the forces seeking power and authority
were not interested in democracy, but in a dictatorship,
when they threatened all those who differed with
them, including members of the Rada? As a result, the
legitimate legal President was overthrown and forced to
leave Kyiv under the threat of physical violence.

Those present in this Chamber know full well that
the violent overthrow of an authority is illegal. Such
actions have been repeatedly condemned, including in
documents adopted by the Security Council. Instead of
the Government of national unity provided for pursuant
to the agreement of 21 February, a Government of the
victors was established in Kyiv, as acknowledged by
Mr. Yatsenyuk. A number of key positions, including
that of Minister of Defence, went to representatives
of the radical nationalist Freedom Party. In the
resolution adopted in December 2012, the European
Parliament characterized the views of that party as
anti-Russian, anti-Semitic, xenophobic, and counter to
the fundamental values of the European Union. It called
on all pro-democracy parties in the Rada not to form
coalitions with that party. Where are those European
values now? Are the new authorities in Ukraine sticking
to them?
The real bulwark of those new forces is an even
more radical organization, the so-called Right Sector,
whose leader has made his presidential ambitions clear.
The radicals have not laid down their weapons, as
required by the agreement of 21 February. Moreover,
they are restocking their arsenals with weapons seized
from military depots. The new authorities have done
nothing to organize a national dialogue to promote
genuine constitutional reform, as stipulated in the
agreement of 21 February.

They have done their best, however, to antagonize
the eastern and south-eastern regions of Ukraine.
First of all, they got rid of a law on languages that
afforded official status to the Russian language, and
then they eliminated the Russian-language versions of
Government websites. Instead of engaging in dialogue,
Kyiv sends its political commissars to the eastern
region. Those who dissent are arrested, as happened
with a popular governor of the Donetsk region who
stated that he intended to participate in the presidential
elections, and with former Governor Dobkin of the
Kharkiv oblast. The fract is, the Kyiv authorities
themselves are splitting their country in two.

A great deal has been said in the Council today,
often with considerable passion, with regard to the
situation in Crimea and the decision of the Supreme
Council of the Autonomous Republic to hold a
referendum on to decide on annexation by Russia or
on broader autonomous status within Ukraine. Some
dispute the legitimacy of such a referendum. However,
what is unacceptable is the manipulation of individual
principles and norms of international law, arbitrarily
wresting them from the general context not only of
international law itself, but in particular of concrete
political situations and historical specificities.

In each particular case, one must seek the right
balance between the principles of territorial integrity
and the right to self-determination. It is clear that
the achievement of the right to self-determination in
the form of separation from an existing State is an
extraordinary measure. However, in the case of Crimea,
it obviously arose as a result of the legal vacuum created
by the violent coup against the legitimate Government
carried out by nationalist radicals in Kyiv, as well as by
their direct threats to impose their order throughout the
territory of Ukraine.

A number of countries that have spoken out against
the expression of the popular will of the Crimean people
rushed to recognize the independence of Kosovo,
which was declared without a referendum by a simple
decision of Parliament, despite the protests of Belgrade
and the fact that the declaration of independence
took place against the backdrop of an illegal military
operation by NATO countries in a situation in which
the majority of the Serbian population was forced to
leave the province. I shall not even speaking about
resolution 1244 (1999), which retains all its validity in
establishing an international protectorate over Kosovo.

It is well known that the concept of a referendum
is not new. Referendums have been or will be held in
Puerto Rico, Gibraltar, the Falkland Islands, Catalonia
and Scotland. The legal and historical contexts,
as well as the results of all those votes, are all quite
different, but the fact remains that the inhabitants of
those territories were or will be given the opportunity
to express their free will. Why should the people of
Crimea be an exception?

There are other interesting precedents. The
Comoros declared their independence from France
in 1975 and were accepted as a State Member of the
United Nations consisting of four islands. However, in
February 1976 France organized for the residents of one
of those islands - Mayotte island - a referendum to
determine whether they wanted to remain part of France
or to be part of the new State of the Comoros. By a small
majority, they voted against independence from France.
The Head of State of the Comoros tried to keep that
from happening. In February 1976, he requested that an
emergency meeting ofthe Security Council be convened
(see S/PV.1888). France's actions were characterized as
naked aggression and an encroachment on the national
unity of the Comorian State. He noted that under French
law in force before the independence of the Comoros
islands, the island of Mayotte was an inalienable part
of Comorian territory. He also underscored the fact that
the Comoros was accepted as a State Member at the
United Nations as a State composed of four islands. It
was all to no avail. Draft resolution S/11967 in support
of the Comorian position was vetoed by France.

The Declaration of Independence of the United
States refers to a situation in which it had become
necessary for a people to dissolve the political ties
connecting it to another people. Let us see how
the people of Crimea view that position during the
upcoming referendum.

Finally, some who have spoken in the Council
referred to the actions of the Russian Black Sea Fleet in
Crimea. We consider those references to be incorrect.
The Russian Black Sea Fleet is in no way interfering
in the situation leading up to the referendum, which
has been proclaimed and organized by the Crimeans
themselves.
