Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We welcome
very much the presence of the Secretary-General at this
meeting, which records a significant success of the
United Nations. We would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his useful briefing on
the various aspects of the election for the Constituent
Assembly in East Timor.

The Council takes up East Timor at a historic
moment. The world has witnessed a remarkable
election there as it prepares to emerge as the first
independent State in the new millennium. I say it is
remarkable for the spirit of peace, maturity and
tolerance that every individual East Timorese and the
political parties have shown throughout the campaign
period and during the polls on 30 August. Through a
voter turnout as high as 91 per cent, the East Timorese
have shown their belief in participatory democracy.
Our warmest felicitations therefore go to the people
and leadership of East Timor for setting such a glowing
example to the world, as the Secretary-General himself
described in his statement immediately after the polls
were closed.

At the same time, we pay our tribute to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Sergio
Vieira de Mello, and to all his colleagues in the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor for
their untiring efforts over the last two years in reviving
lives and livelihoods and re-establishing the
institutions of government. These are critical building
blocks towards full independence. Sergio Vieira de
Mello is in Dili today for the important election-
certification ceremony of the Independent Electoral
Commission in East Timor. We hope to have an
opportunity to pay a tribute to him in person.

Bangladesh warmly congratulates the East Timor
National Liberation Front and its leader, Xanana
Gusmao, for their important victory in the election. The
securing of 27 per cent of the 88-member Assembly by
women candidates is another indicator of the political
maturity of the Timorese people.

At this stage, Bangladesh should emphasize two
aspects. First, with the election over, it is time that the
Council pledge its firm support to the critical second
phase of work in East Timor: the establishment of an
effective and efficient Government, institutions and a
viable and vibrant economic structure.

The presidential statement that the Council
will adopt later reiterates the importance of a
substantial international presence post-independence,
and Bangladesh would underscore the need for a
United Nations engagement in East Timor until its job
is fully accomplished in the post-independent period.

There was a general consensus in the open
briefing of 30 July that United Nations assistance in
East Timor will constitute the core of all international
assistance in various areas. We hope that the Secretary-
General's comprehensive report, due next month on the
United Nations presence in post-independent East
Timor, will reflect this aspect adequately.

Secondly, the Government of Indonesia extended
its cooperation during the critical phase of East
Timor's transition towards independence. We highly
commend Indonesia and its people for playing a
constructive role in that regard. At the same time, we
hope that, in the course of Xanana Gusmao's meeting
in Jakarta with the Indonesian leadership on
Wednesday, the new Indonesian Government will
realize the expectation and importance of cooperation
with and support to East Timor in its transition to
independence.

