Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to begin by thanking Ms. Zerrougui for her briefing
and for her efforts to promote peace and stability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also listened

attentively to the briefings by Mr. Nangaa Yobeluo,
President of the Commission electorale nationale
independante, Ambassador Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union (AU) to the United
Nations, Mr. Malanji, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Zambia, and Monseigneur Utembi, representing the
Conference episcopale nationale du Congo.

On 30 December, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo held its presidential, National Assembly
and provincial assembly elections, in which nearly
20 million people voted. Regional organizations such
as the AU and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) sent observers, and on the whole
the election process was peaceful, stable and smooth.
The Electoral Commission announced the preliminary
results on 9 January. All this testifies to the strong desire
of the Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to safeguard peace and stability
based on Congolese ownership and on their aspirations
to achieve a smooth transfer of power through peaceful
elections. China commends the Government and the
Commission for their efforts.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is now at a
historic juncture. A peaceful handover of power is in the
interests of its people and will be conducive to peace,
stability and development in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Africa as a whole. We see elections
as a country's internal affair. We believe that the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
the ability and wisdom to resolve the issues involved
in their own way, and we hope that the Congolese
parties will remain calm, show restraint and resolve
their differences through dialogue and negotiation with
a view to maintaining peace and stability. We believe
that the international community should focus on the
following three priorities.

First, the international community should show
full respect for the country's sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity and for the authority of the
Commission electorale nationale independante.
Secondly, in order for the international community
to continue to assist the Government in maintaining
internal peace and stability, we are keen to see the AU,
SADC and other regional organizations continuing to
lead the mediation efforts. We encourage the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue to help
the Government as and when it is needed. Thirdly, we
should maintain active humanitarian assistance to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Last year, as the
security situation in certain parts of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo improved, approximately

1 million displaced people returned home. Nonetheless,
the humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo continues to face challenges and the
level of food insecurity is especially serious. China
calls for vigorous support from various quarters of
the international community. The Ebola epidemic in
the country's north-east remains dire and requires the
continued support of the international community for
the work of the World Health Organization and the
International Committee of the Red Cross in order to
enable them to effectively respond to the outbreak and
contain its further spread.

China has been a staunch and long-standing
supporter of the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and is actively involved in
United Nations peacekeeping operations in the country.
We will continue to provide medical, food and other
humanitarian assistance, remain actively engaged in
its economic and social development and do our part
for peace, stability and development in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

