Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank Mr. Ibrahima Fall, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, for his report. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Liberata Mulamula, the Executive
Secretary of the Great Lakes Conference Secretariat,
for her briefing just a few moments ago.

With the signing of the Pact on Security, Stability
and Development in the Great Lakes Region, the
Governments and the peoples represented there have
shown that they now wish to work towards security
based on democracy and a cooperative and non-
aggressive approach in the region. This means
recognition of the fact that the countries are facing new
and old threats to their security. These threats are
multidimensional in nature, the economic and social
components of which are fundamental elements of
those conflicts. It, therefore, is necessary to have a
comprehensive approach to the prevention of these
conflicts, and cooperation is required to ensure
stability, be this on a bilateral basis or through
multilateral mechanisms.

This approach is in line with the desire for
rapprochement expressed by the Government of Peru
and the other member countries of the Andean
Community in our own Andean zone of peace. The
Great Lakes Pact reinforces and respects the security
and independence of each State and ensures that no one
will permit this territory to be used by rebel groups to
destabilize any other country or Government. Nor will
they be able on their own, for example, to enter the
territory of another country, whether it is to attack
rebel groups or to take the national resources.

As a sign of this new era in the Great Lakes
region, the international community and the Group of
Friends of the region must contribute to strengthening
inclusive, democratic Governments and the democratic
exercise of power that represents the interests of the
people. In the immediate future, this calls for an all-out
war to eradicate poverty and to establish reconstruction
programmes, good governance and the consolidation of
peace, putting national wealth at the service of people,
by building socio-economic institutions and providing
basic services, such as security, education, health and
food, as well as building an economic base and a solid
infrastructure as a means of developing a sustainable
economy within each country and linked with the rest
of the world. This change also requires a serious
transformation with respect to the humanitarian
situation and to human rights.

In this connection, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is definitely recognized as a very important
strategic country. It is necessary to support the process
of installation of democratic institutions directly, so
that the State can be in a position to provide the
minimum services to its people - security, health and
education. Besides external efforts, the domestic
leadership needs to focus on serious democratic
rebuilding of the country. We cannot run the risk of
having the human and financial investment in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo be lost owing to the
frustrations felt by the citizens, which might eventually
lead to a resurgence of the crisis. For this reason, we
must constantly monitor and follow up the sanctions
regime established for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

We need the support of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and of the neighbouring
countries - in particular, Uganda, Rwanda and
Burundi, as well as the Sudan, the United Republic of
Tanzania and Zambia - to ensure that there is
effective control over the territory and over the access
to land, air and water routes, so that they cannot be
used by illegal armed groups trafficking in weapons or
for the illegal export of natural resources. MONUC
must continue, as it has been doing, to coordinate
closely with the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) and with the United Nations Office in
Burundi to strengthen the regional impact of the
effective presence of the United Nations in the region.

Since the beginning of the year, the Security
Council has witnessed a process of dialogue and aimed
at achieving a ceasefire and reaching a political
understanding between the Lord's Resistance Army and
the Government of Uganda. For Peru, there can be no
peace if impunity continues to exist. For that reason,
my country is following developments in the Juba
peace process and hopes that the humanitarian and
development needs in northern Uganda will be met in
accordance with the comments made by that country's
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence. We must
continue to follow developments in Burundi as well.
In conclusion, I wish to express the hope that the
United Nations, in cooperation with the African Union
and relevant subregional groups, can assist in the

follow-up process, because peace in the region will
have an effect throughout the continent. We hope that
that experience will serve as a stimulus for finding
satisfactory solutions to other crises, such as those in
Darfur, Cote d'Ivoire, Somalia, Eritrea and Ethiopia.
We therefore welcome the Pact on Security, Stability
and Development in the Great Lakes Region and the
implementation process, which is in its initial phase.
We wish to thank the Tanzanian delegation for the draft
presidential statement that the Council will adopt,
which we support.

