Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, and the Russian
Federation for having convened this meeting. I also
wish to convey my sincere gratitude and appreciation
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Yamamoto, to the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Fedotov, and to my dear colleagues
Mrs. Adela Raz, Ambassador of Afghanistan, and
Ambassador Djani of Indonesia, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). I thank them for
their detailed and informative briefings following the
periodic report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/703),
in particular since this meeting is being held in advance
of the extension of the UNAMA mandate, to be
considered later next week.

I extend my heartfelt condolences to the Afghan
people and Government in the wake of the recent
terrorist attack in Kabul.
Egypt always stresses the importance of bolstering
the role of the Security Council and recalls the
commitment of the international community to
Afghanistan by providing it with political, security and
developmental support for a better present and future
for the Afghan people and the whole of Central Asia.
We must all be partners in order to link security to
development and peace in Afghanistan and its region.
We all believe in one desired international objective
that leads to strengthening Afghanistan's capabilities
after the country has suffered a great deal for decades
while striving to address difficult challenges since the
last quarter of the twentieth century. The future goal
is to achieve peace, stability, security and sustainable
development by strengthening the United Nations role
concerning this vital issue and shedding light on the
future of Afghanistan and Central Asia, along with
reminding various international parties of the need to
shoulder their responsibility towards Afghanistan,

As there is a correlation between the interests and
reasons for stability in Central Asia and the Middle
East, Egypt always supports the Afghan Government
in its war against terrorism and its tireless efforts at
control and sovereignty over all of its territories. At
the same time, we look forward to the resumption of
peace talks between the United States of America
and the Taliban. We also welcome the support from
neighbouring countries to this vital negotiating path.
We also support Afghan authorities in their political
and social endeavours to establish security and
development for all the people of Afghanistan. Based
on that, when we, as the international community, seek
practical solutions in that regard, we need to shed light
on the following aspects.

First, the security aspect has at its core the
collective commitment to fight terrorism everywhere
under the international strategic framework and to
address the extremist ideologies, especially fighting
Da'esh in Afghanistan, in particular the Khorasan
Province branch), amid an escalation in security
incidents recently and terrorist attacks in a manner that
is unprecedented in Afghanistan. In that regard, we
stress the importance of close cooperation regionally
and internationally with the relevant Afghan authorities
involved in fighting drugs, while also stressing the
importance of countering opium trafficking, as
reported by United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
in its recent reports. It is impossible to disassociate this
from counter-terrorism efforts given the fact that drug
trafficking is among the main sources of financing
terrorists organizations and armed groups.

Secondly, the development aspect should be
considered in the light of economic and investment
initiatives of neighbouring countries as well as regional
projects that have a strategic dimension. At the forefront
of those endeavours are the decisions taken by the Heart
of Asia ministerial conferences, along with the efforts
undertaken by the Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan. In that regard, Egypt
pledges to continue its contribution through specialized
training offered by programmes ofthe Egyptian Agency
for Partnership for Development that target Afghan
army and police elements. In addition, Egypt continues
to provide support in the areas of the judiciary, culture,
health care, nursing, agriculture, irrigation and the
banking sector, as part of contributing to building an
integrated architecture for Afghan national institutions.
Egypt believes in the desired international unity of
purpose with a view to strengthening the capabilities
of the Afghan Government to achieve peace, stability,
security and sustainable development. In that context,
Egypt calls on the international partners to continue
meeting their commitments to Afghanistan.

Thirdly, the political aspect requires that we
support the Afghan Government in order to promote
the possibilities of succeeding in the internal peace
process, national dialogue and reconciliation, especially
in the context of the quartet mechanism. We welcome
the efforts of the Afghan Government to prepare for the
upcoming elections.

Fourth is the international aspect, which is
represented by UNAMA and the means to strengthen
the activities and effectiveness of that important United
Nations mission in the light of its role and significance
in Afghanistan. In that regard, we also value the vital
tasks undertaken by the United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia.

Fifthly and lastly is the regional aspect, where we
emphasize the important role of regional organizations,
as well as subregional bodies in Central Asia, such
as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. It is also
important to build upon the positive outcomes of the
Brussels Ministerial Conference and to ensure that

pledges made there be met. It is necessary to strengthen
cooperation and coordination to counter threats,
overcome challenges and bolster communication in this
strategically important part of the world.

In conclusion, I reiterate the importance of making
progress towards an integrated United Nations vision
that includes the above-mentioned elements. That
should be accompanied by a clear Afghan-owned and
Afghan-led road map in order to establish peace and
security and, ultimately, to achieve development and
prosperity in Afghanistan and Central Asia given that
this is a model example for implementing the concept of
global peacebuilding called for by the United Nations.

