Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and the Force
Commanders, whom we commend for the frankness of
their assessments, as befits the seasoned professional
leaders they clearly are.

I would also like to acknowledge and pay tribute
to all who serve the United Nations, especially those
in high-risk environments. Today we have again been
reminded that some United Nations soldiers make the
ultimate sacrifice, giving their lives in the performance
of their duty. This phenomenon of dead United Nations
soldiers is extraordinarily confronting. Whatever the
reality of the new threat environment, it should not be
happening. United Nations peacekeepers should not
even be targets, let alone casualties. The fact that it is
happening is at the core of the three briefings we have
had today. It is also at the core of why some countries
find it so difficult to contribute troops to United Nations
operations.

Yesterday, the High-Level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations toldus that allpeacekeepers-civilian,
military and police - must do all they can to ensure
that civilians are not harmed. That is clearly right, yet as
we have been reminded today by General Tesfamariam,
living up to that principle, which flows so easily off the

tongue, is extraordinarily difficult. The challenge for
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan is indeed
extraordinary - a complete breakdown of civilian
Government, with our poor soldiers left to protect
the civilians whose Government and leaders have
abandoned them. It is unacceptable that the force is
having to contend with direct harassment and repeated
violations of the status-of-forces agreement. We believe
that the Security Council must keep a very close eye on
South Sudan and the situation there.

I would also like to congratulate Major
General Lollesgaard on the frankness of his assessment.
He has told us bluntly that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali is not properly equipped to operate in the
asymmetric threat environment prevailing in northern
Mali. That is something that the Organization must
listen and respond to. We wholeheartedly support his
plea that troops who are sent to Mali are indeed trained
and equipped to deal with the situation in which they
must operate. We welcome the progress the General
was able to point to, particularly in the development
of an intelligence capability. We acknowledge the
importance of intelligence for enhancing situational
awareness, in assisting force protection and supporting
the protection of civilians. I would like to ask him
whether he sees a role for an all-sources information
forces unit capability in the Mission to assist in the
conduct of an information operations campaign.

I would also like to ask him a question that continues
to challenge me when I think about the operations that
the United Nations must now work in. Can a force that is
equipped with the armour and other equipment needed
to operate safely in a serious threat environment at the
same time make the connections to the local population
that are necessary to engender the trust that we know is
essential to the fulfilment of their mission?

I would like to commend Major General Firm
for laying out so clearly the challenge he has had to
confront in dealing with the caveats imposed by
various troop contributors to the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization (UNTSO). In a similar spirit
of candour, I want to acknowledge that the reason for
some of those caveats is related to a concern that the
United Nations operation was not sufficiently equipped,
directed and supported to ensure the protection of the
soldiers operating there. We do not like caveats, and
we certainly agree with the Ambassador of the United
States that if caveats are imposed, they should be
imposed openly and must not come as a surprise to the
Force Commander. New Zealand has withdrawn the
caveats it had in place on military observers serving
in UNTSO, based on improved medical support, the
rehearsal of casualty evacuation plans and the inclusion
in the mission of a team to counter improvised explosive
devices. But the issue is a serious one, and we believe
there must be an open and honest conversation between
the troop contributors, the Secretariat and the Council
about the caveats and the reasons for them, and how we
might find a way of minimizing and preferably doing
away with them entirely.

