Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the briefings given
today. We took careful note of the explanations on the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, as well
as the troubling report on the humanitarian situation.

We strongly condemn all violent acts committed
by both parties to this conflict and we call for a
cessation of hostilities and provocations jeopardizing
the progress that has been made, especially with
regard to the ceasefire. In order to achieve this
objective, everyone - especially women and young
people - must participate.

Despite the fact that there have been continuous
confrontations in the Al-Hudaydah governorate, we
welcome the fact that an agreement has been reached
on the new mechanism for monitoring the ceasefire and
the military de-escalation. As Mr. Griffiths informed
us, it has also been agreed that committees will be
formed to supervise compliance with the ceasefire with
the participation of representatives from both parties,
as well as the United Nations.

Furthermore, as Mr. Lowcock pointed out, the
humanitarian situation remains catastrophic. Since the
beginning of the year, new cases of cholera continue
to be reported, with almost half a million people
affected by the disease. We therefore need a robust
and coordinated response from the relevant actors to
improve the living conditions of the most vulnerable,
especially children.

I would like to thank Mr. Beasley for his briefing,
in which he eloquently outlined the current situation
of the distribution of aid in some areas controlled
by Ansar Allah. We regret that there has had to be a
gradual suspension of assistance and we reiterate that,
in order for humanitarian action to be effective, it
must be provided in accordance with the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.
Failure to comply with these principles puts the welfare
of the affected population at risk. Further, we cannot
allow hunger to become a weapon of war. We trust
that, through dialogue, commitments can be reached to
meet the people's food needs. We hope that, based on
Mr. Beasley's announcement today, it will be possible
to reach a signed agreement.

Moreover, we would like to draw attention to
the problem of landmines and improvised explosive
devices, which prevent humanitarian organizations
from reaching populations in need. Civilian areas must
urgently be cleared of mines and explosive devices, and
this demining must take place not only in residential
areas but also on agricultural land, so that people can
access their fields safely.

We echo the concerns expressed by the Office ofthe
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
with regard to the imposition of the death penalty on 30

people, most of whom are academics and students, by a
Special Criminal Trial Court of de facto authorities in
Sana'a. The defendants must be guaranteed due process
and a fair trial, and any charges under political motives
must be dismissed.

Finally, the Security Council remains united in the
search for a political solution to the conflict in Yemen,
and we would like to reiterate our delegation's steadfast
support for Mr. Griffiths in his tireless efforts to find
a solution. We call on the parties to the conflict to
participate in good faith in these negotiations and to
fulfil their commitments in the same spirit displayed in
Stockholm in December.

