Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
first like to congratulate Lithuania on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council and welcome the
timely choice of the topic for this debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2015/289) and
for the recommendations contained therein.

The concept note (S/2015/306, annex) prepared by
the Lithuanian presidency raises a number of questions
that prompt in-depth consideration of the trafficking
of small arms and their nefarious impact on the peace
and security of States. We hope that today's debate will
provide a concrete follow-up to the high-level debate
organized by the Australian presidency in September
2013 (see S/PV.7036), which resulted in the adoption of
resolution 2117 (2013).

There is global consensus on the destructive effects
of the proliferation and destabilizing accumulation
of small arms and light weapons. This scourge is the
greatest cause of the loss ofhuman lives, the destruction
of economic capacities, and the threat to the security,
stability and national unity of States, as well as their
territorial integrity. The illicit trafficking in small
arms and light weapons prolongs conflict, exacerbates
armed violence, and weakens respect for international
law, international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Furthermore, the close connection
between terrorism, transnational organized crime, and
the traffic in drugs, human beings and natural resources
is overwhelmingly clear.

The African continent has unfortunately been the
most heavily hit by the horrors resulting from this evil.
In this respect, the Sahel-Saharan region has become
the epicentre of the recent association among illicit
arms trafficking, terrorist and separatist groups, and
criminal networks. At the same time, threats related to
security, the scope of which exceeds the Sahel region,
have been exacerbated by the circulation of weapons,
whose number has grown in recent years, in particular
those from the arsenals of the former Libyan regime
of Al-Qadhafi. Those weapons contribute significantly
to the destabilization of the region by empowering
terrorist and criminal groups operating in the Sahelo-
Saharan region.

Therefore, in order to end this scourge, it is
essential to promote international and subregional
multidimensional cooperation aimed at strengthening
the capacities of States, in particular in intelligence
gathering and border protection. In this framework, I
recall the high-level meeting on the counter-terrorism
strategy in the Sahel region, organized by the Secretary-
General, and the special meeting organized by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, under the chairmanship
of Morocco, on cooperation and assistance to countries
in the Sahel region, with a view to strengthening their
counter-terrorism capacities.

International consensus is being built on the need
to strengthen global coordination mechanisms to
ensure an effective struggle against the illicit trade
of small arms and light weapons and to seek the best
ways to addressing the resulting challenges. To that
end, the Kingdom of Morocco emphasizes the extreme
importance of the the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts
and Components and Ammunition, supplementing
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime.

The Kingdom of Morocco also reiterates its
support for the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, and
and its International Tracing Instrument. Morocco calls
for their effective implementation at the international,
regional and national levels, based on the Action Plan
adopted at the second United Nations Conference
to Review Progress Made in the Implementation of
the Programme of Action. Furthermore, Morocco
hopes that the Arms Trade Treaty, which entered into
force in December 2014, will continue to strengthen
international efforts to end the illicit traffic in small
arms and light weapons.

To that end, in 2006 the Kingdom of Morocco
signed the Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence
and Development. Morocco participated in its launch
alongside Switzerland and 41 other States members
of the United Nations Development Programme and
non-governmental organizations active in the field
of development. This initiative, now backed by 109
signatory States, is focused on helping countries
affected by armed violence in order to eliminate
this scourge and contribute to the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals by integrating
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration into
their national development policies.

We further recall that international efforts to fight
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons must
comply with the provisions of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations, including the right of all
States to import and manufacture small arms and light
weapons for their legitimate national defence needs and
to maintain their territorial integrity.

Finally, Morocco hopes that this meeting will lend
new momentum to regional and subregional cooperation
in order to prevent illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons, and to prevent the merchants of death
from profiting at the expense of innocent victims. We
underscore the importance of information-exchange
and intelligence mechanisms and the need to step up
cooperation and international assistance, particularly
in capacity-building, which are extremely important
to the effective implementation of the Programme of
Action and all international commitments.

