Mr. Inzko: In six months' time, when I next appear
before the Security Council, Bosnia and Herzegovina
will be marking the twentieth anniversary of the Dayton
Peace Accords. At the beginning of July, we will also
be marking the twentieth anniversary of the Srebrenica
genocide.

Much has been achieved since that all-important
day in November 1995 when Richard Holbrooke finally
succeeded in brokering an agreement to end Europe's
most tragic conflict since the end of the Second World
War. Bosnia and Herzegovina has come a long way
since then, but it is also true that what happens during
the next six months will play a hugely significant
role in determining how the twentieth anniversary of
Dayton will be Viewed by the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Peace is, ofcourse, a priceless commodity. It should
never be taken for granted. But it is a starting point,
not the end state. It is entirely right that after 20 years
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina - especially the
young - expect so much more from their country and
their politicians. They are suffering from the highest
youth unemployment rate in Europe and many of them
are leaving the country. They are right to expect more
because Bosnia and Herzegovina truly does have the
potential to offer its citizens prosperity and a normal
way of life. I take this opportunity to encourage
members of the Security Council to Visit that beautiful
land to see for themselves its spectacular landscapes
and its rich cultural diversity.

What needs to happen in the next six months so
that we can mark the twentieth anniversary with a sense
of renewed optimism about the future and, even more
importantly, so that we can re-energize the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina? The answer is very simple. We
need to see the newly elected authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina - and the country in general - coming
together to deliver the steps that are required to take
advantage of the new European Union (EU) initiative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The good news is that we now have Governments
in place at the State and entity levels that are showing
signs that they are ready to start implementing the
written commitment that was adopted in March and has
opened the way for the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the EU to enter into force. However,
progress will require concrete results to be delivered.
Some of the reforms will be very difficult, but they
will deliver new opportunities for the country and its
people. Specifically, we need to see concrete results
that will create new jobs, improve the functioning and
functionality of institutions, and entrench the rule of
law, especially when it comes to the fight against crime
and corruption.

I believe that a great deal can be achieved in 2015 if
there is a renewed commitment within the country and
among its political leaders to pulling together and to
working together - to working as one. This is what we
need to see and we need to see it quickly so that the new
Governments can build up real momentum for reform.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been given a fresh chance
and it must be taken. I would therefore like to take
this opportunity to sincerely thank Foreign Secretary
Philip Hammond and Foreign Minister Frank-Walter
Steinmeier for launching the initiative that has given
Bosnia and Herzegovina this fresh chance.

I also want to thank High Representative
Mogherini and Commissioner Hahn for taking the
initiative forward. High Representative Mogherini has
already been to Bosnia and Herzegovina three times.
Commissioner Hahn Visited Bosnia and Herzegovina
just last week and again showed his commitment to that
country.

A new Special Representative of the European
Union, Ambassador Lars-Gunnar Wigemark, has
recently joined us in Sarajevo, and I would like to
take this opportunity to welcome him warmly and to
once again express my strong commitment to working
hand-in-glove with him to assist those citizens and
politicians who want to move the country forward.

The initiative offers Bosnia and Herzegovina the
chance to end years of stagnation and to get the country
back on track towards the brighter future we all want
for its people. However, we need to recognize that there
are no guaranteed outcomes. Is there an alternative? Of
course there is. That alternative is to continue doing
what we have seen over and over again. The alternative
for the country's politicians is to continue practicing the
politics of the past that have been driving the country
ever deeper into crisis at the expense of all its citizens,
especially the young.

I must be frank - there are some politicians
who may be tempted to follow this negative and
dangerous path. As I have made clear in my report
(S/2015/300, annex), there have also been negative
developments over the past six months that include
direct challenges to the Peace Agreement. Ofparticular
concern is the declaration adopted by the National
Assembly of the Republika Srpska on 17 April, which
directly challenges the authority of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court. A second example
is the declaration of the ruling party in the Republika
Srpska of 25 April. While it is only a party document
that has no official value, I am nevertheless concerned
by its threat to hold an independence referendum in
Republika Srpska in 2018. The problem has a name - it
is "referendum" - and it has a date: 2018. As I have
made clear repeatedly, the Peace Agreement does not
grant the entities the right to secede, and any attempt to
change the Peace Agreement requires the agreement of
all the parties.

A week after I submitted my report, Bosnia and
Herzegovina was rocked by a shocking incident, when
a lone attacker killed one police officer and injured
two others at a police station. I take this opportunity to
again offer my condolences to the family of the police
officer who lost his life in the line of duty. I also wish
a speedy recovery to the two injured police officers.
The response of the authorities was swift, and it will be
important for us to see ever-closer cooperation between
authorities at all levels, inside the country and in the
region, in tackling a wide range of law enforcement
challenges facing the country, including the ongoing
fight against terrorism, which as we know is a global
change.

To conclude my remarks today, an opportunity is on
the table from the EU that offers the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina a chance to ensure a prosperous and
dignified life for themselves and their children. This is
the time for the country's politicians to decisively look
to the future in the interests of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, especially the young. This is the moment
when the country needs to finally say farewell to the
politics of the past and to decisively commit to a new
way of doing politics that puts the interests of citizens
firmly in first place. This is truly the time for Bosnia
and Herzegovina to come together and to work as one.

I very much hope that the visit of the Pope to
Sarajevo in June Will help to foster a sense of unity in
the country. I cannot stress strongly enough that this
opportunity must be taken. If we see hard work and
results in the weeks and months ahead, then we will be
able to look forward with real optimism when we come
together to mark the twentieth anniversary of the Peace
Agreement in November. There are politicians and
people in Bosnia and Herzegovina who want to work
together in good faith to take the country forward. They
must have our full and proactive support in the months
ahead.

The drawing of borders in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is behind us. Division and secession are failed strategies
that were defeated 20 years ago. Their place is in the
history books; God forbid that anyone should seek to
reactivate these dangerous strategies. If they do, they
will need to be dealt with firmly and decisively. In this
respect, I will continue to take my responsibilities under
the Peace Agreement with the utmost seriousness.

As more and more people in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the region and indeed beyond now
fully understand, the future of that part of Europe is
reintegration from within and integration with the
wider continent. This is the era not of division, but
of renewed bridge-building. The expanding force of
forward-looking people in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is growing stronger by the day, and what a positive
force it is as it crosses ethnic and religious lines and
re-energizes the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
work together to build a better tomorrow. As an aside, I
should like to inform the Council that two Muslims are
currently building and renovating a Catholic Church in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Such interreligious dialogue
for a better tomorrow is also a fact that we should not
forget.

We, the international community, are dutybound
to recognize the importance of this moment. We must
do all we can to help the forces of positive change in
the country to reach their surge capacity. I must add,
however, that the international community's support for
the Office of the High Representative is in fact waning,
and it is becoming increasingly difficult for me to fulfil
my mandate. Now is not the time for us to lose focus or
resolve, and I ask for the Council's full support as we
help Bosnia and Herzegovina to move along the path
towards the EU.

Let us do all we can in the next six months to help
these peoples to seize the opportunity the country has
been given by the EU so that 2015 is remembered as
the year Bosnia and Herzegovina turned decisively to
the future. I hope that this is what we will achieve so
that we can mark the twentieth anniversary of the Peace
Agreement with a sense of genuine optimism about the
future. This is what I hope to report to the Council
when I return in November, six months from now.

