The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Brou
for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of cote d'Ivoire.

It is a great honour and privilege for me to preside
over today's Security Council meeting following that
of yesterday, which was presided over by Mr. Alassane
Ouattara, President of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire (see S/PV.8413). I would like to thank Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres, who honours Cote d'Ivoire with his
presence on two successive days - at yesterday's high-
level debate and again today. I congratulate him on the
quality ofhis briefing. I would also like to thank my two
brothers Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, and Mr. Jean-Claude Kassi
Brou, President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States, who, after being
present yesterday, honour us with their presence today.
I congratulate them on their valuable contributions to
today's debate. I would like to extend a warm welcome
to all the eminent persons who have kindly accepted
our invitation, honouring us with their presence at this
meeting on a topic that we hold dear, namely, the role of
States, regional arrangements and the United Nations
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.

The increasing number and continuance ofconflicts
in the world, which are testing the United Nations peace
architecture, as well as the various crisis prevention and
resolution mechanisms, continue to represent significant
challenges and sources for collective reflection for the
Council and the international community.

Given the complexity of the situation, it is
increasingly necessary to adopt innovative and
inclusive approaches that go off the beaten path and
to call for common action and the greater involvement
of all national, subregional, regional and international
stakeholders in the prevention and management of
conflicts.

In this globalized world, where no organization
alone can shoulder the responsibility for managing the
threats to collective security, strengthening cooperation
and coordination among national actors, subregional
and regional organizations and the United Nations is
imperative.

In our view, the pursuit of a more inclusive approach
of all actors, taking into account a clear definition of
responsibilities, remains the most effective way to
ensure the prevention and management of the conflicts
that are at the heart of the agenda of the Security
Council and underpin its existence.

Conflict prevention and management, which
are increasingly multifaceted, necessarily require
a common strategy, accepted by all, with national
ownership and clear priorities, to which the United
Nations, the international community and national
partners should devote sufficient resources. The case
of my country is a perfect illustration of that.

States of course have the primary responsibility for
detecting and eliminating the structural and cyclical
factors conducive to the outbreak of crises, in particular
by reducing inequalities, promoting the rule of law and
good governance, facilitating access to employment
for young people and ensuring political support for
resource mobilization, both human and material.

After more than a decade of crisis, C6te d'lvoire,
which very early on realized the stakes of restoring
stability, has resolutely embarked on the path of
peace-building thanks to the excellent cooperation
between the Ivorian Government and the United
Nations through the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI).

The combined national and international
efforts resulted in establishing, in the context of
the Peacebuilding Fund, a joint plan, called the
Peacebuilding Priority Plans for 2011-2014 and 2015-
2017. It has $30 million and has supported local efforts
in the areas of governance, preserving the social
climate, normalizing political life and ensuring the
security of people and property.

Consequently, the Ivorian Government, with the
assistance of its partners, has managed to restore State
authority and security throughout the national territory,
accelerate and make national reconciliation and social
cohesion irreversible, successfully implement the DDR
and security sector reform programmes, and promote
the rule of law and human rights.

Since the departure of UNOCI in June 2017, the
Government has capitalized on all those achievements
and continues that worthy course with the support of
the United Nations country team.

The support of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) to the national development plan
2016-2020 is eloquent testimony to that. Those actions
have allowed us to preserve the State and its institutions
and to organize national and local elections in peace,
security and stability, which has greatly contributed
to the current economic growth in Cote d'lvoire. The
Ivorian experience in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, must therefore be pursued and shared.

In recent years, there have been major
developments in conflict prevention, management and
resolution in Africa. They are particularly marked by
shared responsibilities and the primacy of regional
and subregional actors in the conduct of the earliest
peace initiatives after the outbreak of conflict, in
accordance with the principle of subsidiarity. It is in
the name of that principle that ECOWAS is playing an
increasingly decisive and leading role in the settlement
of conflicts in our region. Thus, in my country, for
example, negotiations conducted by Senegal, in its
former capacity as Chairperson of ECOWAS, led to
the first ceasefire agreement with the Ivorian rebels in
October 2002 in Bouake. In addition, in the framework
of ECOWAS mechanisms, Togo hosted the first
inter-Ivorian negotiations from October to December
2002, which had the merit of establishing the bases ofa
political solution to the conflict.

I also welcome the mediation of other friendly
countries, such as Ghana and South Africa, under
whose auspices several agreements were signed
between the Ivorian warring parties. The African Union
and then the United Nations subsequently took over
from ECOWAS in the conduct of political and military
processes. Finally, Burkina Faso played a decisive role
in organizing the October 2010 presidential elections in
my country.

In Mali in 2012, the resolve of President Alassane
Ouattara, who was Chairperson ofECOWAS at the time,
and the mobilization of his peers enabled the return to
constitutional order in the country after the putsch led by
Captain Sanogo. That regional commitment also helped
to mobilize the international community, particularly
France, whose military intervention prevented terrorist
groups from the north of the country from seizing
Bamako. I thank the French authorities for the action
being taken by the French army in the Sahel against
the terrorist groups that threaten our common security
in West Africa. In all these situations, the African
Union, followed by the United Nations, took over from
ECOWAS on the political and security levels. It is clear
from all this that the State's close cooperation with
subregional and regional organizations and the United
Nations is an undeniable asset for crisis prevention and
management.

In that sense, the strategic partnership between
regional organizations and the United Nations, pursuant
to Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
must be more closely oriented towards action and
results, shared responsibility, the spirit of cooperation
and enhanced coordination. In that regard, the African
Union, through its regional conflict prevention and
management mechanisms, has established itself today
as an essential and credible partner of the United
Nations. To that end, the signing on 19 April 2017 by the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission of the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security, is the expression of the strategic
commitment of these two organizations to address
threats to peace and security on the continent.

Today, the political and military mechanisms
deployed by subregional and regional organizations
in the context of conflict prevention and resolution,
which have already proved their effectiveness,
deserve to be strengthened so as to be more effective.
Peacekeeping, an essential tool of the United Nations
for promoting and ensuring international peace and
security, faces many challenges that significantly affect
its effectiveness. The extent of the challenges facing
our world calls for diligent action on our part, which
highlights the important of the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which my country
fully endorses.

It is important to recall that some of the major
obstacles to the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations
include the way host countries and populations perceive
those missions, vague mandates and the inadequacy
of the human and logistical resources available.
It should be noted that peacekeeping operations
with clear, precise and objective mandates support
national political processes. cote d'Ivoire supports the
Secretary-General's vision of peacekeeping, which is
first and foremost one of collective responsibility. There
is therefore a need to act together to address, through
peacekeeping operations, contemporary challenges to
peace and security. Moreover, strengthening the troop
capacities and taking account of the gender dimension
in peacekeeping operations could play a decisive role in
the effective implementation of their mandates.

International security remains inextricably linked
to peace and security in Africa - a continent where
complex and multifaceted security challenges, as
well as the perpetuation of conflicts, undermine the
foundations of stability and development.

In regard to funding at the African level,
Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the fact that, in 2017, the
African Union Peace Fund received the highest
level of contributions from member States since its
establishment in 1993. In that regard, it is important to
note once again that only solidarity between the United
Nations and the African Union will make it possible
to consider appropriate and lasting solutions in the
framework of a common vision for the maintenance of
peace and security in Africa. That highlights the need
for close cooperation between those two organizations,
which deserves to be encouraged and strengthened,
particularly with respect to the crucial issue of
financing African peace operations. In that regard, my
country welcomes the gradual evolution of approaches
with a view to improving the financing of peace support
operations in Africa, and that this step is an essential
link in the process of stabilizing the continent.

Indeed, resolution 2320 (2016) marked a major
step in the United Nation's commitment to African
Union peacekeeping operations by demonstrating the
Council's readiness to consider funding proposals, in
accordance, inter alia, with international obligations
applicable to the principles of accountability and
transparency, to which African Union peace support
operations are subject. In that regard, resolution 2378
(2017) is also an important step in the right direction,
expressing the Security Council's intention to consider
the practical arrangements and conditions necessary for
the establishment of a mechanism whereby authorized
African operations, pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
could be financed on a case-by-case basis.

My country is of the view that measures should
therefore be taken on the basis of bolder commitments,
particularly aimed at the establishment of flexible,
predictable and sustainable financing based on
assessed contributions. Cote d'Ivoire therefore invites
all stakeholders to take a further step towards finding
lasting and solutions that are essential to the effective
functioning of African Union peace support operations.

In any case, it is in the context of a united effort
and the genuine involvement of all its actors that the
international community will succeed in strengthening
conflict resolution and prevention mechanisms, which
can make an effective contribution to international
peace and security. cote d'Ivoire intends to play its
full part in that regard and hopes that its experience in
emerging from crisis, which it is eager to share, will
contribute to achieving these objectives for the well-
being of the peoples and development of Africa.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council who wish to make statements.

