Mr. Sadeghi (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to join other speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on
your able stewardship of the Council's work this month
and in thanking you for having convened this open
debate in order to address the grave situation in the
Middle East and the unspeakable plight of the
Palestinian people. I also avail myself of this
opportunity to thank Mr. Pascoe, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for briefing the Security
Council on the subject matter before us today.

In the period under review, as on every other day
in the past six decades, the Palestinian people were
subjected to the daily brutalities of the Israeli regime,
which has continued to systematically violate the
Palestinians' most basic, legitimate and inalienable
rights. While the Israeli regime hypocritically speaks
of peace, in practice it has persisted in and even
increased its abhorrent crimes against the innocent
Palestinians and others in the region. As realities on the
ground abundantly suggest, its systematic pattern of
human rights violations and massive breaches of
international law and international humanitarian law
have continued unabated.

The continuation of military operations against
Palestinian civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territories, particularly the most recent inhumane and
criminal Israeli acts against schools, medical centres
and other civilian institutions in the West Bank, and the
imposition of a humanitarian crisis on the entire
population of the Gaza Strip through closures and
restrictions on movement and access of persons and
goods, even humanitarian and medical necessities,
have once again highlighted the gross violation of the
most basic human rights and the fundamental
principles of international law by the Israeli regime.
During the period under review and as a consequence
of the Israeli military campaign, the human and
material losses inflicted on the Palestinian people
continued to rise. A case in point is the continuation of
the brutal blockade of the Gaza Strip that has made the
lives of the innocent Palestinians living there
unbearable.

Four years have passed since the International
Court of Justice rendered its Advisory Opinion on the

legal consequences of the construction of the illegal
separation wall in the Palestinian territories. The
construction of the unlawful separation wall is not only
an illegal act with dire consequences for the Palestinian
people, but is also a clear indication of the aggressive,
racist and expansionist policies adopted and pursued by
the Israeli regime. Despite the unambiguous opposition
of the international community to the construction of
the illegal wall, the Israeli regime has continued and
even expanded the construction of the wall with full
impunity. It has indeed added to the suffering and
difficult plight of the Palestinian people, who, at the
same time, have been suffering and continue to suffer
from other Israeli atrocities, such as appalling
massacres, extrajudicial killings, home demolitions and
other atrocious crimes.

Instead of heeding the international community's
calls to terminate such illegal acts, the said regime has
continued the construction of the wall, entailing, inter
alia, violations of the freedom of movement of the
Palestinian people and of their rights to work, worship,
health care, education and adequate living standards. It
has also forced the eviction of Palestinian civilians
from their homes and lands, which has in turn shattered
many families.

The international community must hold the
Israeli regime accountable for its illegal and criminal
actions in the occupied Palestinian territories. As the
International Court of Justice also demanded in its
Advisory Opinion, that regime must terminate its
breaches of international law, cease forthwith the
construction of the wall, immediately dismantle the
structure, repeal and render ineffective forthwith all
legislative and regulatory acts relating thereto, and
make reparations for all the damages that the apartheid
wall has caused.

In violation of numerous United Nations
resolutions and despite repeated calls made by various
United Nations organs and agencies, the construction
of illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories has continued and expanded. That serves as
yet another indication that the Israeli regime's words
about peace with the Palestinians are deceitful and of
no validity. It was unfortunate that certain members
permanently seated in the Security Council, by
threatening to use their veto, did not allow to proceed
the initiative of the Arab Group to submit a draft
resolution to the Council condemning that illegal act.
The Council should fulfil its Charter-based mandate by
taking action against the Israeli regime to compel it
immediately to cease all its settlement activities and to
dismantle the settlement outposts.

We commend the people of Lebanon for their
efforts to bring about national unity and reconciliation.
We welcome the election of Mr. Michel Sleiman as
President of Lebanon and the formation of a national
unity Government. Together with others in the region,
we have spared no efforts to encourage all the
Lebanese and to help them make these remarkable
achievements possible.

While the Israeli war machine is relentlessly at
work shattering the lives and livelihoods of
Palestinians, the Israeli regime persists in its
aggressive policies towards Lebanon - and against
others in the region too. It continues to occupy the
Syrian Golan Heights and parts of Lebanese territory.
That regime is also violating Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006), particularly through violations
of Lebanese airspace. According to paragraph 10 of the
most recent report of the Secretary General on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2008/425), Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace
have increased to an "unprecedented" level. This is
another example of the Israeli regime's contempt for
the Security Council and for its decisions.

The Security Council, as the organ of the United
Nations with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, should
live up to its responsibilities by preventing the Israeli
regime from continuing to commit these atrocities and
flout the will of the international community, as
embodied in numerous United Nations resolutions.
Regrettably, the Council has thus far failed to take any
serious and tangible action in this regard due to the
unconditional support extended to the Israeli regime by
a permanent member of the Council. That support
cannot but be regarded as explicit support for the war
crimes and unlawful activities persistently pursued by
the Israeli regime.

The representative of the Israeli regime made
some baseless and unworthy allegations and distortions
against my country during today's meeting. I wish to
place on record that my delegation rejects those absurd
allegations and distortions. No one needs to be
reminded that these are tired and well-known practices
by that regime and its representatives, intended to
distract the international community's attention from

08-4336]
the horrendous crimes committed by the Israeli regime
on a daily basis against the people under its
occupation. Nor does anyone need to be reminded -
including, let there be no illusion, the representative of
the Israeli regime as well - that that regime has
inflicted upon mankind only bloodshed, State
terrorism, aggression, occupation and crimes against
humanity. There is no doubt that the regime's wicked
behaviour and policies, coupled with its clandestine
nuclear arsenal, have made it the most serious and
immediate threat that the civilized world is facing
today.

Before concluding, I wish to draw attention to the
issue of the Iranian diplomats and the Iranian journalist
who were abducted 26 years ago this month by an
Israeli-sponsored paramilitary group in Lebanon during
the Israeli occupation of that country. As we have
already communicated through the Secretary-General,
on 5 July 1982, during the invasion of Lebanon and the
occupation of Beirut by the Israeli regime, three
members of the staff of the embassy of the Islamic
Republic of Iran in Beirut, as well as an Iranian
journalist, were abducted in Lebanon while returning
in a diplomatic vehicle from Syria to the embassy of
08-43361
the Islamic Republic of Iran in west Beirut. There are
various news reports and numerous signs indicating
clearly that those Iranian officials were immediately
handed over to the Israeli military forces after their
abduction, as Beirut was occupied by the Israeli forces
at the time. The reports further indicate that the
abducted Iranian officials were subsequently taken to
Israeli prisons and since then have been held in
captivity by the Israeli regime. This illegal and
inhumane act runs against the most fundamental
international rules and principles, and also contravenes
numerous United Nations resolutions.

The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran
is of the strong view that the Israeli regime is
responsible for those abductions and for the fate of the
Iranian diplomats and the journalist. We call on the
Security Council to take appropriate action to help
secure their release and their safe return home many
years after their illegal abduction and detention.

