Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I join others
in welcoming Foreign Minister Zebari and his team
here today for the adoption of this important
resolution. I would just like to highlight three points in
that respect.

First, I would like to welcome the fact that a
Chapter VII United Nations mandate is no longer
needed for international forces in Iraq. As my Prime
Minister announced last week, subject to the
completion of procedures in the Iraqi Parliament, the
United Kingdom forces will complete their tasks in the
first five months of 2009 and will proceed thereafter to
Withdraw. This ability of my Government to complete
its tasks in Iraq is an important sign of the progress that
has been made in Iraq over the past five years.

Secondly, we welcome the continuation of the
arrangements for the Development Fund for Iraq as the
vehicle for allocating Iraq's oil revenues and the
extension of the special arrangements for that Fund,
given the need for particular protections, as set out by
Mr. Zebari.

Thirdly, an important decision in the resolution is
the one to review the Saddam-era resolutions
pertaining to Iraq. This will be the priority for the
Council in 2009. These resolutions were introduced in
entirely different circumstances, as a consequence of
Saddam Hussein's actions and the need to protect
Iraq's neighbours. It is right that we now overhaul their
provisions with a View to their termination as soon as
is feasible.

Lastly, as this is the last scheduled meeting of the
Council in 2008, it is not only Iraq's liberation that we
are marking today. I would like take the opportunity to
thank our colleagues from Belgium, Indonesia, Italy,
Panama and South Africa for their outstanding
contributions to the Security Council's work. I hope
that they enjoy their liberation from the responsibility

of Security Council membership and find a useful new
life in the other agencies of the United Nations. We
look forward to their continued participation in our
deliberations as non-members.

