Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation welcomes you, Mr. President, and
thanks the leadership of the Republic of Poland for
having organized and convened this meeting on such
a critical theme. We also thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his briefing, as well as the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Mr. Yves Daccord, and Ms. Hanaa Edwar,
Secretary-General of the Iraqi Al-Amal Association,
for their respective briefings and for attending
today's meeting.

Armed conflicts severely affect civilians, who are
at the mercy of the indiscriminate use of weapons of
all types, both in rural areas and in densely population
urban zones. In many circumstances they are seen as
military targets. According to the Secretary-General's
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2018/462), more than 50 million people in urban
zones are currently affected by armed conflicts. The
use of explosives caused the deaths ofmore than 42,000
people in 2017, of which 31,904 were civilians.

In addition to injuring and killing people, armed
conflicts have other consequences for the civilian
population, including forced displacement and sexual
violence. With regard to displacement, as the Secretary-
General's report describes so well, that was one of the
characteristics of conflict in 2017. It is worth noting
that an alarming number of 65 million people were
forcibly displaced in 2016 alone. We also condemn
and deplore the confirmed increase in cases of sexual
violence in 2017.

Children are the most vulnerable segment of
the population in all those situations. They are
disproportionately affected by armed conflicts and their
consequences, whether sexual violence, abduction,
recruitment or forced displacement. Therefore, Bolivia
emphatically condemns any kind of violence, attack
or threat against the civilian population or against
hospitals, schools, health-care facilities, infrastructure
for water and energy supply, and humanitarian
personnel, including doctors who risk their lives to help
the civilian population embroiled in armed conflict.

As we have said, armed conflict disproportionately
affects the civilian population. In the case of Yemen,
according to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), more than 22 million
of the 27 million inhabitants will require some form
of humanitarian assistance in 2018 i 1 million more
than the previous year - of which 7.5 million will need
nutritional support, including 1.8 millions boys and
girls. In Palestine, again according to OCHA, 73 people
were reported dead and 8,154 injured in the course of
2017, both in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. In
addition, in the past seven weeks and since the start of
the Great March of Return, more than 100 deaths have
been reported, among them 13 children - more than
half of whom died just on 14 May. Regarding Libya,
according to data from the International Organization
for Migration, in 2017 at least 2,824 Libyan citizens
died or disappeared in the Mediterranean Sea in their
attempt to flee the conflict in that country.

Those are only some data that reflect the negative
effect of armed conflict on the civilian population.
In that regard, and to address that regrettable
scenario, concrete initiatives have been taken, such
as resolution 2286 (2016), which seeks to protect
the civilian population and humanitarian personnel
during armed conflicts and to guarantee their fully
secure deployment, as well as ensure the protection
of civilian infrastructure, among other things. In
addition, the Agenda for Humanity, proposed by the
United Nations, encompasses five points on which
the international community must work in order to
alleviate humanitarian suffering and mitigate the risk
and vulnerability of the civilian population. It should
be noted that the agenda includes conflict prevention,
respect for international humanitarian law and work
with the most vulnerable populations. Moreover, the
Health Care in Danger initiative, launched in 2011 by
the International Committee of the Red Cross, aims at
addressing the problem of violence against patients,
health workers, facilities and vehicles, to strengthen
safe access to health care and to provide health care in
armed conflicts and other emergency situations.

Despite those initiatives, we believe that the
disproportionate impact of armed conflicts flows from
a failure to implement international law, including
international humanitarian law, and the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
It should be recalled that international humanitarian
law and its principles of impartiality, neutrality,
humanity and independence were developed precisely
in response to violence in armed conflict, and must be
observed regardless of political or military disputes. It
is important to mention that some of those acts may
be considered war crimes or crimes against humanity,
and are therefore subject to prosecution before the
International Criminal Court. We call on all States to
ratify the Rome Statute to ensure its universality and
put an end to impunity.
We welcome the decision of the Palestinian
Authority to request the International Criminal Court
to investigate possible war crimes committed by
Israel, the occupying Power, in occupied Palestinian
territories, including the Gaza Strip. We also encourage
all States to ratify the 1949 Geneva Conventions and the
Additional Protocols of 1977 and 2005, so as to facilitate
humanitarian assistance and unrestricted access.

Our approach to armed conflict should be focused
on preventive action - including identifying potential
conflicts and threats to civilians - since the most
effective way to protect civilians is to prevent the
outbreak, escalation, continuation and the resumption
of armed conflicts. Bolivia therefore advocates the
use of peaceful means for the settlement of disputes
established by Charter of the United Nations, such as
negotiation, mediation, conciliation, prevention and
legal settlements for the peaceful resolution of disputes.

Finally, as Mr. Daccord and Ms. Edwar are at this
meeting, Bolivia would like to pay heartfelt tribute to
humanitarian workers, who often put their own lives
at risk or make the ultimate sacrifice, for their tireless
efforts to prevent or mitigate attacks on civilians in
armed conflict.

