Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): The
delegation of France wishes to welcome your presence here
today, Sir, to preside over this formal meeting of the
Security Council. I wish to thank you for having reflected
the views of the members of the Security Council in
expressing our condolences to the families of those
members of the World Food Programme who gave their
lives in the service of the United Nations in Kosovo. This
is a sad but real reminder of the price that is paid by the
international community and by the United Nations to
continue to contribute to the restoration of peace and
stability in the Balkans. That is why, as we speak of Bosnia
and Herzegovina today, the example of Kosovo and the
problems which we are confronting must remain ever
present in our minds.

The presence of the co-Presidents here in the Security
Council Chamber today is, as Ambassador Holbrooke just
stated, historic in nature and of great symbolic value, four
years after the Dayton/Paris Agreement, which put an end
to the conflict in their country. That agreement created a
common State in which the ethnic rivalries that ravaged
Bosnia and Herzegovina could be overcome and in which
the various authorities could at last work together to
reconstruct a Bosnia and Herzegovina capable of resuming
fully its place within the European nations. It is therefore
particularly auspicious that four years after the Dayton/Paris
Agreement, one of the principal architects of that
Agreement is here to welcome the Members of the
Presidency. He will have recognized himself in that
description.
I might recall also that the three Members of the
Presidency were all elected. It is good that some of the
delegations welcoming them to the Security Council
Chamber include parliamentary and other national
representatives. Their presence here also bears witness to
the importance that they attach to the work of the United
Nations and in particular to the role of the Security
Council. The Security Council is here to ensure respect
for the values that guided the actions of Member States
throughout the quest for a lasting peace. Rejection of
ethnic and religious hatred, respect for others and the
primacy of law were the values for which the States
members of the Security Council sought to ensure respect
when, over the years, they pursued the work that led to
the Dayton Accord and the Paris Conference.

The progress achieved since then demonstrates that
our objective of achieving peace in a united, multi-ethnic
and democratic Bosnia and Herzegovina is within reach.
But we all know that a great deal remains to be done.
Examples of issues that must be dealt with have just been
given by Ambassador Holbrooke. We all know that much
remains to be accomplished before the common
institutions can begin to function on a daily basis and
reinforce the union of the peoples that make up the
country. The collegial Presidency is at the centre of the
common institutions that must guide Bosnia and
Herzegovina towards that future of unity and stability.
That central role confers privileges; the collegial
Presidency represents Bosnia and Herzegovina in
international organizations and institutions, and it is in
that context that its Members are here in the Security
Council today.

But those privileges go hand in hand with equally
important duties. On 8 November, the High
Representative, Ambassador Petritsch, reminded us of the
importance of those duties, and hence of the need for the
leaders and the entire population of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take charge of the future of their country.
International support is necessary, but it cannot be
maintained indefinitely at the current level. Increasingly,
Bosnia and Herzegovina will have to rely on its own
resources in order to carry out successfully the needed
reforms. But the co-Presidents have the necessary political
and moral authority to encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina
to move in that direction.

With the assistance of the High Representative, the
Presidency has undertaken commitments that have already
been acknowledged by the Security Council, and it was
a pleasure for us to hear them recalled by the Presidency
today. They include a commitment to work unequivocally
for the united State of Bosnia and Herzegovina and for
the common institutions on which it is based; a
commitment to increase the economic prosperity of the
country, which will require the establishment of a
legislative and fiscal framework to promote investment
and local economic activity; a commitment to promote the

 

development of a common educational system that respects
the cultures of all the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina;
and a commitment to promote the return of refugees and
displaced persons. The High Representative reminded us
that at the current rate, the return process will take at least
22 years in the Federation and 40 years in the Republika
Srpska. The reform of the property law must be carried out
in order to facilitate these returns. There is also a
commitment to reduce military expenditure, which is clearly
compatible with a future of peace and economic prosperity.

However, these commitments, on which the High
Representative worked energetically with the Presidency, do
not suffice. The establishment of a unified State means
creating the instruments of its sovereignty. On 24 June last,
the three Members of the Presidency recognized the need
to create a border service, and the Office of the High
Representative worked in the country to develop that
project. We are pleased to note today that the co- Presidents
have taken the opportunity offered by this historic visit to
the United Nations to give concrete form to the
implementation of shared institutions: the New York
Declaration, which the Presidency adopted yesterday
evening - following the work of one of the essential
architects of the Dayton Accords, to whom, as I said
earlier, I believe tribute should be paid - enshrines the
establishment of those border services. In other words, it is
an instrument of the sovereignty of a single State.

The Presidency has also announced the establishment
of a permanent secretariat, a matter about which we
exchanged some ideas with the High Representative a few
days ago. It goes without saying that if the Presidency is to
be an effective instrument, it must have at its disposal a
high-quality, professional administrative service, and it was
therefore necessary for a permanent secretariat to be
established; hence the decision that was taken last night, for
which we commend the Presidency. In the context of the
common instruments of sovereignty, the Presidency also
concluded an agreement on the establishment of a national
passport. It will also be necessary to finalize the draft
electoral law.

A series of concrete decisions have thus been made
that reflect the will of the Presidency to overcome the
difficulties with which we have become only too familiar
over the years with regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina and
to move genuinely towards the establishment of a common
State, with viable common institutions represented not just
in words but in deeds.

This meeting could have been a merely symbolic
and historic gathering - which would have been
completely justifiable - to mark the fourth anniversary
of the conclusion of the Dayton/Paris Agreement. But
you, the Members of the Presidency, wanted to do better
in coming here to New York. As I have said, that reflects
your commitment not only to the ideals of the Charter but
also to the role of the United Nations and, in particular,
that of the Security Council.

It is an important sign at a time when that role is
sometimes called into question. That is why it is so
important, gentlemen, that you are here in this Chamber
today - along, as I said, with some of the other principal
architects of the peace agreement. By coming here, you
have lived up to these ideals and to the expectations of
the Security Council. In this way you have taken an
essential step, moving beyond mere commitments to
conclude agreements that relate directly to affirming the
common nature of your institutions and the unified nature
and sovereignty of your State. That is the best service you
can render to peace, to your country and to the United
Nations.

