Mr. Plasai (Thailand): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the States members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN): Brunei Darussalam,
Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines,
Singapore, Viet Nam and my country, Thailand. I
wish to express ASEAN's appreciation to the Japanese
presidency for convening today's open debate and to
all the briefers for their respective remarks. ASEAN
also welcomes the Security Council's adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/12 on this issue.

The review of the peacebuilding architecture called
for a move away from the post-conflict peacebuilding
mindset, and urged us to view peacebuilding more
holistically as part of the peace continuum that spans
from conflict prevention and resolution to laying down
the foundations of sustainable peace. This is in line
with ASEAN'S comprehensive approach to peace and
security. If peace is to take root and grow strong, a
country must have the means and mechanisms to sustain
and build upon the efforts invested by the international
community. In this regard, the presidency's concept
note (S/2016/586, annex) rightly stresses the importance
of institution- and capacity-building in order to build a
peaceful and resilient society.

Today's focus on Africa is of particular relevance
for the Security Council. While some African countries
that used to be on the Council's agenda have attained
peace and stability, a fair number are still grappling
with conflicts and holding on to a fragile peace. As
our contribution, we wish to underline the following
considerations.

The first concerns national ownership. One of
the underlying causes of conflict and instability is
exclusion from political and decision-making processes.
Inclusive national ownership is therefore a prerequisite
for successful peacebuilding. This must begin with
genuine dialogue among all stakeholders, including
women and young people. This process is necessary to
instil a sense of ownership in State institutions, as well
as to restoring legitimacy and trust in them.

The second concerns partnership. ASEAN supports
a greater role for Africa in addressing African problems.
There is vast experience and knowledge in the field
of peacebuilding within the region. In particular, we
echo the recognition by the Council and the General
Assembly in their respective resolutions on the review
of the peacebuilding architecture of the prominent role
of the African Union in this regard. It is commendable
that peacebuilding is one of the key priorities in the
African Peace and Security Architecture Roadmap
2016-2020. We also encourage enhanced exchanges of
view and dialogue between the African Union and the
Security Council, as well as other United Nations bodies
involved in peacebuilding, in order to achieve synergy
and ensure complementarity. In addition, the experience
within our region has shown that partnership with civil
society can contribute to addressing peacebuilding
challenges, especially in the field of development. We
believe that enhanced partnership with African civil
society can produce the same positive impact.

Finally, I turn to sustained support. We wish to
touch on two particular aspects. Peacebuilding requires
adequate and predictable funding, yet the Peacebuilding
Fund, which has supported numerous catalytic projects
around the world, continues to face financial shortfalls.
Access to assessed contributions for the Fund should
be considered. We must also look for alternative means
to fund peacebuilding activities in Africa. Partnership
with the private sector, international financial
institutions and regional development banks should be
seriously explored. On our part, ASEAN countries have
provided technical cooperation to countries in Africa
through various development cooperation programmes.
We encourage deepening and enhancing South-South
cooperation in the field of peacebuilding.

The valuable contribution of ASEAN countries
to peacekeeping operations and special political
missions to peacebuilding is well-recognized. Over
1,000 personnel from ASEAN countries are deployed
in support of United Nations missions in Africa, such
as the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
where justice and security institution-building is
among the priority tasks. In order to ensure coherence
and continuity, as well as preserve peacebuilding gains,
careful mission transition planning and post-mission
United Nations support should be in place from an
early stage. The involvement of United Nations country
teams and the United Nations development system is
also crucial to that end.

I would like to conclude my remarks by reiterating
ASEAN's commitment to peacebuilding in Africa. We
cannot wait until the guns fall silent. Peacebuilding
work must begin now. ASEAN members stand ready to
lend our support and cooperation to the Council and to
our friends in Africa in build resilient and prosperous
societies.

