Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Tunisia takes note of the reports of the
Secretary-General and of the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We thank them for their efforts and for the
excellent quality of the documents before us. The reports
refer to significant progress in the implementation of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH). Despite obstructionist
manoeuvring and delays in the complete implementation of
the mandate, the situation has continued slowly but surely
to evolve.

Let me make some comments on the two reports. It
deserves to be noted with satisfaction that municipal
elections under the rules of the Provisional Election
Commission took place in April without major incident.
The notable success of multi-ethnic parties shows, in our
view, that ethnic parity is gaining ground.

Tunisia welcomes the steps taken by UNMIBH in
police restructuring, including through the creation of the
Law Enforcement Personnel Registry and of the
inter-entity Ministerial Consultative Meeting on Police
Matters, and through the integration of specialized police
forces. All these important reforms will change the ethnic
composition of the entire police force and will help
strengthen integration. Such steps are particularly crucial
because they will help strengthen national identity, which
is the only way to mobilize parties around a common
goal.

My country is particularly interested in the way in
which the judicial system is developing. The international
community must support UNMIBH efforts to ensure the
success of the judicial reform that is under way. Here,
impartial and trustworthy justice will be of particular
importance in consolidating a State based on the rule of
law and in rejecting a culture of impunity.

We note that despite encouraging progress the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains precarious.
Questions of the return of refugees and displaced persons
and of the lack of security are reasons for concern,
requiring firm commitment on the part of the international
community. In that connection, we note the activities of
United Nations bodies in various spheres.
I welcome the initiative to set up a Bosnia and
Herzegovina police contingent for a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. The psychological importance of
this contribution, with its powerful symbolic potential,
cannot fail to benefit the image of a Bosnia and
Herzegovina that is multi-ethnic and prosperous, and by
extension that of the entire Balkan region.

Clearly, the commitment of the international
community, the international financial institutions and the
donors is a priority to which due attention should be
given. There is no doubt that lasting peace can be
established only if it has an equally lasting economic and
social basis.

