Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Africa would
like to express its appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for presiding over this timely and relevant briefing
on supporting the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) only a few weeks before
the start of the third session of the Preparatory
Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
on 29 April. Likewise, we thank the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), Mr. Amano, and the High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Nakamitsu, for their
detailed and insightful briefings.

We thank the Foreign Ministers of Germany,
Indonesia, Poland, France and Kuwait for their inputs
and welcome the United States Under Secretary of
State for Arms Control and International Security,
Ms. Thompson.

Allow me to reiterate South Africa's commitment
to the attainment of a world free of nuclear weapons.
In this context, I reaffirm my country's commitment to
the NPT as the cornerstone of the nuclear-disarmament
and nuclear non-proliferation regime, which are two
sides of the same coin.

It is undeniable that the NPT plays a critical role
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
The three broad objectives of the NPT, namely, nuclear
disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, are inextricably linked
and mutually reinforcing. Therefore, in our View, efforts
to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons should
be matched by an equal commitment by the nuclear-
weapon States to eliminate all nuclear weapons in a
verifiable and irreversible manner. As such, the support
of the Council for the full and balanced implementation
of all the objectives of the NPT is paramount.

Regrettably, we remain disheartened at the
apparent lack of urgency and seriousness with which
nuclear disarmament has been approached in the NPT
context. This state of affairs places the Treaty, as well
as its review process, under increasing pressure and
falls far short of expectations. Nor have the continued
reliance on nuclear weapons in security doctrines, the
development of new types of nuclear weapons and
qualitative improvements to existing arsenals allayed
the fears of non-nuclear-weapon States.

Almost 50 years since the entry into force of the
NPT, we cannot be complacent about the continued
threat posed by nuclear weapons and the lack of
implementation of the disarmament obligations
flowing from article VI. We must respect the Treaty
and the outcomes of its Review Conferences in order to
maintain its continued longevity. Measurable progress,
in particular on nuclear disarmament, must therefore
be a major determinant in achieving and sustaining
international peace and security.

With this in mind, South Africa believes that
the 2019 Preparatory Committee should respect
the agreements arrived at in 1995, 2000 and 2010 in
order to strengthen global security. The 2020 Review
Conference should likewise not roll back or reinterpret
previously agreed commitments, which constitute the
current nuclear-disarmament benchmarks. While we are
aware that some States are arguing for the creation of a
so-called special environment for nuclear disarmament,
it is our View that this was already established with the
entry into force of the NPT on the basis of its "grand
bargain". We believe that the success of future Review
Conferences will be determined by the extent to which
these undertakings are implemented.

Despite the lobbying and immense pressure on South
Africa, as well as other States Members of the United
Nations, we clearly demonstrated our commitment to
nuclear disarmament when we deposited our instrument
of ratification of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons (TPNW) on 25 February, joining the 21 other
Member States that have ratified the Treaty. We want to
use this opportunity to encourage Member States that
have not done so to sign and ratify the TPNW at the
earliest possible time in order to ensure its early entry
into force. For us, the TPNW is a positive and bold step
towards a world free of nuclear weapons. It complements
and reinforces the NPT. A mass movement towards and
a general call for a nuclear-free world has begun, and
the process is unstoppable.

It would be remiss of me not to commend the
sterling role played by the IAEA in the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The
implementation of the 2030 Agenda is critical for the
socioeconomic development of developing countries,
especially on the African continent. We therefore urge
the Council to fully respect the inalienable right of the
States parties to the NPT to use nuclear technologies
for peaceful purposes, as envisaged in the Treaty. We
further call upon the Council and the international
community to continue to support the Agency's
technical cooperation projects and activities.

The Agency, furthermore, continues to verify and
monitor the implementation by Iran of its nuclear-related
commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA), one of the recent success stories of
multilateral diplomacy. We call upon the Council to
continue to support and encourage these contributions
to international peace and security by the Agency and
reiterate our calls for the preservation of the JCPOA.

Nuclear-weapon-free zones will continue to play an
important role in preventing the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. In that regard, I highlight the importance
of the Treaty of Pelindaba; this year marks the tenth
anniversary of its entry into force. In the same vein,
my delegation calls for the early establishment in the
Middle East of a zone free of nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction, as outlined in the
1995 resolution.

South Africa strongly supports the full implementation
of the NPT and its universality in pursuit of the goal of
achieving and maintaining a world free from nuclear
weapons. In this regard, we would do well to remember
that the strength, credibility and utility of the NPT rests
on a fundamental bargain, which all of us should uphold.

We express our profound appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for facilitating the press statement to be
adopted later.

Finally, I would like to leave the Council with a
quote from a South African President: "There are no
safe hands for nuclear weapons".

