Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
commend Equatorial Guinea for having convened this
important debate and welcome your presence here,
Mr. Minister. We are also grateful for the presence of
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and of the Executive
Secretary of the Gulf of Guinea Commission.

Peru is part of an age-old culture that has always
recognized the marine wealth of our coasts. Fishing
remains for us an important source of nourishment
and development, and we therefore deem of the highest
importance the protection and monitoring of maritime
spaces. We are seriously concerned about the threat that
piracy and armed robbery at sea pose to international
navigation, security and economic growth, particularly
in the Gulf of Guinea, as well as to the security and
well-being of seafarers.

We would therefore stress the importance of
taking a comprehensive approach, led by the countries
of the region, to fighting crime, which must include
addressing the root causes of such threats. This is
particularly urgent in an increasingly interdependent
world in which 90 per cent of global trade takes place
by sea.

While the focus of the international community in
this field has been on the Horn of Africa and South-
East Asia, the Gulf of Guinea has also become a locus
of maritime crime and piracy owing to its vast oil and
gas resources, as statistics for 2018 show. We condemn
the killings, hostage-taking and robberies committed
by pirates operating in the Gulf of Guinea and other
areas, and we urge the States of the regions affected to
cooperate in bringing those responsible to justice and in
strengtheningjudicial systems andjudicial cooperation.

We also call on all States and on the private sector
to foster fresh synergies, including in the area of the
exchange of information and intelligence. We are
particularly concerned at the fact that some of the drugs
produced in South America and Asia pass through the
Gulf of Guinea on their way to European markets. This
is also clear evidence of the link between piracy and
armed robbery at sea with transnational organized
crime, including drug trafficking.

Peru would recall its concern, recognized by
the Council in its presidential statement of May
last (S/PRST/2018/9), at the relationship between
transnational crime and terrorism, which makes it
possible for terrorist groups from West Africa and the
Sahel region to profit from the income generated by
piracy and armed robbery. In that vein, we acknowledge
the positive cooperation between UNODC and the
United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice
Research Institute and with INTERPOL.

Likewise, we acknowledge the efforts made in
the region by the International Maritime Organization
and urge it to explore new areas for cooperation and
possible synergies in the area of maritime security.
We encourage active participation by regional
organizations in responding to maritime crime on the
basis of applicable international law, including the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. It is
also important to resolve disputes on maritime limits in
order to ensure greater stability in the areas concerned.

I Wish to conclude by reiterating the primary
responsibility of States for eradicating piracy and
armed robbery at sea, as well as the key role that the
Organization is called upon to play in supporting
national and regional efforts to respond to this threat.

