Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Kuwaiti presidency and the Security
Council for organizing this briefing on the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). I would also like to
welcome the presence among us of His Excellency
Mr. Tiebile Drame, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Mali. I commend
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative
of the United Nations Secretary-General, for his very
informative briefing and his personal, determined
commitment to resolving the crisis in Mali.

My country joins other speakers in condemning
unequivocally and in the strongest terms the cowardly
massacre carried out by armed men in the village
of Sobame-Da, in the Mopti region. Cote d'Ivoire
addresses its deepest condolences to the Government
and brotherly people of Mali and reiterates its
solidarity with them in their legitimate search for
peace and stability. To that end, my country welcomes
the decision of the Government of Mali to launch
investigations to shed light on those heinous crimes and
bring their perpetrators to trial before the competent
national courts.

Cote d'Ivoire also welcomes the consensual
formation of a new Malian Government and reaffirms
its conviction that it will be able to meet the expectations
of the Malian people.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of MINUSMA (S/2019/454) provides us with
information about the progress made since the United
Nations Mission was deployed in Mali. It sheds special
light on the persistent challenges against the backdrop
ofwhich it is important to assess the needed adjustments
and MINUSMA's support for peace efforts in Mali.

My delegation therefore welcomes MINUSMA's
continued support for the implementation of the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation and encourages
the new Government team led by Prime Minister
Boubou Cisse to contribute to it without fail. Indeed,
Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its conviction that strong
national ownership and inclusive implementation of the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation remains the
only way forward for a rapid and sustainable return of
peace, security and stability to Mali, particularly in the
northern and central regions.

To this end, it wishes to express its full support for
the Government of Mali in its stated desire to organize
an inclusive national dialogue so that it can be used
to explore the adoption of consensus solutions to the
many challenges facing the country. Women and young
people should find and have their rightful place in such
a dialogue.

On the security front, my country shares the concerns
related to the situation in the northern and central
regions of Mali. Indeed, episodes of communitarian
violence, as recurrent as they are bloody, undermine
social balances and hamper efforts to restore calm
and peaceful coexistence among communities. That is
why the exacerbation and instrumentalization of this
violence by armed groups should encourage the Council
to support, through MINUSMA, the redeployment of
police and judicial institutions, in order to enable the
Malian State to fully perform its sovereign functions.

The need to continue the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process and security
sector reform is more important than ever today. The
success of this process will undoubtedly contribute to
a substantial reduction in the level of violence and the
construction of an army of the Republic of Mali in the
service of peace and stability.

With regard to the humanitarian situation - another
cause for concern - my country would like to commend
the multifaceted assistance provided by specialized
agencies to meet the basic needs of the affected
populations. Cote d'Ivoire strongly hopes that
humanitarian responses will be strengthened by
economic and social-development initiatives that focus,
inter alia, on combating poverty and unemployment,
which are the underlying causes of insecurity and
instability in Africa in general.

MINUSMA remains an essential link in all the
current forms of the security presence in Mali and the
subregion. It should therefore benefit from the constant
support of the Security Council. Its complementarity
with the forces on the ground, namely, the Malian armed
forces, the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-S Sahel), Operation Barkhane and the European
missions, constitutes a considerable asset in the fight
against terrorism and organized crime throughout the
subregion. It therefore seems imperative to ensure that
its capacity is strengthened, in order to enable it to react
and effectively anticipate attacks against its civilian
and military personnel and to continue to carry out all
the missions assigned to it.

Admittedly, MINUSMA is not intended to replace
the Malian armed forces, but its contribution and the
strengthening of their capacity and support for their
redeployment, particularly in the northern and central
parts of the country, are crucial. The same applies to
its support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, in accordance
with resolution 2391 (2017). This support is of vital
importance for effectively combating terrorism and
restoring peace and stability in the Sahel region.

However, Cote d'Ivoire believes that, in the light
of the constraints observed in the provision of support
to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, a review of the technical
agreement should be considered in order to improve
the quality and effectiveness of MINUSMA's logistical
support. My country also believes that any decision
to reconsider the scope and means at the disposal
of MINUSMA must necessarily take into account
the potential consequences on an already fragile
security situation. Cote d'Ivoire therefore urges the
Security Council to maintain its level of engagement
around MINUSMA and to continue its multifaceted
support to the Government of Mali in its efforts to
restore peace and stability and promote economic and
social development.

I would like to conclude my statement by
reaffirming my country's support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and by urging
all bilateral and institutional partners to continue their
support for MINUSMA.

