Mr. Laurin (Canada) (spoke in French): First of
all, I should like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
open debate on children and armed conflict.

(spoke in English)

Given the present international context, and as we
approach the one-year anniversary of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, we
are reminded that this is highly relevant work for the
Security Council.

I wish to begin by expressing my appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his substantive report
(S/2002/1299). In particular, we were pleased to see
specific conflict situations mentioned in the report as
well as in the annex. What is clear is that, while
progress has been made, the work of the Council is far
from complete. Ongoing child abduction, conscription
and the use of children in armed conflict make the
work of the Security Council all the more urgent.

We welcome the Security Council's acting as a
channel for Member States to receive information
about the impact of conflict on children, and we would
urge the Council in future to call for recommendations
for effective solutions to prevent the recruitment and
end the use of child soldiers. It is incumbent on us to
move away from general statements to specific action
and to build a system of accountability that cannot be
ignored. Now that Governments and armed groups
using children in armed conflict have been publicly
named, the challenge to the Security Council is to
make these parties accountable. This requires genuine
political will and resources. I congratulate the
Secretary-General for highlighting this reality in his
report.
I would like also to congratulate the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Otunnu,
as well as the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), in partnership with non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and other United Nations
agencies, for their efforts in developing mechanisms
for integrating child protection into the peace and
security agenda. I would like to pay special tribute to
the critical work of civil society. We must continue to
collaborate with those organizations that are on the
front line of efforts to ensure effective monitoring and
to meet the protection and assistance needs of war-
affected children and their communities.

In particular, Canada welcomed the report of the
Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict in
November of last year, funded in part by the Canadian
Human Security Programme. That report illustrates
clearly how much work still needs to be done with
respect to monitoring, reporting and follow-up action
before, during and after armed conflict.

It goes without saying that Canada associates
itself fully with the statement that the representative of
Austria will make on behalf of the Human Security
Network.

Canada made commitments at the Winnipeg
Conference, and we fully intend to respect them. For
example, the Canadian International Development
Agency has committed $122 million to child protection
programmes and $2 million to child protection
research, including several projects on war-affected
children. Through our Human Security Programme, we
sponsor youth outreach and education initiatives
through War Child Canada, an organization that
provides humanitarian assistance to war-affected
children.

We believe that the efforts of Canada and of
others have helped turn the corner on monitoring and
reporting. Now we would like to see action taken when
the evidence is persuasive, as it is in the Secretary-
General's report.

To this end, Canada calls on the Security Council
to undertake field missions in the specific conflict
situations mentioned in the Secretary-General's report
and in particular closely to scrutinize the action of the
parties identified in the list annexed to the report. Such
field missions should include consultations with local
NGOs, women's organizations, youth groups and
children. The Security Council should ask for a six-
month interim report, evaluate progress made on these
situations, and commit itself to follow up in one year's
time on the parties named in this year's discussion.
Ultimately, if there is no real progress, the Security
Council must consider what actions it must take to give
effect to its decisions, including targeted sanctions. At
present, only countries on the Security Council's
agenda are mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report. This was a first step - one that should be
followed by the inclusion of all conflicts in future
reports.

For the sake of the children who are the victims
of such crimes, Canada believes this debate should be
made an annual event. Recommendations from relevant
resolutions, namely 1379 (2001), 1261 (1999) and
1314 (2000), should be assessed. In addition, Council
accountability for specific actions to enhance
protection and assistance for girls and boys affected by
armed conflict and their communities could be
reinforced.

The issue of children and armed conflict is linked
to the broader agenda item on protection of civilians
recently debated by the Council. The Security Council
and the broader United Nations system in its entirety
must ensure that these agenda items remain linked.

Although Council members agreed to consider
the protection of civilians, including the rights and
needs of children, in country-specific reports and
resolutions, it would appear to us that this has not been
done in every case. We call for renewed efforts towards
this end.

(spoke in French)

Discussions on small arms, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes and access
should address directly the implications for children
and should pay special attention to the situation of the
girl child. One promising outcome of the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects was its
recognition of the impact of small arms on children.
While this represents progress, children continue to fall
victim to the ravages caused by the proliferation and
reckless use of small arms.

We commend the Economic Community of West
African States for having launched its child protection
unit within its secretariat. That is a very important
initiative that we hope will serve as a model for other
regional organizations in the integration of child
protection into their work.

We encourage United Nations agencies to
continue their efforts to improve training on children's
rights for United Nations staff and to evaluate lessons
learned from incorporating child protection into
peacekeeping operations. We believe that the six core
principles of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee
Task Force on Protection from Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse in Humanitarian Crises should be incorporated
into the mandate of all peacekeeping operations,
including the prohibition of sexual activity with
children. In addition, HIV/AIDS education and HIV
testing and counselling services should be offered to all
United Nations peacekeepers.

Impunity, humanitarian access and physical
protection, with specific consideration of sexual
exploitation, all are urgent issues that remain
unresolved, although they fall squarely within the
Council's purview and should be addressed. Canadian
representatives were pleased that very serious crimes
committed against children, including the use of child
soldiers to participate actively in hostilities, were
included in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). This was a significant
development in international law to protect children
from the devastating effects of armed conflict.

The ICC is an important additional international
mechanism to protect children's rights. We call on
those States that have not yet done so to ratify or to
accede to the ICC Statute. All States should welcome
the fact that the ICC will contribute to ending impunity
for serious crimes against children.

In the outcome document of the special session
on children, held in May 2002, States renewed their
commitment to strengthening the protection of children
affected by armed conflict. The Security Council has a
key role to play in ensuring that that commitment is
translated into action.

Canada firmly believes that all our actions must
be guided by the principles of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, which remains the principal
instrument of reference and, indeed, the fundamental
legislative basis for achieving children's rights. The
primacy of the Convention needs to be strongly
reflected in our words and actions aimed at improving
the lives of children. The three landmark Security
Council resolutions on children and armed conflict -
1261 (1999), 1314 (2000) and 1379 (2001) - have
outlined steps to be taken, actors to be engaged and
mechanisms required to increase the protection of the
rights of war-affected children and their communities.

Progress has been made, but much more needs to
be done. The Security Council has a key role to play.
War-affected children have the right to expect that the
Council will do its part to the fullest extent possible.

