Mr. Nambiar: As the Council is aware, I led a
mission dispatched by the Secretary-General to the
Middle East late last week to explore ways of defusing
the crisis in the region. I am pleased to be here today
with the other members of my team, Mr. Alvaro de
Soto and Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, to report.

Before briefing the Council on our mission, it is
my duty first to provide a Secretariat overview of
developments since the last monthly briefing to the
Security Council by my colleague, Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari.

Efforts of mediators to obtain the release of the
Israeli soldier captured on 25 June have been
unsuccessful to date. Israel's military operation to
secure his return and to prevent rocket attacks from
Gaza continues. In the course of this operation, the
Israeli air force has fired missiles from the air at
alleged militants in cars and into residential buildings
06-43869

where they were said to be sheltering. Installations that
service the civilian population, including the main
power plant and bridges, have been damaged or
destroyed by bombardment. Israeli Defence Force
tanks also took positions more than one kilometre into
the northern, central and southern Strip. The violence
is continuing. Today, a family of five was killed when
an Israeli tank fired at a house in Gaza, which is at
least the second time in the reporting period that many
members of a family have been killed.

The Prime Minister's office and the buildings of
the Palestinian Authority's Foreign, Interior and
National Economy Ministries have been hit by Israeli
missiles. In addition, 64 Palestinian Authority officials,
including 8 ministers and 21 legislators, have been
arrested.

During the reporting period, Palestinian militants
fired over 200 rockets from Gaza into southern Israel,
striking a number of population centres, including a
schoolyard in central Ashkelon.

At least 147 Palestinians have been killed by
Israeli forces in Gaza and the West Bank, at least 15 of
whom were children. More than 450 Palestinians have
been injured, at least half of them children. Five
Israelis have been killed and at least 25 injured by
Palestinian militants, including in rocket attacks.

On the humanitarian front, Israel's destruction of
parts of the Gaza power station has left 1.4 million
Palestinians without electricity for between 12 and 18
hours a day and has left municipalities reliant on
generators. Water is now rationed at each of the
districts, and public health is already suffering, with
indications of insufficient access to clean drinking
water. Significant destruction was caused to public and
private infrastructure, agricultural land and crops.

Access into and out of Gaza continues to be
severely restricted. Rafah, the only exit for
Palestinians, reopened for arrivals on 18 July, having
been closed since 25 June. On 15 July, between 1,000
and 5,000 Palestinians who had been stranded in and
near the terminal were able to enter the Gaza Strip
through a hole that was blown in the fence by
unidentified militants. Karny Crossing has been
regularly opened from 12 July onwards for limited
periods during the day and for imports only. There
have been no goods exported from Gaza since 25 June.
Access of United Nations staff to the Gaza Strip is also
heavily restricted.
3

Meanwhile, a temporary international mechanism

is being developed. The second window, which

provides fuel support costs for the Gaza power plant

and other facilities, started on 11 July with the first

transfer by the European Union of 300,000 litres of
fuel for hospital generators in Gaza.

Last Friday, at a donor meeting in Geneva on the
humanitarian situation, many donors said that they
would make significant contributions to the revised,
consolidated appeal, especially to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East.

I should add that, on 27 June, Fatah and Hamas
reached an agreement on a revised version of the so-
called Prisoners' Document on which to base the
National Unity Government and reform of the Palestine
Liberation Organization. During our meeting with him
on 18 July, President Abbas stated that efforts to put in
place such a Government are on hold due to the crisis.

I will not report in any detail on the situation in
Lebanon and Israel in view of the regular briefings the
Council is receiving and the briefing by the Secretary-
General yesterday. Suffice it to say that, as of
yesterday evening, the conflict had claimed the lives of
over 300 Lebanese and 34 Israelis, while injuring over
500 Lebanese and approximately 200 Israelis.

The United Nations has dispatched experts to
Lebanon to support the Government and agencies
already on the ground in addressing the humanitarian
needs of the Lebanese, particularly those in the south,
who have been most affected. In extremely difficult
circumstances, the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon has established joint coordination centres in
two locations. However, it has had severe restrictions
imposed on its freedom of movement due to the intense
fighting that continues and lack of safe passage. The
destruction of important roads and bridges in southern
Lebanon has made access extremely difficult, if not
impossible, in certain cases. It is urgent that the Israeli
Government extend its full cooperation by immediately
ensuring humanitarian access to those in need.

That concludes the brief overview of monthly
developments. I come now to my mission.

I first want to thank the Governments of the
United Kingdom and Spain for their generous support
of the mission, without which it would not have been
possible to cover the ground we did in such a short
time.

Upon arrival in Cairo on 14 July, the team met
with the Foreign Ministers of Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon,
Saudi Arabia and Qatar, as well as the personal envoy
of the President of the Palestinian Authority and the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States. I
would like to extend my gratitude to all these leaders
for their graciousness in receiving me and the members
of my team.

The mission proceeded on 16 July to Beirut via
Cyprus, where it had the opportunity to consult en
route with the European High Representative for
Foreign and Security Policy. In Beirut, the mission met
twice, on 16 and 17 July, with Prime Minister Fouad
Siniora and Speaker of the Parliament Nabih Berri.
Both the Prime Minister and the Speaker expressed
great pain and frustration over the scope of Israel's
military actions in Lebanon, which they said were
causing misery to the ordinary people of the country
and inflicting serious damage on Lebanon's
infrastructure and future economic capacity. Both were
almost incredulous that Israel would carry out actions
that would, in their View, inevitably help Hizbollah in
the long run by increasing misery and radicalizing
public opinion. Both pressed for an immediate
ceasefire and for action from the international
community to assist in achieving it.

Prime Minister Siniora said that as things stood
he was not in a position to negotiate a ceasefire
himself, as he had no involvement in the initiation or
continuation of Hizbollah's attacks, which his
Government had disavowed.

Prime Minister Siniora reaffirmed his support for
the full implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions. He stressed that Israel's activities were
making it more difficult for the Government of
Lebanon to act to implement them and to have a
Lebanese consensus behind doing so.

The mission left Beirut on 17 July for Israel,
where it met the next day with Prime Minister Ehud
Olmert, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister
Tzipi Livni, Vice-Prime Minister Peres and a number
of other senior officials. All interlocutors stressed
Hizbollah's responsibility for initiating the conflict, as
well as its continuing terror attacks against Israeli
population centres by long-range rockets. They also
said that Hizbollah was financed, armed and supported
by Syria and Iran.

They made clear that Israel had decided that
military operations would continue until Hizbollah was
seriously weakened; this was not, as in the past, a
response to a particular incident - the abduction of the
two soldiers - but was a definitive response to an
unacceptable strategic threat posed by Hizbollah and a
message to Iran and Syria that threats by proxies would
no longer be tolerated. It was stated that the Israeli
captives must be unconditionally released and that, this
time, Israel was not prepared to negotiate with
Hizbollah through third parties, which in the past had
led to prisoner exchanges.

Israeli interlocutors stressed that they were
seeking to minimize civilian casualties and damage to
Government and public infrastructure, and accused
Hizbollah of resorting to tactics that made it inevitable
that civilians would be in the firing line when Israel
acted to defend itself. Both Prime Minister Olmert and
Foreign Minister Livni stressed that once they felt that
Hizbollah had been weakened sufficiently not to pose
an immediate terror threat to the citizens of Israel, they
would welcome a political framework that ensured no
return to the status quo ante and would facilitate the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1559
(2004).

From the mission's consultations, it became clear
that there are serious obstacles to the achievement of a
comprehensive ceasefire in the immediate future.
However, the mission sees two vital political goals for
the international community in the days ahead.

The first goal is to secure, urgently, some form of
cessation of hostilities. This is essential so that
captives are protected and released, humanitarian
access is ensured, civilian casualties are dramatically
reduced, and the political space is opened to negotiate
a full and durable ceasefire.

The second goal is to develop quickly the
elements of a political framework that would pave the
way for a full and durable ceasefire. A return to the
situation as it existed prior to the Hizbollah attack on
12 July is untenable. A political package is needed that
gives the Governments of Israel and of Lebanon
confidence that the horrors each country is now
enduring will not be repeated -the end of the Hizbollah
threat against Israel, and the full respect by all
Lebanese parties and all Lebanon's neighbours of the
Government of Lebanon's sovereignty and control. It is
difficult to envisage a sustainable ceasefire without
such a political framework.

The team discussed with the parties a number of
elements that might provide a framework to end the
crisis. Yesterday the Secretary-General outlined these
in his briefing to the Council.

I should stress that, in developing these ideas and
conducting initial consultations on them with the
parties, it was made clear that these would require
further discussion and elaboration.

It was also pointed out that the planning and
implementation of these elements should, as far as
possible, be done in parallel.

In responding to these ideas, Prime Minister
Siniora was clear that any steps to defuse the crisis
required an internal Lebanese consensus. However, he
stressed repeatedly that he now felt that any process to
reassert the sovereignty of the Government of Lebanon
over the entire country must address what he termed
the "core issues", such as the issue of Sheba'a Farms.

For their part, Prime Minister Olmert and Foreign
Minister Livni were adamant that the prisoners must be
returned, unconditionally, and not made part of a
negotiating process. They would consider any proposal
that would help guarantee that Israel would not be
vulnerable to terrorist rocket attack along its northern
border, through the Government of Lebanon deploying
in the south and the disarmament of Hizbollah and
other militant groups.

I wish to add that, on my way back from the
region, the team met the Spanish Foreign Minister. It
also met this morning the Secretary of State of the
United States in advance of her visit to the region.

Before concluding this briefing, allow me to add
a few words about our consultations with President
Abbas in Gaza. As the Secretary-General reported
yesterday, apart from the deep humanitarian and
security crisis that affects the people of Gaza every
day, President Abbas focused our attention on the need
for a political path forward.

He was particularly concerned that the current
crisis in Lebanon involved, among other things, an
attempt by non-Palestinian extremists to hijack
leadership on the Palestinian issue. He felt it was
important to de-link the crises and for the Palestinian
issue to be addressed, urgently and creatively, on its
merits. He left us with a powerful impression that the
international community has work to do in assisting the
parties to develop a credible political framework that
can show the path towards what the G-8 calls the root
cause of the problems of the region - the absence of a
comprehensive Middle East peace.

The Secretary-General and the Secretariat are
working on the political, peacekeeping and
humanitarian fronts to respond to this deep regional
crisis. We would welcome a united stance by the
Security Council.

