Ms. Veneman (UNICEF): I appreciate the
opportunity to join the Security Council today to
discuss the situation of children affected by armed
conflict. UNICEF welcomes the President's initiative
to hold this open debate to consider, in particular, how
the Security Council, the United Nations and the
international community as a whole can better
contribute to long-term and sustainable solutions
regarding the issue of children and armed conflict. I
commend my colleague, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Radhika Coomaraswamy, for her tireless
efforts in helping to draw global attention to the impact
on children in situations of armed conflict.

Children continue to suffer from the horrors of
war. Children have to cope with violence and the loss
of family, homes and community, and many have been
killed or maimed, even long after conflict has come to
an end. Children also suffer from the indirect impact of
war through a resurgence in preventable diseases, such
as pneumonia, diarrhoea, measles and malaria.

Conflict and post-conflict countries have some of
the highest rates of under-five mortality. Of the
33 countries affected by armed conflict during 2002 to
2006, 20 have experienced insufficient or no progress
towards the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) on
child mortality. Conflict and strife often break down
public health services and the rule of law and
contribute to food insecurity, population displacement
and continued insecurity. Rehabilitation of key services
and infrastructure requires security and political
stability.

When entire communities are in a state of
upheaval, schools can provide a safe haven and a sense
of normality. It is therefore crucial that their sanctity be
protected and that access to Vital services, such as
health care, clean water and basic sanitation are not
disrupted.

UNICEF welcomes the endorsement by 92 States
of the 2006 Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence
and Development and encourages other States to join
this process. The Declaration will contribute to the
protection of children through the promotion of actions
to reduce armed violence, improve human security and
build a culture of peace.

UNICEF has a long history of advocating and
assisting in the release and reintegration of children
used by armed forces and groups. We know from
experience that it is possible to reintegrate these
children, especially when they are provided with
assistance and the skills needed to become positive and
productive members of society. Yet reintegration is a
difficult and long-term process requiring a long-term
commitment. UNICEF works with States and non-State
actors to stop the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflict.

The 2007 Paris Commitments reinforce
international consensus on the unlawful recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict. These
commitments also reiterate measures States can take to
protect children caught in conflict and the steps they
can take to help reintegrate them with their families
and their communities.

Children become associated with armed conflict
groups for many reasons. They may have no choice or
they might view enlistment as their best survival
option, or as a way of escaping other violence and
discrimination.

Reintegrating children into communities needs to
be done with an eye to future stability, not only of the
child, but of society as a whole. Some important
lessons have been learned. One is that reintegration
programmes must avoid further stigmatizing the child.
Successful reintegration also requires predictable and
sustained funding that can be disbursed in a timely
manner and that will continue to be available despite
periods of instability. As has been shown in northern
Uganda and Sri Lanka, children's lives can be
improved by protection measures and reintegration
activities, even while political solutions are being
sought.

UNICEF greatly appreciates the commitment and
the efforts of the Security Council and its Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. The purpose of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism is to monitor,
report and respond to the situation of child victims of
conflict in order to reduce the occurrence of grave
violations against children, enhance accountability of
perpetrators and prevent further grave violations in
situations of armed conflict.
As we approach the third anniversary of Security
Council Resolution 1612 (2005) and the setting up of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism, there are

promising signs of progress. In Cote d'Ivoire and Sri
Lanka, for example, recruitment and use of children in
conflict has diminished significantly. Yet, more must
be done to better monitor, prevent and respond to
violations against children and to ensure respect for the
rule of law.

Girls and women in conflict situations are
extremely vulnerable because of the sexual violence
perpetrated by armed forces and groups. Sexual
violence is too often used as a weapon of war. The
Security Council's recent resolution 1820 (2008) is a
welcome expression of its determination to take
measures to address sexual violence against children,
particularly girls.

Earlier this year, I visited Sierra Leone. While
there, I met a young woman named Mariatu, who was a
victim of the many years of conflict in that country. At
the age of 12, she was captured and raped, and both of
her arms were cut off by the perpetrators. Her story is
still unfolding. She had never been to school, but today
she is attending university in Canada.

The best way to protect children is to prevent the
outbreak of armed conflict and violence in the first
place. Development and post-conflict reconstruction, if
done well, can address the root causes of violence and
thus protect children from exposure to armed conflict.
As Graca Machel urged in 2001, we "must shatter the
political inertia that allows circumstances to escalate
into armed conflict and destroy children's lives"
(A/51/306, para. 253).

UNICEF hopes that today's discussions will help
strengthen the collective commitment to protect
children from conflict and violence across the political,
humanitarian and development agendas of the United
Nations. UNICEF, through its mandate, its country
presence before, during and after crises, and its
capacity to advocate for children can contribute to the
prevention of conflict as well as to immediate and
long-term solutions once conflict has erupted.

The challenge is immense but not
insurmountable. Children continue to bear the brunt of
conflict, but they also demonstrate resilience and the
capacity to overcome the violence around them and to
help build peace within themselves and within their
communities.
Ishmael Beah, with whose painful story many of
us are familiar, is a case in point. His powerful and
best-selling book chronicles his experiences as a child
soldier in Sierra Leone and his difficult transition back
to a normal life with the help of UNICEF. Last
November, I appointed Ishmael as a UNICEF Advocate
for Children Affected by War. He continues to speak on
behalf of young people whose childhoods have been
scarred by abuse, violence and deprivation.

Let us never forget the stories of Ishmael,
Mariatu and thousands more like them as we move
forward with a shared sense of urgency in helping to
build a better world for children.

