The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Croatia.

Croatia joins other delegations in thanking
Mr. Holmes for all the work he has done and for his
briefing today about his most recent trip to Chad and
the Sudan. I would also like to welcome the
Ambassador of Chad and thank him for his statement.

It was only this morning that we were briefed on
the Sudan from another angle, that is, its lack of
cooperation with the International Criminal Court.
Now, we have heard in graphic detail what the situation
is in this country and about the ongoing suffering of
the population, especially that of refugees and the
internally displaced persons (IDPs), many of whom are
women and children.

What we have heard is very disturbing and I echo
other delegations who have expressed their serious
concerns and indignation.

If anything, this briefing has assured us that the
international community needs to invest more efforts
into bringing a political solution to this conflict, and
ending impunity for all war crimes will certainly help
in this process.

As has been proven time and again, there is no
lasting peace without justice, and any suggestion to the
contrary is hollow and without merit. The humanitarian
situation in neighbouring Chad is also affected by all of
this. A large number of refugees and IDPs are living in
precarious and often unsafe conditions and their human
rights are not always protected.

We understand that the Government of Chad is
under a great deal of pressure, but we believe that it
should further increase its investment in creating a
viable political dialogue that will bring an end to the
conflict and restore the normality that is so needed in
order to be able to address humanitarian and
development issues. We are encouraged by
Mr. Holmes' optimistic assessment of the situation in
Chad over the past 12 months and we hope this trend
will continue.

We hope that the recent rapprochement between
Chad and the Sudan will also help bring positive
change to the humanitarian situation.

Finally, my delegation would like to express its
deep gratitude to the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, under the
leadership of Under-Secretary-General Holmes, as well
as to all other humanitarian entities and workers, for
their unwavering commitment to alleviate the suffering
of affected civilians under very challenging conditions.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Holmes to respond to
comments and questions raised.

