Mr. Takasu: I would like to express my deep
appreciation to you, Sir, for inviting me, in my
capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, to
address the Council on security sector reform. My
gratitude goes to the Secretary-General for his briefing
and his endeavours on promoting this matter. I am also
grateful to Mr. Jan Kubis, Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Slovakia, for his presence here today and the
leadership role of his country. The presence of Deputy
Foreign Minister Van der Merwe of the Republic of
South Africa is welcome.
7

Ensuring security is a precondition for any
peacebuilding effort in countries emerging from
conflict. In order to achieve sustainable peace in such
countries, it is critically important to strengthen local
capacity in the security sector by carrying out effective
reform with the assistance of the international
community. If we fail to successfully address that
important challenge, it will certainly cause a serious
peacebuilding gap, which will hamper a smooth shift
beyond peacekeeping activities and a gradual transition
to longer-term socio-economic development in the
overall peace continuum. Security sector reform has
broad implications for such peacebuilding efforts as
reconciliation, social integration and youth
empowerment.

That is why security sector reform is one of the
high priority issues in the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission. It was with that in mind that the
Commission held thematic discussions on the reform of
the security and justice sectors in its country-specific
meetings. Throughout its work, the Peacebuilding
Commission has put emphasis on ownership -
priorities to be identified by the Government and
commitment to fulfilling its responsibility. In the
consultative process involving all stakeholders, the
Commission develops an integrated peacebuilding
strategy. Security sector reform has been identified as a
priority area both in Sierra Leone and in Burundi.
Those frameworks and monitoring mechanisms
describe the challenges faced and the commitments to
be met by both the Government itself and other
stakeholders locally and internationally.

Sierra Leone has been widely viewed as an
example of successful security sector reform. The
Cooperation Framework contains specific commitments
on the part of the Government to review the conditions
and terms of service of its armed forces, to reduce the
size of the armed forces, and to provide training to
improve police and community relations. The report of
the Chair of the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration underscores that the Government of Sierra
Leone has been making impressive progress in meeting
its commitments. I believe that the upcoming high-level
stakeholders consultation on Sierra Leone on 19 May
presents a useful opportunity to highlight security sector
reform initiatives led by the Government, with the
support of its international partners, including the
United Nations and the United Kingdom, and to seek
additional support for continued reforms.
The Peacebuilding Commission's engagement
with Burundi has focused on consolidating the
important gains made to date through the
reorganization of the army and the police and the
demobilization of combatants. At this moment, a
delegation from the Peacebuilding Commission is
visiting Burundi. Recent violent clashes between the
Palipehutu-Forces nationales de liberation and
Government security forces and the ensuing worsening
of the security situation will be an important issue for
discussion during the visit. I would like to emphasize
that continued international support for security sector
reform is critical to laying the foundation for effective
peacebuilding efforts in that country.

With regard to Guinea-Bissau, security sector
reform is identified as one of the most important
peacebuilding priorities through the interaction with
the Government. During the Peacebuilding
Commission's visit to the country recently, the
participants concurred with the view of the
stakeholders on the ground that successful
implementation of Guinea-Bissau's security sector
reform plan published in November 2006 was key to
the country's stability. The Commission is now in the
process of developing an integrated strategy reflecting
the priority concerns of the country.

As designed to address any gap in the early stage
of the peacebuilding process, the Peace Building Fund
plays a catalytic role in support of various security
sector reform initiatives. In Sierra Leone, the Fund
provided support to strengthen police capacities in the
lead-up to the national elections and to improve the
conditions of military barracks. In Burundi, it
supported reform efforts of the national police and the
intelligence services. In Guinea-Bissau, a project to
rehabilitate prisons and provide support to the judiciary
police is currently under consideration, to be funded
through the Peacebuilding Fund.

Allow me to now briefly offer some of my own
observations on security sector reform, in the light of
the experiences gained through the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission over the past two years.

First, security sector reform must be a nationally
owned process. The governments concerned should
lead not only the planning process but also the
implementation of such reform. The commitment by
national leaders to fulfilling their responsibility for
such reform is essential to producing results and
inducing international support.
Secondly, security sector reform requires long-
term, predictable and sustainable support and
assistance from the wider international community. It
is important to involve all national and international
stakeholders from the early stages of planning in order
to ensure a smooth transition from peacekeeping to
recovery and sustainable development. In coordination
with the efforts of local actors, United Nations
agencies, individual countries, regional and
international organizations, including international
financial institutions, and civil society are all equipped
to make various contributions to that end.

Thirdly, a coordinated, coherent and integrated
approach is indispensable in addressing the
multifaceted nature of security sector reform. Such
reform requires the active involvement of a wide range
of national and international actors with diverse
expertise and specialties. It also needs to take into
account its close links with such matters as the rule of
law and good governance and the necessity to integrate
gender perspectives.
08-33544

For all those reasons, I believe that the
Peacebuilding Commission can make significant
contributions to promoting security sector reform by
providing a valuable forum for coordinated efforts by
all relevant actors on the basis of integrated strategies.
I would like to assure the Council that the Commission
will continue to pay the utmost attention to mobilizing
international support and resources for the efforts of
countries emerging from conflict, based on mutual
engagement, with the aim of having a real impact on
the ground.

