The President: As April comes to an end, let me put
on my German hat. I think Geir Pedersen is right that
this is the last meeting during the Germany presidency,
as I have not heard any requests for a night meeting. I
would therefore like to take this opportunity to thank
my colleagues around the table for all their support,

patience, constructive criticism and encouragement,
and I would also like to ask them to convey that message
to their wonderful teams.

I would like to thank the Secretariat, the
Director and her team and the representatives of the
Secretariat, including the conference service officers,
interpreters - who I am afraid will not have good
memories of the German presidency - translators,
verbatim reporters and security staff.

I want to say that it is neither ordinary nor routine
for Germany to be on the Security Council. Germany
believes in a multilateral, rules-based international
order, with the United Nations at its helm, and the
Security Council is one of its most important organs,
if not the most important. In our View it is therefore
vital to strengthen the United Nations, with the Charter
of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights as its key documents. Our objective
this month was not to promote any specific German
interests but rather to strengthen the United Nations
and the Security Council, and we hope that we have
been able to contribute to that in some innovative
ways, such as the German-French presidencies, greater
interaction, greater transparency with the curtains,
more civil-society briefers and more women among the
briefers. The issue of women was actually the highlight
of our presidency, with women in peacekeeping and
discussions of sexual violence in conflict and the
participation of women.

I would like to return my French colleague's
compliments. I am very appreciative of our joint
presidencies, which were not only part of our innovation
efforts but represent something that is very deeply
rooted in France and Germany. We are not teenagers
anymore. After decades of war that did not end until
the second half of the previous century, for us working
together is in our DNA. We work together bilaterally
and within the European Union, and we were very
pleased to bring that spirit into the Security Council.
Maybe it will inspire some others as well, and I thank
all the members of the Council. Last but not least, I
would like to thank my own team. They have worked
extremely hard and provided lots of ideas, and their
engagement and constructive criticism have also been
very important. I thank them all.

I believe I speak on behalf of all the members of
the Council in wishing the delegation of Indonesia
good luck in the month of May. We hope it will keep
the curtains open, and we are also ready to pass on
the hourglass, but we will quite understand if it does
not carry on with that. l have to share a secret here.
Halfway through our presidency, we reset the hourglass
to measure only four minutes rather than five and a

half. I did not tell Council members, in the hope that we
could speed up our discussions. But we have refilled it
back to five and a halfminutes, and Indonesia can take
it over.

The meeting rose at 4.50pm.
