Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The signing of the overall package of peace accords on
Guatemala, the last of which was the final peace Agreement
signed on 29 December 1996, represents an important
milestone achieved by the United Nations in support of
peace and stability in a country long torn by disputes and
hostilities. Egypt again welcomes the signing of these
agreements and congratulates the people of Guatemala on
that achievement. The General Assembly has, so far, taken
the major role in the process of bringing about peace in
Guatemala by adopting many resolutions and decisions, the
most important of which was General Assembly resolution
48/267, which called for the establishment of the United
Nations Mission for the Verification of Human Rights and
of Compliance with the Commitments of the
Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in Guatemala
(MINUGUA). That Mission successfully and ably
supervised all the efforts leading to the completion of the
agreements, which have been crowned with the final peace
accord.

We must also thank the Secretary-General and his
assistants for their efforts, which increased the chances of
achieving agreement. Guatemala and the Unidad
Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG) have now
requested the United Nations to verify the implementation
of all the agreements that, assisted by the United Nations,
they negotiated together. The Security Council must make
its contribution to increasing the chances of the
implementation of these accords by adopting the draft
resolution before the Council today.

The delegation of Egypt supports all the provisions
of this draft resolution, and we will vote in favour of it.
Egypt believes that any request by a State to the Security
Council to supervise the implementation of a peace
agreement negotiated with the assistance of the
Organization deserves a positive response, particularly
when such a response is consonant with the responsibility
of the Security Council for maintaining international
peace and security. While we appreciate the
circumstances surrounding negotiations on the draft
resolution, we hope that they will not prevent the Council
from adopting the draft resolution and thereby shouldering
its full responsibilities for assisting Guatemala to establish
peace and stability in accordance with the peace
agreement.

