Mr. Fedotov (spoke in French): I would thank
you again, Mr. President, for taking the initiative of
organizing this very important Security Council
meeting for an assessment of the work of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in the
field of combating drugs and organized crime.

(spoke in English)

The Council's evaluation of the work of UNODC
is very encouraging. I am very grateful to members for
their kind words, and I take these words as guidance.
They will be very useful to us in the future, but they
are also a credit of trust. I assure the Council that we in
UNODC will try to live up to the Council's
expectations.

I would also like to thank, through the
representatives here, the Governments represented on
the Council for their support for UNODC, including
financial support. Indeed, our financial situation is not
easy. We depend mostly on voluntary contributions
from Member States. But we are also grateful to our
donors and contributors for their support of our
activities, which are very important and very relevant
in many parts of the world. In parallel with working on
our governance and financial reform, we will continue
to rely on voluntary contributions in the foreseeable
future. That is a fact of life.

I will not comment on the statements made today,
but would simply like to address a few points.

First of all, on drugs, I was indeed encouraged by
the idea prevailing in the Security Council that to deal
with drugs we need to follow a balanced approach, to
address both supply reduction and demand reduction.
Also, we should not forget the victims of drug
addiction as we continue to consider the fight against
illicit drug trafficking as an important issue. They
require our support and our help. We need to help them
to recover and we need to be compassionate and
understanding with regard to their situation. They are
sick people, and they need to be treated as such.

But the real criminals, of course, are drug lords.
In that regard, we need to continue to work very
actively, and even in a more aggressive way, especially
to prevent new ways for new drugs to capture new
markets in different parts of the world.

On human trafficking, just a year ago the General
Assembly adopted the United Nations Global Plan of
Action against Trafficking in Persons (General Assembly resolution 64/293). I would like, through the
representative of Portugal, to once again convey our
appreciation to her Permanent Representative, who was
very instrumental in reaching agreement on the Plan.

I can report to the Council that, since then, we
have started work. In spite of the scarce resources we
have in the trust fund, we were able to launch a small
facility grant programme a few months ago in London.
I hope that, in a few weeks, we will start to help
victims of human trafficking, especially women and
children, through eligible non-governmental
organizations. That will be the first practical result of
the resolution and the Global Plan of Action. As
members will be able to note, in just one year we have
seen practical and tangible results from our efforts, and
now we have agreed policies.

On regional organizations, we are of course
working with all regional organizations and
arrangements in many areas, including in Afghanistan
and neighbouring countries. We look forward to
continued useful coordination of our efforts with them.

It is very encouraging that the peer review
mechanism of the United Nations Convention against
Corruption is working well and that the mechanism
allows for the Convention to be implemented in a more
meaningful way.

I hope that the States parties to the Palermo
Convention - the Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime - will be able to come up with the
same review mechanism, which would enhance the
possibility of the implementation of this and other
important international legal instruments.

Finally, I would like to assure the Council that
whenever it asks me to come back and brief it, I am at
its disposal. Members should not forget that while in
recent years UNODC has developed skills related to
acting as a development agency - helping people in
different parts of the world through our network of
regional and country offices - basically, legally
speaking, we are another department of the United
Nations Secretariat. We are not different from the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations or the
Department of Political Affairs, so it is only natural
that a United Nations department should come to brief
the Security Council.

(spoke in French)

Once again, I should like to assure the presidency
of the Council that UNODC will remain available to
the Council.

