Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to express our gratitude to the
delegation of the United Kingdom for having organized
this discussion, which gives us an excellent opportunity
to exchange views about lessons learned and prospects
for development in the peace process of the Mano
River Union region.

Russia is deeply concerned at the complex
situation that has emerged in this subregion, in
particular the volatile situation in the border area
between Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone. We support
the strengthening of coordination between the United
Nations and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) to resolve the situation in West
Africa, including conflict prevention and resolution.
Here lies the growing importance of the work done by
the Security Council's ad hoc Working Group on
Africa, as the link between the Council and the
subregional organizations.

Like other delegations, we commend the efforts
of ECOWAS and those of His Majesty Mohammed VI
of Morocco to help bring about a ceasefire and to
reconcile the Liberian parties, and also to build
confidence among the leaders of Guinea, Liberia and
Sierra Leone.

The stabilization of the situation in the Mano
River Union region is intrinsically linked to a
successful conclusion of the peace process in Sierra
Leone. We are pleased to note that the holding of
elections on 14 May was an important landmark in the
history of that country, bringing to an end the second
stage of the implementation of the military concept of
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) for this year. The Government appointed
by the newly elected President of the country, President
Kabbah, has a fairly firm grip on the situation and is
now getting down to resolving the priority tasks of
establishing life in peace.

The activities of the United Nations and the
Security Council in settling the crisis in Sierra Leone
deserve the highest commendation. With the assistance
of UNAMSIL, at present a total of almost 6,500
people, former members of armed groups, have been
through the reintegration process. Another 20,000
people are participating in the process of reintegrating
into peaceful civilian life.

The difficulties being experienced by the
Government of Sierra Leone are well known when it
comes to implementing disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes. This is why it is
important that the international financial institutions
and the donor community give the Government
emergency targeted assistance. In this way, it could
successfully carry out and conclude these programmes,
and that, to a large extent, will determine the fate of
post-conflict peace-building in that country. There is no
doubt that providing security will, for the immediate
future, remain a top priority for United Nations
peacekeepers in Sierra Leone, until sufficient capacity
is built up and the national security organs are
guaranteed to be working reliably.

We think that when adjusting the further presence
of UNAMSIL in that country, it will be essential to
synchronize the future plans regarding the Sierra
Leonean army and the recruitment and training of
national police officers with plans to reduce
UNAMSIL's strength, in order to prevent a security
vacuum occurring after the Mission's withdrawal.

The most serious threat to stability and security in
the Mano River Union region remains the ongoing
bloody conflict in Liberia, where armed clashes
continue between Charles Taylor's forces and the
Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy
(LURD). As a result, the uncontrolled flow of Liberian
refugees into Sierra Leone is growing, and they include
a large number of armed elements. An escalation of
fighting in Liberia could lead to a destabilization ofthe
situation in neighbouring States.

A direct consequence of the ongoing conflict in
Liberia is the deepening humanitarian crisis in the
border regions between Sierra Leone, Guinea and
Liberia, as a result of which thousands of people have
been forced to resettle and to become refugees. We
note with gratitude that the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and other international humanitarian organizations,
despite the enormous difficulties they face, continue to
assist refugees who are in dire circumstances by
moving them from the dangerous border areas into
camps that are far removed from the borders.

Against this backdrop, the top priority is now to
provide free access for humanitarian aid workers to the
places where the refugees are, to guarantee their
security and to create the necessary conditions that will
be conducive to their voluntary return.

What is of crucial importance for resolving
conflicts in the Mano River Union region and
preventing their escalation is that Liberia should fully
comply with the demands of the Security Council. We
take note of the Monrovia statements regarding its
intention to continue cooperating with the Council in
this area.

In the context of the implementation of resolution
1343 (2001), we call upon all States fully to comply
with the resolution's demand that they prevent the use
of their territories by armed persons and groups to
prepare for and commit attacks on neighbouring
countries, and that they refrain from any action that
could further destabilize the situation on the borders
between Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.

