Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): I wish to thank you for
organizing this open debate on the situation in East
Timor. These meetings constitute important
opportunities for the States not members of the Council
to express their views.

I am glad to acknowledge the presence in this
Chamber of Mr. Ramos-Horta, whose leadership was
so decisive in the struggle for self-determination in
East Timor. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and United
Nations Transitional Administrator in East Timor,
Sergio Vieira de Mello, for his briefing. Mr. Vieira de
Mello's briefing could not be more eloquent in showing
the roots of the problem of security in East Timor, and
we agree with his analysis.

The event that took place at the beginning of this
month in Atambua, West Timor, shocked each and
every one of us. We should be asking ourselves
whether there was anything that could have been done
to prevent the violence. The killing of the humanitarian
workers was not unpredictable. The deterioration of the
security situation in the region had been repeatedly
reported to the Security Council. Other humanitarian
workers had been beaten up and harassed before while
fulfilling their duties in trying to alleviate the plight of
refugees.

Against this backdrop, the sad acts perpetrated in
Atambua were by no means a sudden outburst of rage.
The assassination of Olivio Mendonga may have
ignited the violence, but it was certainly not the main
factor prompting the attack. The real root cause lies in
the incapacity to disarm and disband the militia and
arrest the extremists that are willing to undermine the
ongoing construction of a democratic State in East
Timor. The threats against United Nations personnel
after last Sunday's weapon handover ceremony in
Atambua are another symptom of the same.

Brazil supports the full and unconditional
implementation of Security Council resolution 1319
(2000). We welcome that the special envoy of President
Wahid, during his meeting with the Council last week,
provided renewed assurances on the measures that are
being taken to quell any further violence.

It is essential that Indonesia continue to do its
utmost, with the cooperation of the international
community, to disarm the militia, bring to justice those
responsible for wrongdoing and protect the refugees.
Brazil hopes that enforcement measures taken by
Indonesia will be effective in disarming the militias
and arresting their leaders.

We are particularly worried about the shortage of
food, medicine and water in the refugee camps. Urgent
action is needed to prevent an even bigger
humanitarian catastrophe.

A durable solution for the refugees that remain in
West Timor will require not only resources, but a great
deal of political will to put resentment behind and to
look ahead for a future of peace and prosperity for all
Timorese. The independent State of East Timor will not
be built on vengeance, violence or rebuttal. It has to be
based on the rule of law, democratic participation and
pluralism. In this new State there should be room for
all those who are truly committed to democracy.

But it is also important to underline that true
reconciliation cannot be attained unless East Timor
comes to terms with its recent past. It is important not
to let human rights abuses go unpunished, for there is
no real reconciliation that can live with impunity.

Finally, in spite of all adversities, the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor,
under the able leadership of Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello, is doing a great job in assuring us that the
conditions are being created for building a democratic
and stable East Timor.

