Mr. Ba-Omar (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Arab
States in my capacity as its Chair for the month of
January.

In its various dimensions, the situation
throughout the occupied Palestinian territories is
extremely serious. That is due to illegal Israeli
practices, in particular in the Gaza Strip, which has
been besieged in an illegal and inhuman manner for
more than two years. As a result, the economy has been
paralysed and there has been a dramatic impact on the
health and the social and daily lives of more than
1.7 million civilians, whose lives are literally falling
apart. We continue to receive reports of the situation in
Gaza, the most recent of which came from the World
Health Organization. All of them refer to the gravity of
the situation, which poses a threat to both the life and
health of innocent civilians in the Gaza Strip because
of Israel's ongoing siege.

A year has elapsed since the barbaric and brutal
military attack led by the Israeli occupying force in
Gaza, which resulted in wide-scale destruction. The
attack killed or injured thousands of Palestinians,
including hundreds of women and children. That
barbaric Israeli aggression served to increase the
suffering of civilians, the impact of which we continue
to see today in destroyed property and loss of
Palestinian lives. The occupying Power is also
preventing all attempts to rebuild and rehabilitate after
the horrors perpetrated in December 2008.

Through repeated incursions and military attacks,
Israel, the occupying Power, is attempting to destroy
all efforts to revitalize the peace process. That is also
fuelling conflict, violence and tension, which will have
dramatic implications and pose a serious threat to one
and all. Moreover, those actions illustrate the attitude
of the Israeli leadership towards the United Nations,
international law and Palestinian civilians living under
occupation.
Acts by the occupying authorities have reasserted
the idea of impunity and disregard for international
law. It is also quite clear that the Israeli leadership
attaches no importance whatever to the outcome of the
work of the Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict, as evidenced by their repeated threats to
launch an additional military attack against the civilian
population in Gaza, which would be illegal and
barbarous.

It is therefore necessary that the international
community, including the Security Council, assume
their responsibilities in this regard. It is necessary to
defend the international order and to assert the
international will that was expressed in resolution 1860
(2009) by ensuring that Israel implements the
resolution. The Security Council must also address and
directly condemn Israel's attacks on civilian lives, as
well as its violations of international humanitarian law.

If we remain on the sidelines while those threats
and attacks continue, the Israeli occupying authorities
will be encouraged to add additional crimes to the list
of war crimes that Israel has already perpetrated.
Women, children and older persons in Gaza continue to
suffer from the last Israeli war. They demand that a just
and moral position be adopted, one that is based on the
decisions of the international community, in particular
those of the Security Council.

The Arab Group would like to underscore the
gravity of the situation in occupied East Jerusalem as a
result of the illegal steps and measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power. The situation there is worse now
than at any time during 40 years of occupation. There
has been a change in the demographic profile, the legal
status and nature of the city as part of an attempt to
create a new reality on the ground. That jeopardizes
any final solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Before everyone's eyes, the Holy City is being
subjected to an illegal aggressive policy by the Israeli
occupying authorities seeking to control occupied East
Jerusalem and ensure a Jewish majority there in a
completely artificial way that excludes and displaces
Palestinians, who were there from the very beginning.
Palestinians are being forced to leave by having their
identity cards taken, while more Israeli settlers are
brought in. We see that reflected in statements from
Israeli Government officials that assert that Jerusalem
is, and will continue to be, Israel's capital. That is
clearly and fully in violation of international law and
10-22138
United Nations resolutions, which since 1967 have
reiterated that the use of force to acquire territory is
unacceptable.

Moreover, the occupying Power is continuing to
establish settlements. The barrier that is being built, the
closing of Palestinian institutions and the heightened
acts of provocation at or near Holy Sites in Jerusalem,
including the archaeological work that is threatening
the foundations of Al-Aqsa Mosque, as well as the
Church of the Nativity, are all illegal. They serve to
raise tensions and inflame feelings, and they have the
potential to worsen the tense and fragile situation in the
occupied territories.

The international community, including the
Security Council, must therefore address the situation
before it is too late, firmly reject acts of provocation
and take immediate and decisive steps to ensure that
Israel implements international law, including its
obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention.
There is no alternative to that; any other approach will
imperil the peace process and the stability and security
of the entire region. There can be neither negotiations
nor peace unless we address the issue of Jerusalem.

We would like to reiterate that Israeli measures to
change the legal, demographic and physical status of
the occupied Syrian Golan Heights and the
infrastructure there are null and void. Israel is
attempting to establish and enforce its legal and
administrative power in the Golan. Such efforts are
also null and void. We also reiterate that all those acts
and measures, including the building of Israeli
settlements in the occupied Syrian Golan, constitute a
provocation of the entire international community.
They also violate international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and resolutions of the Organization,
including Council resolution 497 (1981), and the
Fourth Geneva Convention.

We call on the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities and compel Israel to implement
resolution 497 (1981) and fully withdraw from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967. The
Arab Group condemns Israel's ongoing disregard of
resolution 1701 (2006) as it violates Lebanon's
sovereignty on the ground and from the air and the sea.
It continues to occupy the northern part of Al-Ghajar
village, the Shab'a farms and the Kfar Shuba hills.
Israel's obstinacy extends to refusing to provide
10-22138
information on cluster bombs and landmines planted in
south Lebanon.

The Arab Group supports Lebanon's request that
the international community ensure Israel's
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and the
transition from a situation of aggression to a total
ceasefire. We have demonstrated the earnestness of our
approach to the peace process through a variety of
initiatives, including the Arab Peace Initiative, which
was warmly welcomed internationally - except by
Israel, which continues to ignore it eight years after it
was launched.

The Arab Group welcomes all the efforts to
relaunch the peace process in full earnest and reiterates
the fact that the political process and the opportunity to
open balanced and serious negotiations can begin only
with the full withdrawal of Israeli forces from all Arab
lands to the 1967 boundaries in order to create an
independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. That will require that the international
community, including the Security Council, seriously
adopt a clear platform and a firm position in that regard
that are critical to addressing Israel's illegal practices.

We must ensure in particular an immediate end to
settlement activities in Jerusalem and all Palestinian
territories, without exception. We must return to the
legal terms of reference: international law and United
Nations resolutions, particularly those regarding
Jerusalem. The situation of refugees must also be
resolved equitably, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III). A time frame must be
established for the completion of those negotiations.
All this must be accomplished under effective
international supervision.

These are not conditions; they are the starting
point that every peace process requires. They have
been endorsed by the international community and are
based on the various terms of reference of the peace
process, including the resolutions of the Security
Council. To achieve these objectives, the international
community, including the Security Council, must meet
its direct responsibilities and intervene effectively and
tangibly in order to compel Israel, the occupying
Power, to adhere to international law and to its
international responsibilities.

The first political necessity is to end all
settlement activities, particularly in and around
Jerusalem, and the incursions into Palestinian territory
3
and to lift the siege of Gaza. That will lend some
credibility and seriousness to the political process,
which is currently hindered by Israel's illegal practices
on the ground and the international community's
inability to act.

There is no excuse for the failure of the
international community and the Security Council to
take the measures and adopt the positions necessary to
end all of this - the settlements, the incursions, the
assassinations and the imposition of a new status quo.
During George Mitchell's visit to the region, the Israeli
Prime Minister told him that a university was to be
built in the illegal settlement of Ariel, in the northern
West Bank. That is being undertaken under the very
nose of the international community.

The feverish settlement process has expanded
seventeen times since the peace process was launched
following the Annapolis Conference. Attempts to
Judaize Jerusalem continue apace, with the destruction
of houses and the transfer of the offices of international
and non-governmental organizations. I could go on and
on, listing all these aggressive Israeli policies.

Israel is totally out of control and is trying to
resolve all these issues by continuing to occupy Arab
lands, which naturally would undermine any
negotiating process and hinder any future progress.
What chance is Israel offering while it is destroying
any basis for a future Palestinian State and preventing
us from reaching any solution to the situation
whatsoever? That was manifest, for instance, in the
statement by the Israeli Prime Minister to the effect
that Israel will remain in the West Bank and the
Al-Aghwar region.

The Group of Arab States therefore calls on the
international community, the Security Council and the
Quartet to establish conditions conducive to peace by
taking measures and adopting a clear and resolute
position to protect the political process from the
manoeuvring of the Israeli Government, which claims
to seek talks but wants them to be completely
insubstantial. It refuses to make any commitment and
continues to defy the international community's efforts
to salvage the peace process by continuing settlement
activities in Jerusalem and the West Bank. Israel
continues to ignore the terms of reference of the peace
process, including resolution 1515 (2003), which
enshrines the Road Map and calls on Israel to put an
end to all settlement activity.
Given these very serious developments, we
reiterate our firm rejection of all illegal acts and
measures by the occupying Power, which are null and
void. The international community and the Security
Council must assume their moral and legal
responsibilities for the Palestinian people until a just
solution can be found and their suffering and the
historic injustice done to them are over. The influential
international stakeholders must take measures that go
beyond timid rhetoric and good intentions. The
occupying Power must be made to face up to its
responsibilities and stop forthwith its illegal activities,
which destroy any hope for the establishment of an
independent, viable and contiguous Palestinian State
living in peace with its neighbours within the borders
of 1967.

The international community must therefore
demonstrate the firm resolve and the political and
diplomatic will to meet the situation squarely. It must
not remain silent or continue to respond ineffectively
and out of all proportion to the gravity of the situation.
Such a response reflects a kind of tacit support and
license for developments on the ground and clearly
violates the resolutions of the Security Council and
international law.

The time has come to oblige Israel, the occupying
Power, to end its illegal settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories and East Jerusalem and
return to compliance with international law and the
Fourth Geneva Convention. This is a most serious
issue, with severe consequences for international peace
and security and for an inevitable peaceful solution.

