Mr. Nina (Albania): Albania aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union. Allow me to make some remarks in
my national capacity.

We appreciate the opportunity to take part in this
open debate and would like to thank the President for
organizing it. It offers us a real opportunity to further
our discussions on this very important topic following
the summit on countering violent extremism convened

by President Obama, back in February. We also thank
the presidency for its concept paper (S/2015/231, annex)
in preparation for this debate.

The reality check is bleak and painful. The
year 2014 has been a devastating one for millions of
children, and 2015 is in no way better. According to
UNICEF, hundreds of millions of children live in
countries and areas affected by armed conflict, and an
estimated 15 million children are directly caught up in
Violent conflicts in different countries. Never in recent
memory have so many children been subjected to the
unspeakable brutalities we have heard of recently.

The world has always been prone to conflict-
otherwise seen as the pursuit of contrary or seemingly
incompatible interests - but as we have seen, its
nature has fundamentally changed during the past
two decades. While in modern times relations among
nations have managed to prevent direct inter-State
conflicts - with a few notable exceptions, as evidenced
by those in Georgia and Ukraine - the number of
intra-State conflicts fuelled by ethnic, religious or other
differences and grievances have increased. While in
the context of strong governance and robust social and
political systems conflicting interests are managed and
ways are found for groups to peacefully pursue their
goals, in fragile situations with poor governance and
weak political and social systems, grievances, disputes
and competition for resources can turn Violent with
disastrous consequences.

Children living in conflict areas are a direct and
easy target of Violent and extremist groups. Terrorist
groups, in particular Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram, have
taken full advantage of the overall security situation
in different parts of the world and are not only trying,
but are, rather successfully, managing to indoctrinate
children in extremist ideology. Sadly, reports also
describe recurrent cases of abductions of children by
those groups, who are then trained as fighters.

Regrettably, the recruitment of children is not
confined to areas of conflict. Through the Internet,
and especially via social media, people are now more
interconnected than ever before to other people and
subjected to their ideas. We feel increasingly powerless
in noticing how traditional links, including to family,
are undermined by profit-driven, unwarranted external
influences, which have been strengthened.
Economic hardship, disillusionment, exclusion,
discrimination and marginalization - especially
among the vulnerable and disadvantaged - will
inevitably lead individuals, in particular youth, to seek
solutions outside the exhausted traditional ones, thereby
becoming easy targets of extremist ideology, religious
radicalization and exploitation. There is no doubt that
radicalization and violent extremism, especially among
young people, are one of today's, and for that matter
tomorrow's, most pressing challenges to peace, stability
and development.

As amply highlighted in yesterday's discussion
in the General Assembly, while acknowledging that
extremism is fuelled by various factors and has complex
roots, the abhorrent and catastrophic acts of nebulous
terrorist groups have placed religious extremism at
the centre of world debate, and religious leaders on
the front line with regard to their influence, role and
responsibility in influencing developments in society,
alongside the family, schools, communities and other
important actors.

Countering Violent extremism in today's fast-
changing multicultural and multiconfessional societies
requires a completely renewed and optimal focus on
a wide range of issues. It should bring together good
governance, the rule of law, respect for human rights
across the board, sustainable economic growth with
opportunities for all, accountable institutions, and the
involvement of young people and women and education,
and including, indispensably, work in the community.

Education is beyond any doubt one of the most
powerful tools for providing the younger generation
with the keys to its future. We must continue, within or
outside conflict areas and their neighbouring countries,
to seriously invest in the kind of education needed not
only for opening minds and providing knowledge, but
for providing the kind of empowerment that provides
the necessary tools to build a new life.

But reality forces us to admit that schooling alone
may prove to be insufficient and sometimes too little,
too late in the struggle against terrorist groups and their
increased influence. The long and challenging fight
against extremism will be won only by successfully
combining a wide variety of tools; by successfully
countering extremist ideologies and changing mindsets;
and by engaging all stakeholders in contributing to
building a better society for all. Otherwise, we may
end up fighting long and protracted battles against this
scourge.

Albania participated in and welcomes the results
of the White House Summit on Countering Violent
Extremism, organized in February in Washington,
D.C., and we are fully committed to doing our part
while working closely with our partners and allies.
To this end, we are happy to organize in Tirana, on
19 to 20 May, the first regional follow-up meeting to
the White House Summit. We will be glad to share
the conclusions of that meeting with the wider United
Nations membership.

