Mr. Diarrah (Mali) (spoke in French): I would
first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
Azerbaidjan's presidency of the Security Council for
the month of October, and to welcome your initiative in
holding this important meeting on the situation in Mali.
My Government is also very grateful for Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for the commendable efforts he
has continued to make to resolve the Malian crisis.

Since the Council's 25 June briefing on the
Secretary-General's report (S/2013/338), much has
happened in my country. On 18 June in Ouagadougou,
the transitional authorities and armed groups signed a
preliminary agreement on the presidential election and
inclusive peace talks in Mali. On 1 July, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) became operational,
absorbing the African-led International Support Mission
in Mali. On 29 July and 12 August, with the support
of its outside partners, Mali held the most transparent
presidential election since its democratic process
began in 1992. The election reflected an exceptionally
high participation rate that testified to our people's
willingness to take charge of their own destiny and to
emerge from the swamp of the multidimensional crisis
that the country has been wallowing in since January
2012. By an uncontested landslide vote of 77.6 per cent,
the Malian people entrusted Ibrahim Boubacar Keita
with the task of guiding our country's future.

Since beginning work on 8 September, the
Government, led by Prime Minister Oumar Tatam Ly
under the authority of President Keita, has thrown itself
into solving the problems of the North. While pursuing
an intensive dialogue with all the parties involved in
the crisis, it has implemented a series of efforts aimed
at preparing for the negotiations stipulated in the
preliminary agreement of 18 June within a 60-day time
frame.

Without going into detail, I will mention the
following actions: the meeting of armed groups held
in Bamako from 15 to 17 September; the audience
granted by the President to the armed groups in
Koulouba on 17 September, during which the Head of
State established the framework for future discussions,
specifying that apart from the issues of autonomy
and independence, everything was negotiable within
the framework of a united and pluralist Mali; and the
implementation of confidence-building measures,
beginning with the freeing of several detainees on
18 September and 3 October. I should also emphasize
that we have ordered that the political mandate of various
persons who were members of the National Assembly
be lifted as soon as possible. On 15 and 16 September
in Timbuktu, Gao, Kidal and throughout the national
territory, we also held sensitization forums, as provided
in the preliminary agreement signed in Ouagadougou.
Various intra-community forums are currently being
held in several regions of the country.

The new National Commission for Dialogue,
Truth and Reconciliation will shortly be organizing
inter-community forums while conducting thorough
investigations into violations of human rights and the
consequences of the occupation of three regions in
the North. The Commission will visit refugee camps
and displaced populations in order to be informed of
all issues concerning their reintegration into their
places of origin, and will make recommendations to
the Government on how to ensure that from now on
justice will prevail and an end be made to the culture of
impunity in our country.

From 21 to 23 October, in the framework of
preparations for the national conference on the North,
which will be held by the end of this month, the
Government will conduct a forum on decentralization,
aimed at creating institutional mechanisms enabling
the strengthening of the powers of the decentralized
collectives so that they can better respond to the basic
aspirations of the people.

At the same time, the Government is preparing a
plan for the accelerated development of the northern
regions, the first version of which was approved on
Monday, 14 October, during a ratification workshop
held with the Government and our technical and
financial partners. The recommendations of the
decentralization forum and the content of plan for
accelerated development of the northern regions appear
on the agenda of the national conference on the north,
which will bring together all the social components of
our nation so that together we can forge a definitive and
lasting solution to the crisis that has shaken the country.

The aim of our Government is to reconcile Malians
among themselves and with themselves, because a
nation cannot move forward if it is not united and in
agreement about a common vision for its future. With
determination and wisdom, we will rebuild a new social
contract in order to recreate the conditions of living
together as Malians aong all Malians.

In his speech on 27 September 2013, at the general
debate of the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly (see A/68/PV.15), President Boubacar Keita
showed his unshakeable determination to complete
the electoral process by organizing the first round of
legislative elections on 24 November and the second
round on 15 December. Mali has embarked on the path
of building the rule of law, while resolutely fighting
against corruption and impunity. The nation is primarily
a space of solidarity founded uponjustice and equity.

Although the deployment of Malian Defence and
Security Forces and of MINUSMA and Operation Serval
helped to significantly improve the security situation
in the major cities of northern Mali, at some point we
must recognize that the situation on the ground today is
characterized by the return of armed groups, terrorists
and jihadists who continue to pose a serious threat to
the stability, the peace and security in the northern
regions of the country and across the Sahel. As an
illustration, the increasing number of terrorist attacks
in northern Mali was the subject of a letter addressed to
the members of the Security Council dated 2 October
2013 (S/2013/586), with which the Government of Mali
sought to draw the Council's attention to the threat.
Those terrorist attacks clearly demonstrate that the
fight against terrorism and organized crime in Mali is
not over and that the security situation remains fragile
throughout the Sahel region.

Let me say a few words about the humanitarian
situation in Mali, where much remains to be done to
bring about the safe and sustainable return of internally
displaced persons and refugees to their homes. In
addition to the difficulties arising from the security
crisis in the north, there has been a considerable
deterioration in the food situation in the south of the
country, where more than 800,000 people are facing
untold difficulties.

The renewed terrorist activities in recent weeks
requires the deployment of the Malian army throughout
the territory, with the support of the MINUSMA, which
also needs to receive adequate resources to fulfil the
mandate assigned to it under the relevant provisions
of paragraphs 16 and 17 of resolution 2100 (2013), of
25 April.

Before concluding, I wish to reiterate here the
sincere thanks and deep gratitude of the people and the
Government of Mali to our bilateral and multilateral
partners for their continued engagement with our
country, but also to remind them of the need to never let
down our guard vis-a-vis terrorist and jihadist groups
on the grounds that the Malian crisis is resolved and
that we should turn the page and move to other areas
of tension.

I wish to state emphatically that the security
situation remains very volatile. It requires sustained
attention from all the friends of Mali and involves a
renewed commitment from the international community
to combat terrorism and transborder crime.

Finally, I would make an urgent appeal to the
international community, especially the friends of
Mali, which met in Brussels in May, for an urgent
mobilization of pledges to boost economic development
in Mali.

My delegation welcomes the report under

consideration today (S/2013/582).

