Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Aichatou Mindaoudou, for
her comprehensive briefing on the internal political
situation in the country and the conclusion of the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI).

We welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire, Mr. Amon-Tano, and we
sincerely congratulate him on his country's election
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council
for 2018-2019. We wish his country every success in
its cooperation on the issues on the Council's agenda.
The rich experience of Ivorians in post-conflict
reconstruction is of particular interest in that regard
and I am sure they will share their experience with the
international community.

We note the success of Yamoussoukro in the
sphere of national reconciliation, State-building and
promoting political reforms in the country. We want to
underscore that the successful holding of a referendum
at the end of last year on the new Constitution and of
parliamentary elections confirmed the maturity of the
political forces in the country and their ability settle
differences through peaceful means. Clearly, there is
trend towards stability following the 2010 and 2011
electoral crises. In this regard, we note the contribution
made by the Government, which took unprecedented
measures to organize a political dialogue with the
opposition. We hope that the authorities will continue
to make serious efforts to increase the representation
of women in governing bodies.

The Constitution's provisions on land, citizenship
and national identity are promising and give us
hope for a final elimination of the root causes of the
conflict. We are confident that Yamoussoukro will
soon overcome the challenges posed by outbreaks of
social tension. We take note of the agreements reached
between the country's authorities and ex-combatants
who are integrated into the armed forces, which enabled
them to quell the protests. In this regard, we urge the
Ivorians to concentrate their efforts on addressing
priority tasks, such as security sector reform; the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants programme; and
the return of refugees from Liberia to the country. In
addition, the processes of national reconciliation and
of eliminating the dividing lines in society, including
those related to Victor's justice, must continue.

We must bear in mind that, in the West African
region, terrorist groups have strengthened and we have
been seeing occasional appearances of their emissaries
in the north of the country, on the border with Mali.
Cote d'Ivoire is also becoming a Victim of terrorist
attacks. In this regard, we urge Yamoussoukro to
continue to place priority on the issues of security and
illegal arms trafficking.

We greatly value Cote d'Ivoire's position on
regional stability. We welcome sending the Ivorian
military into the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. We hope
that Cote d'Ivoire will also continue to be accountable
and approach logistical issues responsibly. We cannot
overstate its role there.

We note that the transfer of the remaining tasks
from UNOCI to the United Nations country teams has
been carried out in an orderly manner. We are happy
that the withdrawal of the mission is in accordance
with the time frame. In conclusion, we, once again,
encourage our Ivorian partners to fully cooperate with
the Council.

