Guatemala would like to thank the Saint Vincent and the Grenadines presidency of the Security Council during the month of November 2020 for convening today's high-level open video-teleconference on "Peacebuilding and Sustaining Peace: Contemporary Drivers of Conflict and Insecurity". We would also like to thank all the briefers for their briefings. Guatemala is a long-standing supporter of efforts aimed at peacebuilding and sustaining peace, calling for a more comprehensive approach among the pillars of peace and security, development and human rights, in order to achieve greater coordination and coherence within the work of the United Nations system and to better fulfil the Organization's mandates. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has been a clear reminder that we are not a mere collection of isolated nations; rather, we must work together to ensure a better life for all our peoples. In this regard, it is the clear need for a comprehensive response from the United Nations system in pursuit of a sustainable recovery that must lead the way towards more peaceful and resilient societies. As a result of our own experience, Guatemala understands the importance of strengthening institutional and governance capacities and of implementing national development priorities, so that we may contribute to the attainment of international agreed goals and consolidate long-lasting peace. But there are still gaps that we need to fill in order to stop the existing drivers of conflict that undermines social and economic resilience. Preventive diplomacy must be at the centre of our efforts. Investing in prevention and peacebuilding efforts provides tangible benefits when responding to a crisis and helps to avoid the damaging and long-lasting effects of conflicts. In this regard, the relation between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission is fundamental. Such contemporary risk factors as extreme weather events, the spread of diseases, humanitarian crises, displacement, increasing poverty, drought and hunger are just some examples of the serious consequences that climate change and environmental degradation can bring to hamper sustaining peace in our societies. Disasters may also exacerbate existing conflicts, alter their shape and duration and even lead to the outbreak of new conflicts and further fuel divisions. For example, during this COVID-19 pandemic, Guatemala and its region have been affected by tropical storms, which has proved how these weather events can subvert achievements and further increase the existing pressure on livelihoods, national budgets and governance. The Security Council has the primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security. When we discuss climate change and security, we are talking about an intrinsically symbiotic relationship; one threat exacerbates the other. That is why the magnitude of the challenge of climate change is becoming increasingly apparent and requires its thorough consideration by all members of the Council, permanent and non-permanent. We highlight the need for the Security Council to continue exploring ways to strengthen prevention, early-detection systems and operational action so as to avoid conflicts resulting from climate change, extreme weather events and poor natural- resource management, taking into account community tensions and governance.
