Ms. Frazier (Malta): We thank Viet Nam for organizing this open debate on the importance of upholding the Charter of the United Nations to maintain peace and security, and we wish Viet Nam and the new elected members of the Security Council a successful and productive term. I also take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General and Mrs. Mary Robinson for their inspiring and insightful statements. Malta fully aligns itself with the statement delivered by the Permanent Observer of the European Union (see S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)), and I would like to add a few remarks in my national capacity. The Charter of the United Nations, which all Member States have the obligation to uphold, promotes the maintenance of international peace and security as one of its main tenets, conferring this responsibility upon the Security Council under Article 23. Member States repeatedly underscore their commitment to upholding the values and principles enshrined in the Charter, yet the work of the Security Council and the United Nations as a whole is required now more than ever before. Such debates have become increasingly important as we recognize the crucial role of the international multilateral system in managing an ever-more interconnected world. Geopolitical tensions, disarmament, migration and climate change, among others, are challenges that require a common response. As a State that embraces the principles and responsibilities of the United Nations Charter, strengthening the international multilateral system has been a constant pillar of Malta's foreign policy since it joined the Organization in 1964. The Charter provides a common safety net for inter-State relations in the pursuit of peace and security. The prevention and resolution of conflicts, peace negotiations, peacebuilding, peacekeeping, humanitarian responses and post-conflict reconstruction remain at the core of the United Nations work. Upholding the United Nations Charter also means that all Member States - in particular members of the Security Council, which represent the general membership in their deliberation and decisions - recognize their responsibility to fulfil the principles of the Charter. As we look towards celebrating the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we are aware that, in order to ensure that the legacy of the important Organization lives on, we need to act now. Over the past years, the international community has time and time again sought to promote collective action to address pending issues and seek solutions. There has always been a tendency to be reactionary, thereby yielding positive, albeit limited, results. We cannot shy away from working together. Global issues require global solutions. We need to revitalize and refocus our efforts by stressing that only through multilateral endeavours can we secure lasting solutions. Effective multilateralism remains the best way to advance the national, as well as the collective, interest. To echo what the Secretary-General said just a few days ago, we need to stop escalation, exercise maximum restraint, restart dialogue and renew international cooperation.
