Human rights are our raison d'etre. They are universal and indivisible. We defend them by following the principles of integrity, impartiality and independence. I wanted to begin the Spanish statement for this debate by mentioning those guidelines, which the Secretary-General sets out in The Highest Aspiration: A Call to Action for Human Rights of 2020. Our country fully shares the Secretary-General's approach, which intrinsically links peace and security with the resolute and effective protection of human rights. Human rights are at the heart of all decision-making and implementation processes at the United Nations, as well as in peace operations, which are the emblem and flagship of the Organization within the peace and security pillar. We would like to once again reiterate Spain's support for the critical work of protecting and promoting human rights carried out by United Nations peacekeeping missions. This principle must continue to be clearly reflected in Security Council mandates, which are a key tool in achieving full compliance with the mandated tasks and the successful conduct of the operation by the Force Commander on the ground. A clear mandate requires the explicit mention of the protection of human rights. Mandates must be supported by appropriate training prior to the deployment of troops that is adapted to the real environment in which the troops are going to operate and based on United Nations policy and good practices in this area. We must therefore continue to pool our efforts in three crucial areas: first, the Security Council, which is responsible for developing and adopting the mandate; secondly, working with troop- and police-contributing countries, which are responsible for the appropriate training and selection of the forces to be deployed; and, thirdly, the Secretariat, which develops the concept and establishes policies, which are periodically reviewed in the light of lessons learned. Today, peace operations face a future beset with difficulties and future budgetary constraints. We must continue to strive for maximum efficiency and the rational use of available resources. In short, we must create a dynamic of ongoing improvement in the three areas that we have just mentioned: mandates, well-trained and skilled troops, and the continual review of lessons learned. I would like to focus attention on the following two specific aspects with potentially major implications for human rights in peace operations. These are the women and peace and security dimension and the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The outcome is not predictable in either area. Our actions will be decisive in transforming the crisis into opportunities, confrontation into inclusion and divisions into solid foundations for building a more balanced international society. We must act on both fronts. More than half of the world's population are women, who play a crucial social role in conflict settings. In many cases, women are instrumental in seeking solutions that are the basis for lasting peace. With regard to the women and peace and security agenda, I would therefore like to stress the following. On the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), significant progress has been made in terms of the inclusion of women in peace processes, particularly following the Council's adoption of resolution 2242 (2015). The participation of women in peace processes must continue to be one of the highest priorities. Numerous United Nations studies show that the prospects for successful peace processes increase when they involve women at every stage of peacebuilding and peacekeeping. Spain plays a leading role in the training and preparation of troops prior to their deployment in operations, both in the context of the European Union, NATO and the United Nations. Spain is recognized by the European Union as a leader in gender military training discipline. Being fully aware of the importance of education and training in that area, Spain is fully prepared to explore additional forms of cooperation with the United Nations Secretariat to further strengthen this crucial aspect of peacekeeping operations. The year 2020 has been particularly turbulent. The COVID-19 pandemic is generating major changes for peacekeeping operations. It affects the evolution of conflicts and the way in which troops operate. At this point, I would like to express Spain's satisfaction with the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) on 1 July. It is essential that we now implement the appeal for a ceasefire announced by the Secretary-General on 23 March and ensure the subsequent humanitarian truce. Such measures are a catalyst both for the resolution of conflicts before the Security Council and for the effective protection of populations who suffer them, in particular the most vulnerable civilians. All of this is primarily linked to human rights. The pandemic is aggravating the situation of millions of people who face shortages or a lack of food, water, electricity and health-care services, precarious livelihoods and destroyed infrastructure. Meanwhile, as conflicts intensify, and many linger, the pandemic is also aggravating the situation of refugees in a number of camps. Many are facing increasing instability, which, in turn, can lead to greater volatility and stress in the difficult daily operation of these facilities. It is essential to focus attention on the secondary impact of the pandemic on the food security and livelihoods of those affected by armed conflict. Over time, the levels of hunger, malnutrition, disease and stress related to economic problems may increase. There could be disruptions to local and global supply chains, particularly food supplies. At the same time, markets for labour, goods and services will be weakened by the reduced supply and demand. Peacekeeping operations should work closely with the various civil society actors to monitor these situations and assist in fully implementing the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the fair distribution of humanitarian aid. The evolution and improvement in the handling of human rights in missions that have included a human rights component indicate both the way forward and the hope that such a potential exists. Efforts regarding the human rights dimension of peace operations could benefit greatly from the leadership of the peacekeeping operation placing human rights at the centre of the overall mandate from the outset. That committed leadership is also essential to achieving the highest level of exemplary performance by the troops. The human rights component should be placed in a leading position within the operational structure, which demonstrates the importance that its leadership attaches to it, thereby reinforcing its cross-cutting nature and key role in the planning of other activities. Itis also important to review the environmental and cultural factors that strengthen peacekeeping activities in terms of human rights and the degree of commitment of local actors to mobilize the will of both local and international stakeholders. Efforts could also benefit from adequate strategic communication to support traditional advocacy measures on the ground by dedicated teams. The leadership of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, which Spain greatly appreciates, is critical in that regard.
