Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
country's assumption of the presidency of the Council
this month, during which the Council has considered
the Secretary-General's periodic report on Abyei
(S/2014/336) following the strategic review of the
mandate of United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA). This month the Council also extended
UNISFA's mandate, through the resolution just adopted
(resolution 2156 (2014)).

At this time, I would like to express our gratitude
to Ethiopia, a neighbouring and brotherly nation, for its
efforts to ensure peace and stability in the Sudan, in
particular in the Abyei region, through UNISFA.

The resolution just adopted highlights in a number
of paragraphs the importance of implementing the
agreements signed between the Sudan and South Sudan
on the issue of Abyei. Indeed, a definitive settlement
of the situation will require negotiation and dialogue
between the two parties. We therefore support the
paragraphs that refer to the implementation of the
agreements, specifically the Agreement on temporary
arrangements for the administration and security
of the Abyei Area of 20 June 2011, the Agreement
on Border Security and Joint Political and Security
Mechanism of 29 June 2011, the Agreement of 30 July
2011 on Border Monitoring Support Mission, and the
agreements of 27 September 2012 on cooperation
and security arrangements. There is no doubt that
all of those agreements are part of a whole, a general
agreement, which should be implemented fully without
discrimination. Those agreements were signed as a
whole by the two parties on 12 March 2013, have been
conveyed to the Security Council.

We would like to reiterate our commitment to
implementing those agreements. At the same time,
although this hardly needs repeating, we reiterate
that the shortest path to a definitive solution of the
Abyei region's problems is the implementation of the
agreements on establishing temporary arrangements for
administration and security, in other words legislative,
administrative and police services for Abyei in order
to fill any administrative or security gaps and create
an atmosphere conducive to peaceful co-existence
and stability between the different factions, namely
the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka tribes. A definitive
settlement to achieve peace, security and stability in
the region will follow.

The resolution just adopted indeed reiterates that
there is no other path but dialogue to ensure a definitive
settlement of the dispute. Moreover, the resolution warns
against taking any unilateral measures. Indeed, we are
committed to not taking such measures. It confirms the
concerns expressed by the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union about the Ngok Dinka tribe's
actions with regard to a unilateral referendum.
We would like to convey our reservations with
regard to the section of the resolution that was
deleted and welcome the resolution's rejection of all
unilateral measures. In that context, we recall that the
Sudanese army was withdrawn from the Abyei region
in implementation of the aforementioned agreements
and the African Union road map, which the Council
supported in resolution 2046 (2012). We have spoken
in the Council on that subject and reiterated our
commitment to the agreements between the two parties
on security measures, including the creation of a secure
demilitarized border zone and the implementation of the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.
The reports of the Secretary-General have confirmed
our commitment and our respect for the implementation
of those measures.

The Council knows that any new proposal that went
beyond the agreements already signed and sought to
impose hasty solutions would have disastrous results
for the situation in Abyei and would only complicate
the situation there. We have therefore continually
affirmed and continue to affirm our commitment to
implementing the agreements signed with our brothers
in South Sudan.

Over the next four months, which is the period of
the extension of UNISFA's mandate, we hope to make
progress on establishing security and administrative
mechanisms, and we hope that our brothers to the
south will do likewise. In that regard, I would like to
thank the Council and recall that on two consecutive
occasions the Council has recognized the wisdom with
which the Sudan, and President Al-Bashir in particular,
has handled the situation and the developments in South
Sudan. We are very concerned with restoring stability to
that neighbouring country, as the situation there has an
impact on us and its people are, ultimately, our brothers
and sisters. Even before the referendum, we were also
fully aware that the issue of South Sudan, even if it
became an independent State - a development that we
fully welcomed - would not be going anywhere. We
would always be neighbours and brothers.

We have therefore always been very committed to
fully implementing all the agreements, in particular
the agreements on Abyei, and to establishing all the
mechanisms necessary for an environment conducive
to a comprehensive settlement. We hope that our
brothers and sisters in the south will continue to fulfil
their obligations under the agreements so that the four
months do not come to an end before we are able to
establish those mechanisms. That will allow us to make
progress on the path laid out by the aforementioned
agreements.

