Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful to the
Permanent Representative of Peru, Mr. Gustavo Meza-
Cuadra, for the briefing he provided in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism. We wish him every success in his work in
heading up the work of the Committee.

We stress the importance of the holding of this
briefing, which comes one year after the adoption of
resolution 2341 (2017). Sharing our experience and
knowledge is key when it comes to providing a high
level of protection for critical infrastructure and to
strengthening international efforts to increase resilience
to terrorist attacks.

Today's global society is part of a complex
worldwide network that relies on critical infrastructure,
inter alia, and where citizens depend on institutions and
basic services for their health, security, education and
economic well-being.

Some days ago we mentioned that today's terrorist
scenarios are no longer local or regional but are now
a global problem. This has required us to develop
practices that on occasion have had grave consequences.
For that reason, the international community must
stand ready to strengthen its exchanges of information
and build capacity and, more importantly, step up its
international cooperation.

The transnational nature of terrorism requires a
coordinated response from all States and stakeholders
in the international community. We believe that the
adoption of resolution 2341 (2017) represented a
comprehesnsive response to this global phenomenon.

The resolution stresses the importance of each
country identifying and developing strategies that
enables it to eliminate the risks posed by terrorism
to its critical infrastructure. It also urges States with
the capacity to do so to provide the relevant assistance
through technical assistance and the transfer of
technology, within the framework of respect for
sovereignty, territorial integrity and the political
independence of States, in line with the Charter of the
United Nations.

Capacity-building to provide assistance in risk
assessment, improving, monitoring and establishing
measures for protection, and responding to threats
should be a constant. For that reason, we believe that
it is key for us, inter alia, to work to prevent the risk
of nuclear terrorism through the total elimination of
nuclear weapons and increasing cooperation in the use
ofnuclear energy for peaceful means, such as electricity
generation and nuclear technology in medicine.

We also must enhance cooperation in managing and
guarding nuclear waste. We must also take the measures
necessary to protect the sea, land and air transport
sectors as well as deal with possible threats to sea and
air transport through the implementation of appropriate
security measures. We must also build public awareness
on cyberthreats and their potential consequences.

We also must focus more on preventive security
through ongoing risk management that, in addition to
being based on actually countering terrorism, is also
focused on deterrence. We must collectively strengthen
our security while focusing on prevention.

As the world becomes more and more
interconnected owing to the increased flows of
persons, capital, commerce and information, we are all
the more vulnerable to attacks carried out by terrorists
who use technology to spread fear in new ways. Given
these changes in these practices, it is vital to engage
in contingency planning and ensure that we protect
infrastructure systems, which are critical components
of our economic development. In that regard, we
reiterate that all efforts by the Security Council and the
Organization towards the elimination of terrorism must
count on the maximum support from their members.

Finally, I highlight the need for cooperation in order
to bring those responsible for committing terrorist
acts to justice so that they can be duly investigated,
prosecuted and punished.

