Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks you, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting. We greatly appreciate Chile's leadership
as President this month in enabling the Council to
successfully conduct its work. China will serve as
President for the month of February, and we will do
all that we can to ensure the success of our work next
month. We hope that we will continue to enjoy the full
support of all colleagues on the Council.

With regard to the Council's work this month', I
should like to focus on three issues.

First, on the situation of the Middle East, China is
deeply worried about the serious difficulties facing the
peace process in the Middle East, and expresses deep
regret over the fact that the Council failed to adopt draft
resolution S/2014/9l6, on the question of Palestine,
submitted by Jordan on behalf of the Arab Group of
countries (see S/PV.7360). The stalemate in the peace
talks will inevitably lead to further escalation. China
hopes that the Palestinians and the Israelis alike will
adhere to their strategic choice ofpeace, stay the course
ofthe peace talks, meet each other half-way and resume
peace talks as soon as possible. The international
community should enhance coordination and be open-
minded in an effort to help both sides restore trust.
The Security Council should assume the necessary
responsibility to play an active role in promoting
peace talks, ending the occupation and faciliating the
reconstruction of Gaza. China is ready to enhance its
cooperation with the international community and
to play a greater role in promoting a solution to the
question of Palestine.

TherecentsecuritysituationsontheLebanese-Israeli
and Syrian-Israeli borders are also troubling. China
urges all parties to abide by the relevant Council
resolutions and the ceasefire agreement, exercise
restraint and avoid actions that might escalate tension
so as to restore calm.

Secondly, on Africa, the Council has considered the
situations in Mali (see S/PV.7355), Cote d'Ivoire (see S/PV.7358), Burundi (see S/PV.7364), the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (see S/PV.7367) and the work of
United Nations Office for West Africa (see S/PV.7357),
as well as other topics concerning Africa. This year,
many African countries are planning to hold elections
that attract the broad attention of the international
community. China hopes that he United Nations and
the international community will actively engage in
preventive diplomacy, enhance communication with
relevant countries and support them to successfully hold
their respective elections. China greatly appreciates
the unique and important role played by the African
Union and other African regional and subregional
organizations in addressing regional and internal
conflicts. We hope that the international community
will strengthen cooperation and coordination with the
relevant regional organizations in Africa in jointly
addressing regional challenges and maintaining African
peace and stability.

Thirdly, on Yemen, China is deeply troubled by the
dramatic worsening of the situation in that country. The
top priority now is for all parties in Yemen to exercise
restraint and to avoid actions that might escalate
tensions. They should also bear in mind the long-term
interests of their country and their people; resolve
their differences through dialogue and consultations;
fully implement the Peace and National Partnership
Agreement and the outcome of the National Dialogue
Conference and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
initiative; and reach a broad-based consensus on the
future of the country. We support the Special Adviser of
the Secretary-General on Yemen, Mr. Benomar, in his
mediation efforts and good offices. We also welcome
the GCC and other international partners in playing a
constructive role in helping Yemen restore stability at
an early date. China will enhance coordination with the
parties concerned and encourage the Council to play
an active role in finding a solution to the question of
Yemen.

