Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I join previous speakers
in thanking the Chinese presidency for convening
this important open debate. My thanks also go to the
Secretary-General for his briefing this morning.

Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Constructive dialogue, negotiation and the
employment of other peaceful means are the only
realistic way to settle international disputes. That
is particularly true for the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine. Viet Nam
advocates the peaceful settlement of the protracted
Israeli-Palestinian conflict in accordance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative, aiming at achieving a just, comprehensive and
lasting solution and ensuring the legitimate interests of
all the parties concerned. Viet Nam supports the two-
State solution with a vision of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side-by-side in peace, security and
mutual recognition.

We are therefore extremely alarmed by the most
recent report of the Office ofthe United Nations Special
Coordinator for Middle East Peace Process, which
highlights that the current negative trends on the ground
are imperilling the viability ofa two-State solution. We
are deeply concerned about the recent complicating
developments in the region, in particular the latest
round of violence, which has cost hundreds of lives.
We feel heavy-hearted at seeing the humanitarian crisis
unfolding in the West Bank and Gaza and the plight of
millions of Palestinians. Viet Nam calls for an end to
all acts of violence. We urge Israel to immediately halt
illegal settlement activities, land confiscations and the
construction of the separation wall, and to strictly abide
by international, humanitarian law and human rights
law. We appeal to all the parties concerned to uphold
their determination to resolve the conflict through
negotiations and to refrain from any acts of violence
and hostility that escalate tensions. It is essential that
priority be given to the mitigation of the pain and
hardship of the Palestinian people, who have suffered
for many decades.

Viet Nam has always supported the struggle of
the Palestinian people for their fundamental rights,
especially the sacred right to self-determination and
the establishment of an independent State. We call
for an early resumption of negotiations between the
parties concerned and welcome renewed efforts by the
United Nations, the Quartet, the League of Arab States
and regional countries to help promote the Israeli-
Palestinian negotiations on all core issues, with a view
to achieving just, comprehensive and lasting peace in
the Middle East.

