Mr. Da Silva (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in Portuguese; interpretation from French text furnished by the delegation): There can be no question but that Africa has
witnessed far-reaching changes in the past six years. These
changes of a political, economic and social nature have
been greatly inspired and conditioned, if not caused, by
major global transformations as we approach the end of the
century, and reflect the acknowledgement by African
Governments of the aspiration of their peoples to greater
freedom and democracy and respect for their basic rights
within the context of a multiplicity of ideas and equality
of opportunity. In many cases, they are the outcome of an
electoral process, sometimes conducted under the
supervision of the United Nations and other international
observers. But the upheavals we are seeing in Africa are
also, unfortunately, a tragic and uncontrollable
consequence of the refusal of some African leaders to
hear the cries of distress of their people or to comply with
the rules and norms of democracy and good governance
that the people are demanding, sometimes through Violent
protest and even through armed struggle.

No African people today will submit to being
ignored or living under a dictatorial regime. African
societies need more room to express themselves so as to
participate more effectively in the conduct and
management of national affairs - matters that are of
direct concern to them. The holding of free and
democratic elections in many countries reflects the
awareness of this new reality by African statesmen. But
the electoral process alone is not enough. There must also
be an opportunity for every citizen to prosper and benefit
from improved standards of living equitably shared.

While it is true that from now on democracy and
political pluralism will be part of the political vocabulary
in Africa, as in the rest of the world, principles no less
important than tolerance, the right to dissent and respect
for the individual are not yet firmly embedded in the
hearts and minds of all the men and women in our
continent. Africa is suffering from many ills. It is still
faced with afflictions which, given their seriousness and
intensity, warrant all the support that is so sorely needed.

That is why we are so pleased, Madam President,
that your country, the United States of America, took the
initiative in organizing a ministerial meeting of Security
Council members devoted to Africa. This is also an
eloquent expression of the interest that the Security
Council takes in Africa, and a token of friendship and
solidarity with the peoples whom we represent. The
presence of President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe,
current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity,
and of Mr. Salim Salim, its Secretary-General, whose
statements cannot fail to inspire and contribute to our
collective endeavour, give our discussions an exceptional
character. I also pay tribute to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, for his tireless efforts to find solutions
to the problems of Africa.

 

Africa is constantly to the fore on the international
scene in a way that is increasingly worrying. Revolt, inter-
ethnic and inter-State conflict, tribal war, coup d 'etat,
massive displacement of populations and concentrations of
refugees unfortunately constitute the heavy burden carried
today by certain peoples in Africa. Why? That is the
question asked by so many men, women and children,
including many old people who no longer have the strength
to walk, human beings who are hunted down like animals,
having to wander in the forests in mortal danger. Why is
there such unhappiness and desolation? Why are all these
atrocities and killings taking place? We have the duty to
seek out together the reasons for all these calamities, and to
propose solutions.

The Security Council, and the international community
as a whole, should try to identify the true causes of all the
conflicts besetting many African countries and impeding the
social and economic progress of their peoples. We know, of
course, that the United Nations cannot do everything, but
we maintain the conviction that together we can undertake
to do more and with greater success. We have seen what
can be done elsewhere, and quickly, in similar
circumstances. Let us try to put equal value on the life of
every human being throughout the world. Suffering in
Africa should not be viewed as inevitable. What are the
resources available to us? We have, of course, the Security
Council, whose primary responsibility is the maintenance of
international peace and security. We are a part of it, we
debate within it to find solutions that are, whenever
possible, the results of consensus. However,
notwithstanding the good intentions and eloquence with
which decisions are announced, it sometimes seems that we
do not have a clear enough idea of the seriousness of
certain crises and that, as a result, we do not act with the
necessary speed and urgency. In this connection, the case
of Congo (Brazzaville) is conspicuous and calls for
thoughtful reflection.

The United Nations Charter confers upon the Security
Council the power and the responsibility to take coercive
measures to enforce respect for its decisions. Those
measures, whose effects in humanitarian terms can cause
harm to innocent populations, should have time limits and
should be periodically reviewed on the basis of objective
data. We believe that, in the light of recent developments,
the case of Libya deserves reconsideration. I have in mind,
in particular, the joint proposals by the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and the League of Arab States, which
provide for machinery to ensure that the rights of victims
are respected and that justice is done in accordance with
universally accepted norms.

We understand that it is up to the African
Governments, first and foremost, to ensure respect for
their citizens' basic rights and to promote democracy and
good governance so as to create conditions for genuine
progress and prosperity for all. African countries should
cultivate tolerance and respect for others, and they should
foster a sense of belonging, regardless of ethnic group, to
the same nation. Even if our countries today have
embraced democracy, that democracy, to be viable, must
in the long term be realized by taking into account the
specific cultural characteristics of each one of us.
Democracy is a complex and lengthy process which,
while principally dependent on the effort of individual
peoples, must have a foundation of international
assistance if it is to take shape and bear fruit.

Many conflicts in Africa are the direct result of a
lack of a state of law and of Viable economic structures.
The effort of the international community should be
aimed at encouraging the emergence of pluralist political
forces supported by a civil society that is aware of its
basic rights and on a private sector that is both dynamic
and entrepreneurial. Where inter-ethnic conflicts exist, we
should ensure respect for the rights of the individual and
promote a culture of peace rooted in the diversity and
wealth of a country's ethnic groups.

What can we expect from today's meeting? First, we
can expect a confirmation of the view shared by members
of the Security Council with regard to the seriousness of
the conflicts that currently exist in Africa and that are
causing such distress and taking such a toll on the
populations concerned. We must be innovative and create
the machinery needed to increase the capacity of African
countries to help in the settlement of conflicts in their
region. I have in mind, in particular, the initiative taken
by the United States, France and the United Kingdom to
help Africans in this regard, a most timely initiative that
deserves our appreciation and the support of the whole of
the international community. Above all, however, we
must give Africans the means to prevent conflicts by
supporting the efforts of the OAU and subregional
organizations such as the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), whose contribution to the
settlement of the conflict in Liberia is recognized by all.
We should work with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees to ensure the protection
of refugees and their voluntary return to their country of
origin. Lastly, we must ensure respect for the rights of the
individual and help African countries create conditions
that will lead to economic progress by undertaking the

 

economic reforms that are necessary for the development
and well-being of their peoples.

The importance of a Security Council meeting devoted
to Africa explains the presence in this Chamber of many
African colleagues who would have liked to take an active
part in our discussions. Our present deliberations are, in
fact, the first stage in an effort towards collective
deliberation. It is therefore important that the dialogue be
pursued and that account be taken of the opinion of the
countries directly concerned in formulating a series of
measures designed to contribute to the settlement of
conflicts in Africa. It is our wish that the hopes raised
throughout Africa by our debate - in Angola, in Burundi,
in the Central African Republic, in Liberia, in Rwanda, in
Sierra Leone, in Somalia, in the Republic of the Congo and
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo - not be
disappointed.

