The Secretary-General: May I first thank you,
Madam, and the Swedish presidency for convening
this meeting and allowing me to have my first formal
presence in the Security Council, discussing what
I believe must be the priority of everything we do
together - preventing conflicts and sustaining peace.
I believe that the massive attendance at this meeting
proves that, indeed, this message is something that we
all fully recognize.

The United Nations was established to prevent war
by binding us in arules-based international order. Today,
that order is under grave threat. Millions of people in
crisis look to the Council to preserve global stability
and to protect them from harm, but the enormous
human and economic cost of conflicts around the world
shows how complex and challenging this is. Yet we
spend far more time and resources responding to crises
rather than preventing them. People are paying too high
a price. The Member States are paying too high a price.
We need a whole new approach.

It has proved very difficult to persuade
decision-makers at the national and international levels
that prevention must be their priority - perhaps because
successful prevention does not attract attention. The
television cameras are not there when a crisis is avoided.
Most of today's conflicts are still essentially internal,
even if they quickly take on regional and transnational
overtones. They are fuelled by competition for
power and resources, inequality, marginalization and
exclusion, poor governance, weak institutions and
sectarian divides. They are exacerbated by climate
change, population growth and the globalization of
crime and terrorism. With so many factors at work,
it takes very little to trigger a crisis that can engulf a
country or a region, with global consequences.

But while the causes of crisis are deeply interlinked,
the United Nations response remains fragmented.
The interconnected nature of today's crises requires
us to connect our own efforts for peace and security,
sustainable development and human rights not just in
words but in practice. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions on sustaining peace demonstrate
strong intergovernmental support for an integrated
approach. The challenge now is to make corresponding
changes to our culture, strategy, structures
and operations.

We must rebalance our approach to peace and
security. For decades, this has been dominated by
responding to conflict. For the future, we need to do far
more to prevent war and sustain peace. The reforms I
am setting in motion aim to achieve this. I have started
with the decision-making processes in the Secretariat.
The newly established Executive Committee will
increase our capacity to integrate all pillars of the
United Nations under a common vision for action.

I have appointed a senior adviser on policy, whose
main task will be to map the prevention capacities of
the United Nations system and to bring them together
into an integrated platform for early detection and
action. This work will enable us to link the reform of
our peace and security architecture with the reform
of the United Nations development system, while
respecting the specific areas of competence of the
Security Council and the General Assembly. We need
the support of both organs for our efforts to build and
sustain peace across the continuum, from prevention,
conflict resolution and peacekeeping to peacebuilding
and long-term development.

The primary work of conflict prevention lies with
Member States.

(spoke in French)

The United Nations system as a whole must stand
ready to assist Governments in implementing Agenda
2030, strengthening governance and institutions, and
promoting the rule of law and all human rights: civil,
political, social, economic and cultural rights. The
Human Rights Up Front initiative, which also seeks to
integrate the issues of peace and security, human rights
and sustainable development, will allow us continue
to strengthen the capacities of the United Nations in
this field.

Humanitarian agencies and development actors
need to work together to help States prevent crises and
strengthen the resilience of their societies. The current
fragmented system does not give us the capacity to
address the root causes of conflict.

It is essential to ensure that women and girls
participate fully in building inclusive and resilient
societies. Where gender equality permeates the
social fabric and women and men face difficulties as
equal partners, societies have a much better chance
of achieving stability and preserving human dignity
and prosperity.

It is also crucial to resolve the global scourge
of youth unemployment, not only to ensure their
development but also to prevent instability and social
conflicts and to reduce violent extremism. Combating
youth unemployment should not just be an absolute
priority in national development policies, but also a
priority in international cooperation.

(spoke in English)

As societies become multi-ethnic, multireligious
and multicultural, we will need greater political, cultural
and economic investments in inclusivity and cohesion,
so that people appreciate the benefits of diversity rather
than perceiving it as a threat. All groups need to see that
their individual identities are respected, while feeling
that they belong as valued members of the community
as a whole. Civil society has a role to play in raising the
alarm when such respect is threatened or lost.

We must commit to a surge in diplomacy for peace,
in partnership with regional organizations, while
mobilizing the entire range of those with influence,
from religious authorities to civil society and the
business community. We will launch an initiative to
enhance our mediation capacity, both at United Nations
Headquarters and in the field, and to support regional
and national mediation efforts. I ask the Security
Council to make greater use of the options laid out in
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations. I am
prepared to support the Council through the use of my
good offices and through my personal engagement.

Too many prevention opportunities have been lost
because Member States mistrusted each other's motives,
and because ofconcerns over national sovereignty. Such
concerns are understandable, in a world where power
is unequal and principles have sometimes been applied
selectively. Indeed, prevention should never be used to
serve other political goals. On the contrary, prevention
is best served by strong sovereign States, acting for the
good of their people.

In taking preventive action, we need to avoid
double standards. But that does not mean there are no
standards at all. Preventive action is essential to avert
mass atrocities and grave abuses of human rights. And
we can achieve that only through reasoned discussion,
based on facts and the pursuit of truth. Prevention must
consistently be seen as a value in itself. It is an essential
means ofreducing human suffering and enabling people
to reach their full potential.

International cooperation for prevention, in
particular translating early warning into early action,
depends upon trust between Member States and in
their relations with the United Nations. I stand ready
to foster a more trusting relationship and to improve
communications with the Council, with consistency,
candour and transparency. Disagreements about the
past cannot be allowed to prevent us from acting today.
Together, we need to demonstrate leadership and
strengthen the credibility and authority of the United
Nations by putting peace first. Ending the boundless
human suffering and the wanton waste of resources
generated by conflict is in everyone's interests. The
Council, working with the Peacebuilding Commission,
all other parts of the United Nations system and regional
organizations, can enable faster preventive action when
the warning signs are there. The cost of inaction is
simply too high.

War is never inevitable. It is always a matter
of choice: the choice to exclude, to discriminate, to
marginalize and to resort to violence. By restoring trust
between Governments and their citizens and among
Member States, we can prevent and avoid conflict.
But peace, too, is never inevitable. It is the result of
difficult decisions, hard work and compromise. We
should never take it for granted, but should prize and
nurture it in every country, at every time. Prevention is
not merely a priority, but the priority. If we live up to
our responsibilities, we will save lives, reduce suffering
and give hope to millions.

Allow me to repeat the appeal I made 10 days ago
in my first message as Secretary-General: Let us make
this year, 2017, a year for peace. I think it would be
naive to say that 2017 will be a year of peace, but at
least it is our obligation to do everything we can to
make it a year for peace.

