Mr. Toure (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): On behalf of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Guinea-Bissau, who was to be part of the ministerial
delegation of the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
but has been unable to attend this meeting, and on behalf
of the delegation of Guinea-Bissau, I should like to
express my warmest and most heartfelt congratulations to
Botswana on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council of the United Nations. We are familiar
with your Ambassador's talents as a negotiator and his
experience of international problems, as well as his
profound commitment to everything related to the
equilibrium of societies and to peace. We are therefore
convinced that, under his auspices, our work will be
crowned with success.

We express our deep gratitude to and admiration of
your predecessor for the work accomplished under his
presidency.

We also congratulate the Secretary-General, Mr.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, on his exhaustive and clear report
on Angola and the deployment of the third United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). He
can count on our support.

Praise is also due to the members of the Security
Council for their resolute action to find solutions to
critical world problems which disturb us deeply, and for
the excellent initiatives they have taken to assure the
success of the work on Angola under way in the Security
Council.

The tragedy being played out in Angola has been
described at length in the Council Chamber in all its
political, economic and social dimensions. The countries
of Africa, rightly fearing the disastrous effects of this
tragedy on their already weakened economies, deem it
wise to make every effort to avoid further risks and to
bring an end to this tragedy, which has lasted too long.

Despite their efforts and sacrifice, the past years
have been a lost period for the development of their
country. The socio-economic situation has been
completely undermined by the effects of war and
especially by the continued fratricidal battles, which drain
financial resources and thereby stifle the economy and
destroy many human lives.

That is why the African countries, at their most
recent ministerial meeting, clearly expressed their
unfailing solidarity with the people of Angola in their just
struggle to safeguard their national independence and
territorial integrity, while supporting the achievements of
the Bicesse and Lusaka agreements. That meeting was

 

also an opportunity for the Ministers to reiterate their full
support for respect for the most fundamental rights of all
human beings and to promote the advent of an era of
democracy and reconciliation in Angola. All the States of
Africa pledged to make their contribution to the peace
process under way and to the strict implementation of the
agreements concluded for a lasting peace, which is the
reason for the welcome presence here of a ministerial
delegation composed of eminent sons of our continent.

The Republic of Guinea-Bissau welcomes the
measures taken by the Angolan Government and the
competent institutions of that country to achieve national
reconciliation, by, inter alia, the promulgation of a law of
amnesty for offences committed in the framework of the
post-electoral crisis and by agreeing to contribute
effectively to the success of the deployment of UNAVEM
III and provide the necessary assistance. We also commend
and encourage the Government of Angola and UNITA to
pursue their efforts to honour the commitments made in the
framework of the Lusaka Protocol. We are gratified by the
efforts made by the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Blondin Beye, and by the three States
observers to the peace process in Angola, as well as by
certain neighbouring States, particularly Zambia, that
contributed to the success of the Lusaka peace talks.

As members of the Council are aware, the people of
Angola and of Guinea-Bissau have longstanding bonds of
history, culture and fraternal struggle. That is why my
Government and the people of Guinea-Bissau fully support
the peace process in that brotherly country.

Guinea-Bissau endorses the important resolutions of
the Security Council and the results of the multi-party
elections supervised by the international community, which
we consider to have been free and fair. My Government
firmly supports UNAVEM. III and is ready to provide,
within its means, whatever contingent may be requested of
it in order for that Mission successfully to fulfil its
mandate.

For the tireless and commendable efforts which it
unceasingly makes in the search for viable solutions to the
many conflicts in Africa, and especially the conflict in
Angola, the Organization of African Unity deserves our
gratitude, particularly for its initiatives to promote national
reconciliation and the establishment of peace in Angola.
Since its founding, it has constantly been the political
framework in which the historic commitment to the
maintenance of peace and the liberation of all Africa has
been affirmed. The Government and the people of Guinea-
Bissau are, and will remain, loyal to the philosophy of
their immortal leader, Amr'lcar Cabral, for a free,
independent, sovereign and peaceful Africa.

