Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): The delegation
of Viet Nam is pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over
this important debate of the Security Council. Your
presence attests to the importance that Panama attaches
to the work of this body, which is charged with the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
look forward to continuing to work closely with your
delegation to achieve our common goals.

I wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the Executive Director of UNICEF
and the representative of the Watchlist on Children and
Armed Conflict for their briefings. We also welcome
the high-level participation of France, Belgium and
Italy in this debate.

In children, we see our hope for a better world
tomorrow. In children, therefore, we invest our best
resources. We have committed to saving succeeding
generations from the scourge of war and to making this
world a world fit for children. In carrying out our
commitments, we have achieved progress in some parts
of the world; in others, we are continuing to see
children killed, maimed and suffering from all sorts of
ill-treatment in situations of armed conflict. For those
who, by chance, escape the killings and those who are
being told to kill, the negative impacts of such acts are
not much different.

The current report presents us with both progress
and challenges. While noting positive developments in
some African, Asian and Latin American countries, as
reflected in the decrease in the number of cases of
recruitment and use of children in situations of armed
conflict or as reflected in the measures the
Governments in question have taken to prevent or
punish those acts, we share the concern over this
continued practice.

This together with acts such as attacks on
schoolchildren, sexual abuse of children by those who
are mandated and paid to protect them, torture of
children or their deprivation of food and education
constitute serious violations of children's basic rights
as recognized in international human rights and
humanitarian laws and in specific provisions of the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.

Condemning those violations, Security Council
resolution 1612 (2005) and previous relevant Council
resolutions call upon all parties concerned to undertake
measures to protect children affected by armed conflict
and ensure their rights and well-being.

Concerning the implementation of these
resolutions, we share the View on the need for a broad
strategy of conflict prevention that addresses the root
causes of armed conflict in a comprehensive manner in
order to enhance the protection of children on a long-
term basis, including by promoting sustainable
development, poverty eradication, national reconciliation,
good governance, democracy, the rule of law and
respect for and protection of human rights. In this
connection, we recognize the important role and
contributions of UNICEF and other specialized
agencies of the United Nations system.

Resolution 1612 (2005) requested the Secretary-
General to implement a monitoring and reporting
mechanism on the issue of children in armed conflict.
While commending the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in preparing
the report at hand, we wish to stress that in order to
ensure its quality, reliability and objectivity,
strengthened dialogue and cooperation with national
Governments, who bear the primary and ultimate
responsibility to protect and care for the children of
their own countries, is of vital importance, as are
consultations with the United Nations entities and
non-governmental organizations.

Some Governments complained - rightly or
wrongly - that they had not been consulted with
regard to their views that the situations in their
respective countries did not constitute armed conflicts
and that those situations should not be mentioned in the
report at all. This matter deserves the Council's
attention.

Equal treatment of all situations of armed conflict
can also be an area for improvement. The Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict established
pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005), which has put forth
many plausible efforts, should improve its performance
and working method with a view to putting greater
emphasis on prevention.

One of the first signatories of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, Viet Nam has also signed and
verified the Optional Protocol on the Involvement of
Children in Armed Conflict and submitted its periodic
implementation reports. All basic legal documents of
the country, such as the constitution, the law on
military duties and the civil code, provide for measures
to ensure that children under 18 are not recruited into
the armed forces and do not engage in direct combat.

08-2361]

We look forward to contributing our part towards
full and effective implementation of relevant United
Nations resolutions, including those of the Security
Council, with a view to creating a world fit for
children.

Finally, we thank the delegation of France for the
draft presidential statement on this matter and look
forward to working constructively with the other
Council members for its early adoption.

