Mr. Schulz (Germany): I wish to thank all the
briefers for their interesting presentations. We welcome
the Secretary-General's strong commitment to conflict
prevention and resolution, including mediation. We
greatly appreciate the work of the United Nations
through its good offices, special political missions and
mediation support, which often remain invisible and do
not make the news yet are critical for conflict resolution
and prevention. Germany is very committed to this
agenda of the Secretary-General and does everything
in its power to support those efforts in very concrete
terms. Let me give two examples.

First, the Peacebuilding Fund is one example of
a successful effort that can have a quick impact and
incentivize further funding in addressing a number of
African conflicts. Germany just announced a second
contribution of €15 million for 2019, bringing our
contribution to a total of €30 million for this year alone.

Secondly, there is the example of mediation, which
is a key instrument for advancing the peaceful resolution
of conflicts. We believe that the United Nations, in
particular its Mediation Support Unit, should remain a
strong mediation actor. The Secretariat, the Mediation
Support Unit and the Group of Friends of Mediation
have contributed greatly to the promotion of high
standards and professional approaches in the field of
mediation. We fully support that effort.

In addition to being one of the main donors to the
Mediation Support Unit, we are the largest donor to the
Joint United Nations Development Programme-United
Nations Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs Programme on Building National Capacities
for Conflict Prevention, which is also referred to as the
Peace and Development Advisers programme.

We thank the President for organizing the present
discussion on the centrality of preventative diplomacy
and conflict prevention and resolution in the context
of peace and security in Africa, the central question of
which, I think, is how the Security Council can become
more efficient in preventing violent conflict in that
particular context.

I think our briefers have basically provided the
answer today by pointing out that we need an inclusive
and multi-track approach. In order to prevent conflict,
make peace and achieve peacebuilding, we essentially
need two things - we need to involve all the relevant
stakeholders and we need to cover all the relevant aspects
of the conflict. Allow me to make a few remarks on the
relevant aspects that we need to take into consideration.

First, we need early warning and early action. If
we want to act early, we can successfully prevent crises
only if we have sufficient and relevant information,
which needs to be transmitted to the Council so that it
may react early to upcoming challenges. We would like
to encourage all members of the Council to regularly
invite civil society briefers to give us input to that end.

Secondly, there is the aspect of human rights
and conflict prevention. We need clear awareness of
human rights situations, because they are often crucial
to conflict prevention. A clear awareness of human
rights situations helps identify grievances that, if
left unaddressed, can lead to conflict. Human rights
standards provide a framework for devising sustainable
solutions to address those grievances.

Thirdly, there is the aspect of the security
implications of climate change. Many briefers, as well
as the Secretary-General, have referred to that in their
briefings. Whether it is a question of conflicts between
herders and farmers in the Sahel, disputes over scarce
resources, especially with regard to water or food
insecurity, or vulnerabilities that are exploited by
terrorist groups - mitigating and countering climate
change and its effects must be a key component of our
stabilization and conflict prevention efforts. We believe
that the specific security implications of climate change
need to be better reflected in the Council's work.

Lastly, the aspect of sustainable development must
be taken into account. Although not usually a Council
topic, I think we should be aware that sustainable
development is not only an end in itself but also one
of the most effective tools we have to prevent violent
conflict. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
is our road map to creating resilient, stable societies
and addressing the root causes of violence of all kinds.

In addition to those relevant aspects that we must
take into consideration, we also need to involve all
the relevant stakeholders in order to be successful in
conflict prevention. Special emphasis is needed on civil
society and mainstreaming women's rights and gender
equality throughout our prevention and mediation
work. The contributions of regional women mediators'
networks such as the AU's FemWise-Africa Network
and the African Women's Leaders Network constitute
a very important development in that context, which
we applaud and welcome. The protection of children's
rights and the involvement of young people are
equally important.

With regard to cooperation on a broader strategic
scale, the cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union is undoubtedly the most important
partnership that comes to mind in terms of building
and sustaining peace and security on the African
continent. Germany, jointly with its African partners,
is committed to supporting and further developing the
United Nations-AU partnership. We would like to see
that partnership develop further to address all phases
of conflict, from prevention and peace operations
to post-conflict peacebuilding. African ownership
and expertise are crucial to addressing conflicts on
the continent.

In that regard, we support African Union initiatives
such as the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020
initiative and the push by African States for a stronger
integration of AU-United Nations peacekeeping efforts.
We believe that regional organizations in Africa, both
the AU and others - such as the Economic Community
of West African States and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, to name but a few - can
and should play a much stronger role in preventing
conflict and addressing its root causes. Increased
cooperation between the Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council should be at the centre of that effort,
which is why we welcome and look forward to the
annual joint consultative meeting to be held later this
month in Addis Ababa.

