Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic ofIran): I have the
pleasure to speak today on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM). At the outset, I would like to
convey the Movement's appreciation to the Pakistani
presidency of the Security Council for having convened
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine.

I would like to express the Movement's appreciation
for the high-level participation in this important
meeting, as well as the report presented by Mr. Robert
Serry, United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process.

The Movement believes that Israel's settlement
activities constitute grave breaches of international
law and violate numerous United Nations resolutions,
including resolutions of the Security Council. Such
activities undermine the contiguity, integrity, viability
and unity of the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. This issue also remains the
foremost obstacle to peace, impairing all efforts to
revive credible peace negotiations aimed at bringing
an end to the Israeli occupation and achieving a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace.

The Non-Aligned Movement expresses its grave
concern over the continuing illegal Israeli settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. The Movement condemns
the provocative announcement by Israel, the occupying
Power, that it will construct 3,000 settlement units on
confiscated Palestinian land in an area east of occupied
East Jerusalem, now widely known as the E-l plan, in
addition to declarations regarding the construction of
another 3,600 settlement units.

Those deplorable actions in rapid succession are a
grave breach of all the principles andrules of international
law, particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention, which
governs situations in lands under foreign occupation,
and are in blatant contempt of the demands and will of
the international community and the hand that has been
extended in peace by the Palestinian leadership. Israel's
illegal settlement activities and the illegal actions by
extremist Israeli settlers are also causing extensive
physical, economic and social devastation throughout
the occupied Palestinian territory. This is deplorable
and must come to a complete halt.

The Non-Aligned Movement condemns and
rejects those illegal actions by Israel, the occupying
Power, which have been deliberately intensified since
the General Assembly's adoption of resolution 67/19,
which, inter alia, accorded to Palestine the status of
non-member observer State in the United Nations.
The Movement demands that Israel, the occupying
Power, immediately rescind those plans and measures
and cease completely all settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including in and around
occupied East Jerusalem, and abide by all of its legal
obligations.

NAM. continues to call on the Council to uphold
its Charter responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, including with regard
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. NAM. also calls on the
parties to return to the path of peace on the basis of the
long-standing terms of reference of the peace process,
including the relevant Security Council resolutions, for
the achievement of a just and lasting final settlement.
The Non-Aligned Movement also condemns Israel's
decision to withhold the Palestinian tax revenues due
to the Palestinian Authority, in violation of agreements
reached between the two sides and of international law.
On that issue, Israel has also declared that its decision
is a reprisal for the adoption of resolution 67/ 19. Such
a deplorable act constitutes a blatant act of piracy and
collective punishment. It is impairing the Palestinian
delivery of public services, payment of public sector
salaries and operation of governmental institutions and
is further exacerbating the financial crisis.

The Movement expresses its grave concern over
the construction of the apartheid annexation wall in
violation of international law, relevant United Nations
resolutions and the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice, of 9 July 2004. It calls upon the
international community, including the Security
Council, to compel Israel to cease those illegal actions
and measures.

The Non-Aligned Movement expresses grave
concern over the deteriorating situation and deplorable
conditions of thousands of Palestinian prisoners and
detainees who continue to be held unlawfully in Israeli
jails and detention centres, including at least 300
children as well as women and elected officials, and
calls for their immediate release.

The Movement also remains concerned about the
critical humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. We
call once again for the full and immediate lifting of the
illegal Israeli blockade, which has now entered its sixth
year and is in violation of resolution 1860 (2009), other
relevant United Nations resolutions and international
humanitarian law, which prohibits collective
punishment of civilian populations under occupation.
Israel must promptly and unconditionally open all
its crossing points with Gaza and end its continued
obstruction of the freedom of movement of persons and
of the reconstruction efforts in the Gaza Strip.

The Non-Aligned Movement remains firm in its
conviction of the urgent need for the international
community to act resolutely and collectively to fulfil
its long-standing commitment to, and responsibility
for, the realization of a just solution to the question of
Palestine in all its aspects, on the basis of international
law and the terms of reference of the peace process,
including the resolutions of the Council.

The Movement remains resolute in its commitment
to continue to assist the Palestinian people in their
legitimate quest for dignity, justice and their inalienable
right to self-determination in their independent State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital. The
achievement of those noble goals is long overdue, and
its continued postponement will only put the goal of the
two-State solution and the conclusion of a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace further out of reach.

The Movement regrets that all efforts to date
by international and regional parties, including the
Quartet, have failed to achieve any progress owing
to the deliberate obstruction by Israel, the occupying
Power, its refusal to respect the parameters of the peace
process and its insistence on continuing to change the
facts on the ground, in total contradiction of the goal
of the two-State solution, the Charter of the United
Nations and international law.

The Movement also takes this opportunity to
express its support for Palestinian reconciliation
efforts, which Egypt continues to sponsor, and hopes
that Palestinian unity will soon be restored in the
interest of the legitimate national aspirations of the
Palestinian people.

Turning to Lebanon, the Movement condemns
Israel's ongoing violations of Lebanon's sovereignty
and calls on all parties concerned to fully implement
resolution 1701 (2006) in order to end the current
fragile situation and avoid a resurgence of hostilities.
Such actions also constitute a threat to international
peace and security and are a continuation of Israel's
aggression against Lebanon.

Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement reaffirms that all measures and actions
taken or to be taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to
alter the legal, physical or demographic status of the
occupied Syrian Golan and Israeli measures to impose
its own jurisdiction and administration there are null
and void and have no legal effect. The Non-Aligned
Movement demands that Israel abide by resolution 497
(1981) and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, in implementation
of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

The States members of the Non-Aligned Movement
reiterate their continuous calls on the Security Council
to act urgently to send a clear message to Israel, the
occupying Power, that all of those illegal actions will
not be tolerated and must be fully halted forthwith. The
message must be sent to Israel that it is expected to abide
by the rule of law, cease all illegal measures intended
to alter and prejudge the situation on the ground and
cease all provocations and incitement. Israel's blatant
impunity and disregard for the law cannot be tolerated.

Allow me to speak very briefly in my national
capacity to respond to the unfounded references made to
my country by the representative of the Israeli regime.

There has been a consensus over the past 65 years
that the Palestinian question is the core issue in the
Middle East and affects directly or indirectly any other
problem in the region. There is also a growing consensus
that Israel's continued aggression and unabated
atrocities against the Palestinian people lie at the core
of the Palestinian issue. Therefore, the Council is today
debating the repeated and grave crimes perpetrated by
Israeli regime against the Palestinian people, including
its establishment of new settlements in Palestine and
blocking of the revenue of the Palestinians.

However, the representative of that regime,
echoing the words of the representative of its ally State,
attempted once again to divert the debate towards Iran
and, among other things, referred to Iran's peaceful
nuclear programme. The irony is that a regime is
talking about Iran's peaceful nuclear activities while
it possesses the only stockpile of nuclear arms in our
region. The nuclear weapon in the hands of that regime,
with its record of State terrorism and aggression, has
always been a major concern for the Middle East.
It is as absurd as it is appalling that the Israelis now
try to hide their atrocious and egregious acts behind
empty rhetoric aimed against my country. It is obvious
that their propaganda against Iran has always been a
smokescreen they send up to mask their actions and
to divert public opinion from their land usurpation
policies and other crimes.

