Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I wish at the outset to express my sincere
congratulations to you, Sir, on Syria's assumption of
the presidency ofthe Council for this month. I am fully
confident that, with your vast experience and wisdom,
the Council's work will be successful. I also wish to
express my gratitude and appreciation to Ambassador
Kishore Mahbubani and the members of his delegation
for Singapore's outstanding presidency of the Council
last month.

The twentieth century witnessed a large-scale
decolonization movement, in which the United Nations
contributed to ending colonialism in many parts of the
world - with the exception of one brutal colonization
that is based on a military and political ideology that
holds that peace alone will not guarantee Israel
domination and hegemony over its Arab neighbours or
control of the situation in the Middle East.

It is often stated that the Palestinian question is
difficult and complicated, but it is in fact very clear. It
is a question of colonization, the usurpation of the
rights of the Palestinian people, the seizure of its
territory and expansion onto Arab territory. It is a
matter of the just demand of the Palestinian people to
gain freedom, independence and legitimate rights, as
all other peoples liberated from colonialism have done.

The world has been following the suffering of the
Palestinian people and the unjust and coercive
practices that violate religious values and contravene
international norms and moral principles. That has led
to frustration in efforts to bring about peace, security
and justice. Wisdom and rationality had to prevail, and
this gave rise to the Saudi peace initiative, which is
based on international legitimacy, which affirms Arab
rights and which calls for an end to the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories occupied since 5 June
1967 and for the establishment ofthe independent State
of Palestine, with Jerusalem as its capital, in order to
bring security, peace and stability to all the peoples and
States of the region. That initiative has received
unprecedented international acceptance and was
adopted by all Arab States at the Arab Summit in
Lebanon.

While Arab leaders continue their efforts and
contacts, in keeping with the Arab peace initiative,
Israel continues its deliberate destructive policies in the
Palestinian territories and its arbitrary and inhumane
practices, committing war crimes for which it could be
tried under international agreements. Israel is
reoccupying parts of the Palestinian territory and is
imposing a military siege against it. As soon as it
withdraws from one region, it enters another, sowing
terror and horror in the hearts of civilians, who are
deprived of their most basic human rights, and
increasing the suffering and pain of the Palestinian
people.

A few days ago the Israeli Prime Minister
affirmed in an article published in The New York Times
what we have long been saying: that he has no plan for
peace. Yet, he has plans that reject the establishment of
a Palestinian entity on the land of historic Palestine; he
continues to work to strangle the spirit of Palestinian
steadfastness, he extinguishes the torch of Palestinian
resistance and he destroys everything the Palestinian
Authority has built in terms of basic infrastructure for
the Palestinian State.

That is being done to stop the growth of the
elements of an independent economic and political
Palestinian community, to impose forced migration on
the largest possible number of Palestinians through the
implementation of a transfer plan, to restrict the
remaining Palestinians in compliant groups, living in
isolated bantustans besieged by military settlements
and military bases, and to isolate and restrict them by
means of racial laws and apartheid.

The Israeli Prime Minister's article, in which he
invented a strange interpretation of resolution 242
(1967), reflects the absolute rejection by the present
Israeli Government of the search for a final solution,
because that would put an end to its expansionist
ambitions.

The United Nations has shown no great interest in
Israel's persistent aggression, its contempt for
international legitimacy or its failure to implement the
numerous resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly, particularly Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and the more
recent resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002), 1403
(2002), and 1405 (2002). The fact that the United
Nations and the international community have ignored
Israel's failure to implement resolutions of
international legitimacy is why conflict and instability
in the Middle East continue.

The Arabs have chosen the strategic option of
peacefully addressing and resolving the Middle East
question through negotiations and of reaching a just,
lasting and comprehensive political resolution of the
problem.

We express our appreciation for the efforts of the
United States, the European Union, the Russian
Federation and the Secretary-General, and we hope that
their contribution will help put an end to the
humanitarian tragedy of the Palestinians and to Israel's
brutal occupation, since 1967, of Arab lands, including
Al-Quds, so that violence will end, security will return,
fear will vanish, peace will prevail, destruction will
end and prosperity will be restored.

