Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this briefing on
the review of the situation in Yemen. We commend
Mr. Martin Griffiths and Ms. Ursula Mueller for their
substantive and insightful briefings.

Cote d'Ivoire, like the entire international
community, remains deeply concerned about the risk of
stalemate in the conflict in Yemen, with its devastating
humanitarian consequences for the civilian population.
The deadlock in the political process, as well as the
Violent fighting in recent days in Aden, particularly
near the international airport, constitute a significant
escalation in the situation.

The opening of new fronts that deepen the
fragmentation of the Yemeni conflict reveal its
complexity and underscore the urgent need to include
all parties in the peace process. Moreover, the attacks
on Saudi infrastructure, which my delegation strongly
condemns, are likely to undermine regional security
and stability and the paltry achievements of the peace
process, including the ceasefire.
In the light of that worrisome situation, Cote
d'Ivoire reaffirms its conviction that there can be no
military solution to the crisis and reiterates its call
for a political settlement. In that regard, my country
welcomes the efforts of the regional forces that have
led to an immediate ceasefire and the withdrawal of
the Southern Transitional Council from key points in
Aden. Similarly, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the holding of
the trilateral meeting in Tehran on 17 August, which
included Iranian representatives, the Houthi movement
and delegations from the United Kingdom, France,
Germany and Italy, with a View to finding a solution to
the political and humanitarian crises.

That initiative serves to highlight the need to
promote constructive dialogue among all the parties
to achieve a comprehensive agreement and a political
solution that, by necessity, would include the full
implementation the Stockholm agreements of December
2018. In that context, the full implementation of the
Al-Hudaydah Agreement seems to us essential.

We therefore urge all the parties, including those
with influence over the warring factions, to comply with
the ceasefire and continue the redeployment of military
forces from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras
Isa, under the aegis of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, in accordance with the agreement on the
details of the concept of operations for the first and
second phases of the redeployment.

In addition, Cote d'Ivoire encourages the urgent
deployment of local security forces in those ports, in
order to guarantee security and foster trust, as well as
to allow the population to benefit from the revenues
of those ports, in a country that has been bled dry,
particularly in terms of its free-falling economic
situation. Moreover, my delegation urges the parties to
expedite the process relating to the exchange of 15,000
prisoners and the implementation of the memorandum
of understanding on the city of Taiz, in order to facilitate
the opening of reliable humanitarian corridors.

The humanitarian crisis in Yemen, considered the
worst in the world, remains a major concern for my
delegation. After several years of conflict, Yemen is
now a country on the verge of total collapse. According
to United Nations agencies, 24 million people are in
a humanitarian emergency and 10 million are in a
situation of acute food insecurity, not to mention the
3.3 million internally displaced persons. That already
alarming situation is further exacerbated by the
persistence of deliberate and unacceptable obstacles to
the delivery of food aid.

My delegation therefore urgently appeals to all
Yemeni parties to refrain from any instrumentalization
and manipulation of humanitarian assistance, which
constitutes a serious violation of international
humanitarian law and resolution 2417 (2018). We
also call on them to respect the obligation to protect
civilians and put an end to the recruitment of child
soldiers. My country furthermore urges bilateral and
multilateral partners to continue their funding to
support humanitarian assistance aimed at saving lives,
alleviating the suffering of the Yemeni people and
addressing the special needs of women and girls, who
are the most vulnerable in times of conflict.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its support
for Mr. Martin Griffiths for his tireless efforts to
reach a political settlement to the Yemeni conflict
and for mobilizing the necessary resources to counter
the adverse effects of the humanitarian crisis. Cote
d'Ivoire strongly encourages the monitoring teams of
the Redeployment Coordination Committee, the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
and the World Food Programme in their commitment
to creating the necessary environment for achieving
a definitive and sustainable resolution to the crisis
in Yemen.

