Mr. Lucas (Angola): 1 would like to begin by
wishing you, Mr. President, and the delegation of the
United Kingdom success in your presidency of the
Security Council. We also congratulate the Spanish
delegation for their excellent work during their
presidency in October. We thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for her
briefing on the tenth report submitted according to the
provisions of resolution 1970 (2011).

Four months have passed since the previous
report and debate of the Security Council on this
issue. The report just presented reveals very little
progress in the implementation of the memorandum
of understanding, which is an important requirement
for judicial cooperation between the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Libyan authorities. The current
political and security environment in Libya, marked
by an institutional crisis and escalating violence, has
impeded cooperation and the necessary assistance to
the Court and to the Prosecutor's Office within the
framework ofresolution 1970 (2011). Extremist terrorist
groups joined by foreign terrorist fighters, political and
military factions and militias have created mayhem
in the country. They attack civilians indiscriminately
and commit egregious crimes such as abductions and
mass executions. Against a backdrop of lawlessness
and chaos, the conditions do not exist to investigate
and prosecute the perpetrators of such atrocity crimes,
which the Statute of the International Criminal Court
specifies as the primary responsibility of national
authorities. However, it is obvious that in Libya there
are no conditions to apply due process and fair trials.

Information provided by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights that
detention facilities are illegally operated by various
factions to the conflict is a matter ofthe utmost concern.
The fact that thousands of people, including foreign
citizens and children under 18, have been detained and
exposed to ill-treatment, torture and sexual and gender-
based violence - and, in the case of foreign detainees,
subject to extortion in exchange for freedom - reveals
the chaotic state of affairs of the Libyan justice system.
We believe that only peace and stability will allow
Libya to have a normal system ofjustice and efficient
judicial institutions.

We therefore reiterate our support for the efforts of
the United Nations and the international community to
continue to work with Libyan parties to reach a political
settlement to the conflict. We urge them to respect the
political agreement announced on 8 October by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bernardino
Leon, based on the conviction that Libya's ability to
face the challenges of the future and build a peaceful
society will ultimately depend upon political stability
and State institutions based on the rule of law.

