Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We join others in
expressing our appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his insightful briefing and personal presence at
today's meeting. In our view, since his appointment as
steward of this world Organization, he has ceaselessly
promoted a very important approach, which is the use
of amicable and preventive diplomacy.

Following an alert to the world, the Security
Council underlined in its first presidential statement
of 2018, on preventive diplomacy and sustaining
peace (S/PRST/2018/1), adopted during Kazakhstan's
presidency of the Security Council, that the ways
to address conflict may include measures to rebuild
trust by bringing Member States together around
common goals. That has been particularly important in
situations where international relations have featured
confrontations and tension behind which the contours
of a global war are increasingly apparent. We are
right now in a moment when we must exercise special
caution and vigilance in making decisions about our
actions, especially in the Middle East. We believe
that it is time to tap into all the tools available for a
comprehensive strategy of preventive diplomacy in
order to avoid the very serious consequences of any
military action that could have repercussions for global
security and stability.

The recent escalation of the rhetoric on Syria and
the threat of the use of unilateral actions has left the
delegation of Kazakhstan deeply concerned about
the unfolding situation, which has the potential to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security. We all bear a responsibility for complying
with international law and order, and none of our
countries has the right to violate the Charter of the
United Nations or to act or threaten to act unilaterally
with respect to a sovereign nation under any pretext,
unless that is decided by the Security Council. The
Security Council is a collective body and is designed
to take balanced decisions with regard to the issues of
peace and security. We can agree or disagree, but we
are mandated to work together to achieve a decision for
which we have to bear a collective responsibility.

Kazakhstan believes that the most effective way to
prevent conflicts is to use diplomacy and mediation,
not military means. We look forward to the next round
oftalks to be held in Geneva and in our capital, Astana,
when the parties will address the stepping up of efforts
to ensure observance of their respective agreements,
among other issues.

In addressing the disputes over the issue of
the alleged use of chemical weapons in Douma in
Syria, which has provoked the most recent tension in
international relations, we consider it necessary to
state the following. Kazakhstan strongly condemns
any use of chemical weapons, if confirmed. Impunity
is not permissible. We should act resolutely to stop any
further use of such inhuman weapons, but we should
act on the basis of proven facts. In this particular
case, where there are doubts about the actual use of a
poisonous substance, Kazakhstan calls on the members
of the Council to be patient, at least until the expert
group of the Fact-finding Mission of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
to Syria is deployed to the site of the alleged attack
and can report on the findings of its investigation,
particularly given that yesterday we learned that the
Syrian Government has granted visas for the OPCW
investigators and pledged to facilitate access to the sites
of the alleged chemical attack. We should first establish
and understand the scientifically and professionally
ascertained facts, after which the Council should decide
on the appropriate line of action to take.
At this stage, any military action or threat of it
without the prior approval of the Security Council
is undesirable. It could have a long-lasting negative
impact that would be very difficult to overcome and
could result in unprecedented and unanticipated
complications. Kazakhstan remains committed to
the Charter of the United Nations and to all Security
Council resolutions aimed at resolving the political and
humanitarian aspects of the Syrian conflict. We believe
it is crucial to exercise restraint and refrain from any
rhetoric that might exacerbate the already fragile and
volatile situation. Such a pause for reflection on the
consequences is essential to preserving international
peace and security.

In the light of the prevailing circumstances, it
is more critical than ever that all Council members
implement resolution 2401 (2018). The crisis in Syria
can be resolved only through an inclusive and Syrian-led
political process, based on the Geneva communique of
30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex), subsequent Security
Council resolutions and the relevant statements of the
International Syria Support Group. Lastly, we fully
endorse the views articulated by the Secretary-General
on 11 April about the risks of the current impasse that
we are witnessing today (see SG/SM/18984). We must
at all costs avoid the situation spiralling out of control.
Our ultimate goal should be to put an end to the horrific
suffering of the Syrian people and to help them to move
forward on a path of peace and progress.

Once again, this is an alarming moment, and we
need to work together to restore unity and effectiveness
in the Security Council by rebuilding trust and
consensus in order to preserve global peace and
security. We need cooperation within the Council to
establish a workable attribution mechanism, which we
passionately advocated today in this Chamber. Let us
make it happen and transform our words into real deeds.
The delegation of Kazakhstan is ready for that and calls
on its colleagues to go the extra mile in that direction.

