Mr. Arnault: I would like to thank you, Sir, for
having given me this opportunity to brief the Council
at this early date on developments in Afghanistan and
on our plans for the coming months. It is very
gratifying that the Council has made Afghanistan one
of its very first subjects for discussion on this year's
agenda. The presidential election on 9 October 2004
and the recent appointment of the Cabinet have brought
with them new momentum in the Afghan peace
process. It is very important for the Afghans and for us
in the international community to take full advantage
of this circumstance, to move the Bonn agenda
forcefully forward and to fulfil, as much as possible,
this year, the broad objectives of the transition.

As the Council is aware, on 7 December 2004
President Karzai was sworn in, together with his two
vice-presidents. Before and after his inauguration, the
President held protracted consultations regarding the
formation of his Cabinet. That was a complex exercise
involving, on the one hand, the need to increase the
number of qualified professionals to lead the ministries -
a requirement implicit in the new Constitution and a
strong popular demand - and, on the other hand, the
need to ensure adequate political and ethnic
representation.

The outcome of those consultations was made
public on 23 December. The composition of the
27-member Cabinet does indeed meet the requirements
of the Afghan constitution, and all ministers have
higher education and hold only Afghan citizenship. It
also reflects broadly the ethnic composition of the
country, with 10 Pashtuns, eight Tajiks, five Hazaras,
two Uzbeks, one Turkmen and one Baloch. Three
women are in the Cabinet, among them the only female
presidential candidate, Mrs. Masuda J alal.

Of course, the composition of the Cabinet will not
escape criticism from one quarter or another. But the
consultations that the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has held with political parties,
representatives of civil society and communities in
various regions indicate that the majority of Afghans
welcome the composition of the new Cabinet and see it as
a sign of the increasingly national character of the Afghan
Government. That is in contrast to the mitigated - and
sometimes critical - reaction of public opinion after the
2002 Emergency Loya Jirga, which many saw as overly
influenced by factional considerations and as a missed
opportunity to establish a truly representative central
government. This vote of confidence in the new Cabinet
will no doubt increase the authority and the effectiveness
of the Government as it tackles some very complex,
urgent and difficult tasks on the national agenda,
including the holding of local and parliamentary elections
this year, expanded disarmament and demobilization and
counter-narcotics endeavours.

Let me turn to the first of those tasks. The
Council may recall that, with its endorsement, the
electoral commission decided last year to split the
electoral process in two and indicated that the
parliamentary elections would be held in the Afghan
month of Saur 1383 - between 21 April and 21 May
2005. A variety of considerations were behind that
decision. One concerned a number of key legal and
administrative prerequisites that were not met on time.
Another related to the need to bring about further
disarmament and a political environment conducive to
free and transparent elections, in particular at the
provincial and district levels, where the militarization
inherited from decades of civil war was most likely to
affect and distort the electoral process. Both we and the
electoral commission felt that, given the complete
absence of any electoral tradition or practice in
Afghanistan, the relatively simpler presidential election
would well serve all actors involved in the election as a
rehearsal for the much more complex set of elections
involved in the parliamentary process. In that respect,
all observer organizations - international and
domestic - have issued useful recommendations that
are being taken into account in the ongoing
preparations for the upcoming elections.

The centrepiece of those preparations is the
establishment of the Independent Electoral
Commission called for by the Constitution. Its
appointment, which is a presidential prerogative, is an
opportunity to implement some of the lessons learned
from the presidential election, in particular the need for
closer consultation with the large number of new
political parties - approximately 50 - that have been
registered since last year and which need to develop
more confidence in the operation of the electoral
authority. In the past few weeks, we have been working
with the President's Office to elicit the views and
recommendations of political parties and community
leaders on that matter, and we can expect that the new
Commission will be appointed in the very near future.

In addition to the creation of the new Independent
Electoral Commission, we expect that the
parliamentary elections will see an enhanced role for
Afghans throughout the process. That will be the case
with the organization of the elections, where, overall,
the Afghan personnel performed very well during the
presidential election. And it will also be the case with
domestic observation and political parties. Indeed, in a
few months, local elections will take the electoral
competition to many parts of the country to which
international observers are unlikely to have easy
access. Domestic observers and the action of party
monitors will therefore bear much of the responsibility
for ensuring that local elections are fair and credible.
From that standpoint, the presidential election was a
promising start. We therefore expect that the
recruitment and the training of those observers and
monitors will play a major role in safeguarding the
integrity of the upcoming electoral process.

In order to meet the April-May target date, the
Government and the electoral authorities have to make
a number of decisions: on the participation of refugees
and nomads; the demarcation of district boundaries; the
population figures for each province; the preparation of
voter lists; and the revision of the electoral law. The
most urgent of those decisions concerns the assignment
of population settlements to districts, a task which,
under the electoral law, must be completed 120 days
before election day. For elections to take place within
the agreed time frame, district boundaries must
therefore be finalized within the next couple of weeks
at the very latest. The Ministry of Interior, which is in
the lead for that process, has indicated that good
progress has been made, and it is hoped that decisions
are imminent.

One important piece of legislation that remains
outstanding concerns the powers of the local councils
that are to be elected together with the representatives
to the lower house. The creation of elected bodies at
the district and provincial levels is an innovation in the
Afghan political system brought about by the new
Constitution. Their functions relative to existing
administrative structures must be defined well ahead of
the elections. A mission of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) on local
governance, which visited Afghanistan last month, has
recommended a gradualist approach to the
empowerment of those bodies. More specifically, it
suggested that for the time being, those councils could
be given a local-level advisory role to the executive
body. Further consultations must take place on that
issue before legislation is passed.

That complex preparatory work is pursued, as I
said, with the April-May target in mind, and a final
decision on the election date will have to be made by
the new Independent Electoral Commission in the next
few weeks. Political leaders and representatives of the
international community agree that the gap between
presidential and parliamentary elections should be kept
to a minimum, but they have also noted that this should
not be achieved at the expense of a well organized and
transparent election with adequate time for technical
and political requirements to be properly met.

With regard to the management of electoral
operations, we have streamlined international support
in order to capitalize on the proven strengths of each
international partner. UNDP will continue to oversee
trust fund management and donor relations, in addition
to contributing to support for electoral observation.
The United Nations Office for Project Services, which
has demonstrated its flexibility in administrative and
logistical matters, will be the executing agency for all
budget lines.

That brings me to the very important matter of
the funding required for the holding of the 2005
elections. Depending on the date they are held, it is
estimated that between $120 million and $130 million
will be needed to cover the three elections. If the
Government should decide to hold out-of-country
elections in Iran and Pakistan, an additional
$30 million at least would need to be added to that
estimate. UNDP is in the process of closing the books
of the voter registration and the presidential election
projects. Once that is completed, leftover funds will be
allocated to the parliamentary elections. We will make
appeals to the international community for the
remainder of the funding needed as soon as the date of
the elections has been decided, since, as I said,
different time frames require different budgets.

I should add that, from the operational standpoint, it
is anticipated that the modalities for the 2005 elections
will closely follow those of the 2004 elections. The
location and the number of polling sites - 25,000 - was
based on registration figures and proposals from
communities. There is therefore no reason to alter those
basic parameters. Similarly, logistical arrangements for
the deployment of personnel and material will, in the
main, be replicated with the assistance of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the coalition.

Turning to the issue of security, the deployment
of the National Army and professional police will gain
additional relevance for the parliamentary elections,
for which close to 400 district elections will need to be
secured. I am pleased to report that the Afghan
National Army, currently at 28 battalions - a force of
approximately 17,000 - is expected to increase to 32
battalions by April and to 39 battalions by July. The
size of the reformed and trained Afghan National
Police is also expected to increase from approximately
30,000 members currently to more than 37,000 by
April and more than 45,000 by July.

While the Afghan police and army will play a
major role in the 2005 elections, as they did in the
2004 election, international forces will remain
indispensable for providing security and for backing up
national agencies. ISAF and the coalition have
indicated their full support for the next election and
have noted that their most urgent requirement is that an
electoral time frame be in place as soon as possible in
order to enable them to adjust their plans.

Finally, we must have in mind the type of
security challenges that the United Nations itself will
be facing. While the abduction of three United Nations
electoral workers in October was brought to a
successful conclusion - and I should take this
opportunity to thank those Governments that had a
very significant involvement in securing that release -
and, while the overall security environment has shown
signs of improvement in recent weeks, the kidnapping
and killing of a United Nations Office for Project
Services (UNOPS) subcontracted staff member on
15 December is a reminder of the possibility that the
targeting of international personnel could occur again
and perhaps become more routine once winter
conditions recede and the movement of anti-
Government forces becomes easier.

This issue must be tackled in a comprehensive
manner. The United Nations Country Team has
addressed this problem through a comprehensive
security assessment. Its overall conclusions are that the
security situation remains very diverse in different
parts of the country; that adequate measures must be
taken that will provide United Nations agencies and
electoral operations accessibility to risk-prone regions;
and that the strict observance of minimum operational
security standards, which enabled the United Nations
to carry out its mandate in 2004, should enable us to
operate in the same manner once again in 2005.

Let me turn now to developments in other areas
that will have a bearing on the environment in which
the elections will be taking place.

The Council is well aware of the fact that the
narcotics industry and the accompanying corruption are
now clearly one of the biggest threats to the building of
an effective, democratic Afghan State and to the
country's long-term peace and stability. Opium
cultivation remains one of the largest sources of illegal
income and serves to support criminal and factional
agendas that aim to undermine the central Government.

One of the most worrisome aspects of the
narcotics industry is the extent to which the Afghan
economy and, therefore, the population now depend on
it. Valued in 2004 at $2.8 billion, the opium economy
is now equivalent to about 60 per cent of Afghanistan's
gross domestic product. It is estimated that in 2004,
356,000 families were involved in opium-poppy
cultivation - an increase of 35 per cent from 2003.
Poppy cultivation has also spread to 34 provinces and
now accounts for 56 per cent of total cultivated land.

The central Government has shown a
commitment to tackling the problem. We welcome the
recent establishment of the new Ministry of Counter-
Narcotics, and we welcome also the holding in
December by President Karzai of a national conference
on counter-narcotics, attended by governors, chiefs of
provincial police departments, tribal elders from
throughout the country, relevant ministries, and
representatives of donor countries, United Nations
agencies and international non-governmental
organizations. President Karzai spoke resolutely about
the need to eliminate the drug problem from
Afghanistan, warning that Afghanistan could very well
become a pariah State should counter-narcotics efforts
fail. Since that event, significant numbers of farmers in
the east and the south have been replacing poppy with
wheat. That is, of course, a very welcome
development, even though the extent to which those
initiatives will make a dent in poppy production can be
determined only during the harvesting month, in April.

At the same national conference in December, the
Government officially launched the national narcotics
eradication programme, which is due to focus on seven
key provinces in a staggered fashion until July 2005.
The national programme will include the provision of
alternative livelihoods for poppy-growing farmers, the
extension of drug law enforcement, the implementation
of drug-control legislation, the establishment of
effective institutions, and the introduction of
programmes aimed at prevention and at treatment for
addicts. Governor-led programmes will also be
implemented in other provinces.

In order to counterbalance the potentially
negative impact of eradication initiatives, it is critical
that alternative livelihood programmes be strengthened
and made known to affected communities. It is also
crucial that the Government develop further its
ongoing counter-narcotics public information campaign
and disseminate its messages through traditional and
community-based channels.

I mentioned earlier that disarmament and
demobilization had been a key consideration in
deciding on the date and modalities of the elections.
Indeed, it has been and remains a constant concern of
Afghans that elections should take place when a proper
political environment has been created through
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR).
That concern applies particularly to local elections,
where a web of political interests and armed groups
could significantly distort the electoral process.

The Security Council will recall that, in the most
recent briefing to the Council on Afghanistan two
months ago, we reported that 22,000 ex-combatants
had been disarmed and that 75 per cent of the total
number of heavy weapons in the country had been
cantoned. I am pleased to inform the Council that,
since then, significant progress has been made,
particularly in the past few weeks, under the combined
influence of the momentum of the presidential election
and the good work done by the Ministry of Defence
and the international community under the lead of the
Government of Japan.

To date, 33,000 militiamen have been disarmed,
and the heavy weapons cantonment programme is
almost complete. More than 63,000 names have been
removed from the payroll, which, to a large extent,
included ghost units rather than real militia forces.
Given the rate of actual disarmament compared to the
official strength of militia forces, we can now assume
that, of the residual 40,000 names on the original list,
only 20,000 to 30,000 really exist and have yet to be
disarmed. If the DDR momentum is sustained, and if
the remaining obstacles are removed, we can therefore
reasonably expect the disarmament and demobilization
of the Afghan militia forces to be completed according
to the schedule agreed at the Berlin Conference last
year - that is, by June 2005 - with reintegration
activities for those demobilized continuing until 2006.

Improved access to large stocks of heavy
weapons and ammunition in areas where cantonment
operations had been previously hampered -
particularly in Herat, Mazar and the north-west - has
accelerated progress of this important aspect of DDR.
Throughout Afghanistan, Afghanistan's New
Beginnings Programme (ANBP) - the United Nations
DDR programme - has cantoned and disabled close to
8,000 heavy weapons thus far. That figure vastly
exceeds the surveyed total of operational and
repairable heavy weapons in the country, originally
estimated at only approximately 4,200. Cantonment of
heavy weapons is now complete in the east, south-east,
south, north-west and central highlands.

Access has also been gained to large stocks of
ammunition in areas previously off-limits to
disarmament activities. Those stocks also proved to be
much larger and often more dangerous than expected
and pose considerable challenges in terms of disposal
or storage for the purpose of re-utilization by the
Afghan National Army. The Ministry of Defence, with
the support of the international community under
Canada's lead, has embarked on the complex task of
managing the ammunition that has been discovered. An
ammunition survey has begun in Mazar-e-Sharif and
Herat, the two locations considered to have the most
substantial stocks.

It is important to note that DDR has been
particularly successful in northern Afghanistan. The
requirement under the new political party law that units
with links to political organizations must comply with
DDR before a political organization can be registered
has resulted in considerable disarmament in that area.
In particular, practically all military divisions under the
control of General Dostum have now begun the DDR
process. Broad disarmament will, hopefully, contribute
to stabilizing a region that has been particularly prone
to inter-factional conflict over the past three years.

Let me take the opportunity to flag the
importance of providing the DDR programme with
adequate resources. Unless fresh funds to cover the
cost of running a complex disarmament programme are
provided to ANBP, the programme will suffer delays,
and the momentum built since the presidential election
could be lost.

Let me add one important point with regard to
DDR. Since the inception of the programme in 2003,
DDR has focused so far only on militia forces formally
affiliated with the Ministry of Defence. While this
DDR programme is progressing well, a large number
of miscellaneous irregular forces were not included in
the programme and continue to exist throughout the
country. Some - although not all - of those forces
are among the main sources of insecurity and human
rights abuses in certain parts of the country, and their
activities are frequently linked to drug cultivation and
the drug trade. In order to create a secure environment
for parliamentary elections, the new Government
therefore must, as a matter of priority and with the
support of the international community, tackle the
problem of irregular militias.

As the Council is well aware, the consolidation of
peace can and usually will mean very different things
in different countries. In the case of Afghanistan, it has
been the international consensus since the Bonn
Agreement that the principal answer to the challenges
of terrorism, factionalism and the narcotics industry
lies in the building of a strong, effective, balanced and
representative Government that is able to carry out the
will of the overwhelming majority of Afghans to live
in peace under the law, protected from violent
extremism and from those political and ethnic divisions
that have fuelled the conflicts of the past two decades.

Last year's presidential election showed the
determination with which the Afghans embrace that
vision. The repeated failure of extremists to derail the
electoral process, combined with the better
performance of security forces, point today to the
possibility that the current improvement in the overall
security situation will be sustained. Further DDR will
create a better environment not only for the upcoming
elections, but also for the expansion of civilian
administration, reconstruction and the restoration of
the rule of law.

Such an advance towards the goal of an effective
Afghan State is, in our view, a very real prospect. But
that is no reason for complacency on the part of the
international community - quite the contrary -
because such progress is predicated upon continued
high levels of international assistance - military,
economic and political - and because the narco-
economy now constitutes a distinct challenge to State-
building in Afghanistan, and bringing it under control
will require additional efforts by the Afghans, but also
by the international community.

Let me conclude, therefore, by calling upon the
Security Council to continue, throughout 2005, to
provide vigorous leadership to the international
community in support of the peace process in
Afghanistan.

