Mr. Miller (United States of America): The
Security Council met only last week (see S/PV.8164) and
heard the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs describe his visit to Syria and reiterate a series
of requests that, in his estimation, would be a positive
step towards improving the humanitarian situation
in Syria.

Sadly, not only has none of those requests been
approved by the Syrian regime, but also the situation in
places such as eastern Ghouta continues to deteriorate
beyond our worst imagaination. To the surprise of
no one, cross-line deliveries in Syria, particularly to
besieged and hard-to-reach areas, remain stalled. In
fact, there have been no United Nations inter-agency
convoys anywhere for more than six weeks and no
convoys to a besieged area for more than eight weeks.

We deplore what are, frankly, starve-and-siege
tactics, preventing the distribution of aid, which must
be needs-based. As a result, many families are going
without the most basic food, medicine and other
supplies required for survival. Hospitals reuse syringes
and other medical items meant for single use and,
during the coldest months of winter, families who have
run out of fuel and cooking oil burn household items to
stay warm. That is happening in Ghouta and elsewhere
throughout Syria.

We need an immediate, unconditional humanitarian
pause in eastern Ghouta, where the impact of air strikes
and artillery shelling on the civilian infrastruture has
forced the closure of more schools and medical clinics.
Those bombings continued over the weekend, further
proving that any supposed ceasefire in the area was
merely aspirational.

We reiterate the need to evacuate hundreds of
critically ill people trapped in eastern Ghouta. We have
seen no movement on that issue since late December,
and the list continues to grow. Only a few weeks ago,
we heard that the medical evacuation list contained
600 names, including hundreds of children. That list
has now grown to at least 750 people, according to the
United Nations staff on the ground.

Over the weekend, the United Nations reported
that another critically ill person on Ghouta's medical
evacuation list died due to the lack of medical
treatment. Such deaths are senseless and reflect the
Syrian regime's depraved disregard for human life.
Such gratuitous cruelty suggests that the regime's
siege of eastern Ghouta is directed not at the armed
opposition but against the civilian population. We need
not remind the members of the Council that a siege
directed against civilians is a violation of international
humanitarian law.

We also appreciate the fact that Sweden and Kuwait
worked on a draft presidential statement to address
such dire humanitarian challenges. The overwhelming
majority of Council members agree that we must
be clear in demanding that the Syrian authorities
allow immediate medical evacuations and cross-line
assistance. When there are hundreds of thousands of
Syrians besieged by the regime and starving due to the
regime's actions, such demands are the very least that
the Council can make.

We would also like to take a moment to thank the
Government of Jordan for facilitating an extraordinary
delivery of humanitarian assistance in mid-January
to the internally displaced populations stranded at
Rukban. That population now has food and relief items
for one month. However, we continue to wait for the
Syrian regime's formal approval for the United Nations
to begin cross-line aid deliveries to that vulnerable
population from Damascus. The United Nations
submitted its proposal in mid-November and has still
receievd no response. All arrangements have been
made for the deliveries to begin as soon as possible.
The Syrian regime has only to grant its approval and to
stand out of the way for life-saving assistance to reach
those in need.

As we heard earlier today, members of the Security
Council visited the United States Holocaust Memorial
Museum in Washington, DC, yesterday and saw the
exhibition about the Syrian regime's arbitrary detention
and torture of more than 100,000 civilians. The name of
the exhibition is "Please Don't Forget Us". We should
bear that, and what the Syrian regime is capable of
doing, in mind as we discuss yet again what is taking
place in easter Ghouta and elsewhere in Syria.

