Mr. Schori (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European Countries associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated countries
Cyprus and Malta, as well as the European Free Trade
Association (EFTA) country member of the European
Economic Area (EEA) - Iceland - align themselves
with this statement.

The European Union welcomes the visit of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Hans
Haekkerup. We thank him for his most informative
presentation on the challenges which lie ahead in
Kosovo. The European Union also expresses its
appreciation for the dedication and commitment of the
Commander of the Kosovo Force (KFOR), General
Carlo Cabigiosu, who decided not to leave Kosovo in
light of the present security situation in the area.

The European Union fully supports the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General's efforts to
ensure full implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). The European Union believes
the approach taken by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General is the way forward to address the
remaining tasks in Kosovo. We underline our firm
commitment to a democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on
Kosovo confirms that the number of ethnically
motivated crimes, mainly against Serbs and Roma,
remains alarmingly high. The European Union
vigorously condemns the use of violence and
extremism and any act which makes the coexistence of
communities more difficult, such as the recent attack
on a police station and the burning of private homes in
northern Mitrovica, and calls on all leaders with
political and moral authority to distance themselves
from such acts. The European Union urges political
leaders and local communities to increase their efforts
to build confidence through constructive dialogue in
good faith, and to make progress on issues of common
interest. In this context, the European Union highly
appreciates the central role played by KFOR and the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in ensuring security and public order
in the province, and its efforts to build a safe
environment for all the peoples and communities of
Kosovo. The European Union is ready to continue its
support, including through UNMIK, to the defusing of
tensions through projects supporting all ethnic groups
and minorities and promoting long-term economic
development and enhanced security.

The European Union supports UNMIK's efforts
to increase the dialogue and cooperation with relevant
institutions of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We
welcome the recent steps towards opening an UNMIK
liaison office in Belgrade and hope that such an office
will be inaugurated soon.

The European Union welcomes the recent
adoption of an amnesty law by the Parliament of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the steps taken to
implement that law. We reiterate, however, our call on
the Serbian authorities and those of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to find the appropriate legal
channels to release all remaining political prisoners.
Such measures would constitute a significant
contribution towards the beginning of a dialogue
between representatives of Kosovo and Belgrade.

The European Union fully supports the initiative
to develop a legal framework for provisional
institutions for self-government, including adequate
safeguards for minority rights, as the next step. The
establishment of a legal framework, and in particular
the definition of the functions and the powers of the
elected bodies, is essential to ensure successful
Kosovo-wide elections, in conformity with Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). The European Union
recognizes the importance of keeping all parties,
including authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Serb authorities, informed of the
development of this process.

A certain additional number of steps should be
taken before the elections take place. There is a need to
develop the electoral system further, including through
an updated and integrated civil and voter registry
which would include refugees, internally displaced
persons and members of minority groups who did not
register for last year's local elections, so as to ensure
that the elections truly represent the will of the
population of Kosovo. The European Union stresses
the importance of a high-security environment for the
voting and wishes to underline the need for further
progress in the implementation of the results of local
elections.

The European Union expects all ethnic groups to
participate constructively in the development of the
legal framework and in the preparations for Kosovo-
wide elections. In this regard, the European Union
regrets the recent withdrawal of the Kosovo Serb
representative from the Working Group on the legal
framework. The European Union calls on Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia/Serb authorities to support this
important stage in the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999) and encourages Belgrade to exert its
influence to ensure the adequate involvement of
Kosovo Serbs in this process, in particular through the
resumption of the participation of a qualified
representative of the Kosovo Serb community in the
Working Group on the legal framework.

The European Union remains concerned at the
level of violence in south-east Serbia. It welcomes the
recent signature of the ceasefire agreement by Serb and
Albanian representatives, which constitutes an
important step towards security and stability in the
region. The European Union stresses the need for the
parties to abide strictly by the agreements. As a next
step, the European Union invites the parties to begin
direct negotiations as soon as possible and to put in
place further necessary confidence-building measures
to ensure the casing of tensions in the area.

The European Union welcomes the agreement
reached between the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia on the reduction of the ground safety zone.
The European Union will continue to extend concrete
support to efforts towards a peaceful solution of the
conflict. The European Union wishes to underline the
importance of an increased presence of European
Union monitors in the area as a useful contribution in
this respect and has today decided to make available a
substantial additional number of monitors on the
ground in the next few days.

The European Union is deeply alarmed by the
recent clashes between Albanian extremists and the
armed forces of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia near the city of Tetovo and by recent
reports of acts of violence in other parts of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. The European Union
strongly condemns the rising number of incidents in
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and calls
on all those with political authority involved in
Kosovo, southern Serbia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia to distance themselves clearly
and publicly from, and isolate, the forces behind these
attacks and to shoulder their responsibility for peace
and stability in the region.

The European Union supports the Government's
policy of maintaining the appropriate level of restraint
in preserving the political stability of the country and
underlines the importance of a constructive dialogue
between leaders of all ethnic groups for stability,
pluralism and political and social integration.

The European Union reiterates its strong
attachment to the principle of the inviolability of all
borders in the region and to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. Recalling the importance of integrated
border management, the European Union stands ready
to support efforts by the countries of the region. A
peaceful and stable former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia - within internationally recognized
borders - is a key factor for stability in the region.

We note the importance of developments in and
around Kosovo for stability in the region, as has been
highlighted by the presentation and the interventions
we have listened to today. In such a broader context,
and in line with the Zagreb summit of last November
between the heads of State and Government of the
European Union and of the western Balkan States, the
European Union reiterates its strong support for the
forces of integration and cooperation in the region and
notes the constructive spirit inspiring the heads of State
and Government of the South-East European countries,
as shown in the declaration of the recent South-East
European Cooperation Process summit held in Skopje.

