Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate and thank you,
Mr. President. I also thank Mr. Nikolay Mladenov
for his briefing and ongoing efforts to promote the
peace process in the Middle East and maintain its
terms of reference, as well as his attempts to contain
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the Gaza
Strip while continuously encouraging Palestinian
reconciliation efforts.

Today's briefing and statements only reflect the
injustice suffered by the Palestinian people. We all know
it full well. Therefore, I will not touch upon the factors
or reasons behind the situation, which is due mainly
to the continued occupation and practices of Israel,
which, despite the illegality of its actions, has been able
to maintain an unacceptable situation on the ground.
We have already witnessed the negative repercussions
of those actions, and we will see further repercussions
in the future if we maintain the status quo.

Instead, I will touch on the main points of the
objectives that we must all work for so as to restore the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and put in
place the building blocks for security and stability in
the region, including for the Israeli people themselves.

Therefore, allow me to reiterate the ongoing
Egyptian efforts to achieve Palestinian reconciliation
and the return of legitimate authority in Gaza. I would
like to seize this opportunity to call on the parties to
give priority to the interests of the Palestinian people
and to recognize that the different strata of society
in the Gaza Strip or the West Bank are those bearing
the exorbitant cost of division. Restoring the rights of
the Palestinian people and ending occupation requires
united leadership, objectives and policies.

Turning to the core of the conflict and the crisis
under consideration - that is, the continued Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territories, including Al-Quds
Al-Sharif since 1967 - it might be helpful to draw the
Council's attention to the fact that the road to peace
is still clear. We need the parties to recognize only
that the fates of the Palestinian and Israeli people are
intertwined. Bringing security to Israelis and achieving
the true integration of Israel within its geographical
parameters will not be accomplished by building walls
or illegal settlements, or by maintaining the state
of injustice that has been suffered by the Palestinian
people on a daily basis since last century.

I understand the view of those who believe that
talking about international law, Security Council
resolutions or the Arab Peace Initiative is redundant.
However, I differ from those who believe that the
substance and content of such parameters have failed
to bring about the desired peace. We have all heard
that before in past years, both inside and outside the
Council. However, we have never witnessed their
implementation or any serious attempt to do so, and
have thus never been in a position to honestly judge if
they are able to bring about peace.

I therefore call on those who claim that such
parameters represent injustice against Israel or an
attempt to impose a settlement without negotiations to
read the Arab Peace Initiative carefully or to compare
it with the contents of General Assembly resolution
181 (II), which established the State of Israel, or even
international consensus following the 1967 occupation.
Only then will they realize the level of flexibility
reflected in that Initiative by Arab States on all aspects.
I call on them to also study all resolutions adopted by
the Council so as to realize that they all provide for
negotiations as a path to settlement. They establish
a path that takes into account the interests of the
Palestinian and the Israeli peoples alike.

I reiterate that we are committed to a two-
State solution based on international legitimacy,
and negotiations on the 1967 borders, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as the capital of Palestine. We agree with the
affirmation that has been repeated by the Secretary-
General to the effect that there is no plan B. Disregarding
this path amounts to the destruction of 25 years of work
since the signing of the Oslo Accords. What is more
dangerous is that it entrenches the fact of a one-State
solution, which both peoples reject.

In conclusion, I warn the Council against the
illusion of maintaining the status quo. That is a false
belief that clearly disregards the parameters I just
mentioned. It would only lead Israelis and Palestinians
towards a one-State solution rejected by all. There is
no middle ground, which leads me to pose a legitimate
question to all those who find it useless to refer to the
framework or parameters of the two-State solutions:
Has the surrender to the one-State solution become their
final choice? I hope that the answer to that question
is no.

