Mr. Winid (Poland): Poland aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union. I should like to add some comments in my
national capacity.

I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
debate. Given the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security
conferred on the Security Council, it is very topical and
appropriate to concentrate this debate on reconfirming
the fundamentals of the Charter of the United Nations.

Let me begin with a story of Poland's extraordinary
path as a member of the United Nations. In 1939, Poland
became the very first victim of the Second World War
in Europe. We were subsequently invaded by both our
neighbours, on 1 September 1939 from the West and on
17 September from the East. Throughout the next six
years, my country not only lost 6 million people but also
made an immense military contribution to the defeat of

the Nazism. Fighting on all fronts, Poles accounted for
the fifth biggest Allied army in the European theatre.

It is therefore a paradox of history that, due to an
objection by one of the Allies, the legitimate Polish
Government in London was deprived of its right to
participate in the work of the preliminary conference
that drafted the Charter of the United Nations, as well
as to represent Poland at the founding San Francisco
Conference. A great Polish pianist, Arthur Rubinstein,
who was invited to play the American anthem at the
inaugural concert at the Conference, noted as he
entered the hall, with its long line of all the national
flags of participating States, that the Polish flag was
missing. After playing the American anthem, he stood
up and said: In "this hall, where the great nations gather
to make this world a better place, I do not see the flag of
Poland, on behalf of which this cruel war was waged."
He then sat down and played the Polish anthem in a
great resounding forte, as a symbolic artistic protest
against injustice. Despite the absence ofrepresentatives
of the legitimate Polish Government at the Conference,
Poland was counted as one of the United Nations
founding Members by amending the wording of Article
3 of the Charter. It took my country nearly another half-
century to regain full sovereignty. The story of Poland
must teach us all that no country should ever be left
behind if we are ever to create a truly United Nations.
The rules and provisions of the Charter are equally
binding on all. The strong cannot silence the weak.

As one of the founding Members of the United
Nations, Poland is fully committed to the purposes
and principles of the Charter. The 70 years of the
history of the Organization fully confirm the validity
and continuing importance of the United Nations
founding act, particularly in strengthening efforts by
the international community to maintain peace and
security. One would have hoped that, 70 years after
the Second World War, armed conflicts would have
disappeared from international life. Unfortunately, that
is not the case. Numerous military conflicts on many
continents show that the reasons for which the United
Nations was established are equally as valid today as in
the early days of the Organization. We should be proud
of many situations when firm and consistent actions by
Member States helped to prevent threats to international
peace, contributed to conflict resolution and restored
peace and stability. But we should equally remember
our failures, in order to learn from those lessons and
prevent the reoccurrence of similar tragic instances.
Let me be clear: we strongly believe in the
principles upon which the system of the United Nations
is based. Respect for the basic rules ofthe Charter - for
example, regarding sovereignty, territorial integrity and
the right of countries to decide their own futures - is a
prerequisite for the fair and just participation of States
in international life. We have seen far too many threats
and challenges to international peace and security when
those rules were not observed. We see it now in Ukraine,
which is facing external military aggression and where
the values enshrined in the Preamble and in Article 2 of
the Charter, such as respect for the obligations arising
from international law and the peaceful settlement of
international disputes, are seriously compromised.
We see it in Southern Europe, where human dignity
and freedom are being challenged by terrorists and
criminals pretending to act in the name of Islam.

Respect for democracy and the rule of law is
as important in international relations as it is on a
national level. As Members of the United Nations, we
are equally obliged to implement international law. We
cannot shy away from using all the tools at our disposal,
including sanctions, when dealing with clear violations
of international norms.

In the twenty-first century, external threats to
national security do not come only from other countries
or international terrorist organizations. An important
example is the fate of the small island States, which
face the challenge of the dire consequences of global
warming. The United Nations has to better address
those new developments.

Today, Poland stands ready to further contribute
to the United Nations. Solidarity, responsibility and
commitment are key words that characterize our
activities at the United Nations. Solidarity is not only
the name ofthe movement that some years ago triggered
historic political and economic changes in Poland. It
is also a symbol of the much-needed international
cooperation that is vital to the success of our common
efforts.

