Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for your initiative to convene this timely
debate on such an important issue.

The protection of civilians has over the years
justifiably assumed more importance in the mandates
of United Nations peacekeeping operations because of
increasingly challenging environments. Sustainable
peace is hardly possible when local populations are
at risk of Violence. When civilians are vulnerable,
governance, security and the rule of law all flounder,
and the United Nations is unable to fulfil a fundamental
precept of its Charter, "to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war".

United Nations peacekeeping mandates have evolved
over the past two decades. From the traditional role of
monitoring the implementation of peace agreements,
modern peacekeeping has become multidimensional,
addressing the full spectrum of activities, from
providing secure environments to protecting civilians
and rebuilding the capacities of States.

The primary responsibility for the protection of
all civilians, without discrimination, lies with the host
country. Peacekeepers support the host Governments
in carrying out this responsibility. The creation of the
Force Intervention Brigade in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, for example, was designed as a short-term
measure to allow local forces to fully develop their
capabilities and assume their responsibilities.

Theprotection-ofcivilianmandateshavetraditionally
been implemented by our peacekeepers while adhering
to the principles of peacekeeping. It is a mistaken
notion that these principles are somehow incompatible
with protecting civilians. The edifice of peacekeeping
is based on these principles, and they continue to be
the bedrock on which it rests. The Security Council
establishes protection-of-civilians mandates, and the
use of force in defence ofthe mandate is an integral and
ineluctable part of those principles.

While robust mandates are at times necessitated
by the situation on the ground, they also pose practical
implementation challenges. Questions raised 15 years
ago by the Brahimi report about the credibility and
achievability of a blanket mandate to protect civilians
still await convincing answers. Consultations with
troop-contributing countries at the time of formulation
of such mandates are certainly necessary for
better implementation.

The conduct of peacekeeping operations needs to
be driven by the unique requirements of each mission,
not by any political or financial consideration. We need
to collectively ensure that any given peacekeeping
mission is provided adequate financial and other
necessary resources along with political support to
accomplish its assigned tasks.
My delegation also believes that the participation of
women in peacekeeping operations helps to make them
not just more people-centred but also more effective in
implementing protection-of-civilians mandates.

An issue that needs greater attention is the fact
that protection of civilians is primarily interpreted in
military terms: the provision of tangible protection
under imminent threat. Its scope should include
protection through political action as well as institution-
and capacity-building. The use of non-military tools
such as advocacy, liaison with local communities and
building the capacity of national authorities also help to
achieve the same objective.

Pakistan, as one of the world's top troop-
contributing countries, has proudly and conscientiously
undertaken the task of proactively protecting civilians
when mandated by the Council, including in current
missions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Darfur, Cote d'Ivoire, the Central African Republic and
Liberia. We have demonstrated that this can be done
by a robust deterrence posture and without resorting to
the actual use of force, as in the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur recently.

In similar situations in the past, the decisive action of
our peacekeepers in Cambodia, for example, helped the
consolidation of peace in the early 1990s. In Bosnia in
the mid-1990s, our troops defended the United Nations
safe area and its ethnically mixed civilian population
against repeated onslaughts of ethnic-cleansing
militias. Then, in 2003 and 2004 in Sierra Leone, an
unsteady United Nations presence was transformed
into a major United Nations success story, primarily as
a result of the participation of Pakistani peacekeepers.
In one district of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Pakistani troops provided security to thousands
of civilians exposed to brutal ethnic violence.

The protection of civilians is a system-wide
responsibility, with the host country in the lead. But
it is best promoted by preventing the outbreak of
armed conflicts in the first place, addressing the root
causes of conflicts, finding inclusive political solutions
to disputes and seeking peaceful the settlement of
conflicts. Political solutions must be placed front and
centre of peacekeeping operations, for that is the only
Viable path to achieving sustainable and enduring peace
and security.

