Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I would like to start
by joining other speakers in welcoming High
Representative Valentin Inzko. I would also like to
thank him for his briefing today and his comprehensive
report (S/2019/364, annex).

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union (EU) and I would
like to add several remarks in my national capacity.

Croatia never misses the opportunity to participate
in debates on Bosnia and Herzegovina in this Chamber,
which is a sign of the respect and importance that we
attach to our neighbour. It cannotbe overstated- Croatia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina are neighbouring and
friendly countries, sharing more than 1,000 kilometres
of border. Croatia is Bosnia and Herzegovina's first,
and still its only, EU neighbour and is one of its top
trade and investing partners.

Among the main reasons why Croatia has attached
the utmost importance to Bosnia and Herzegovina
and will continue to do so is that Croats in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are one of the three constituent peoples
and that Croatia, as a signatory to the Dayton-Paris
Accords, has a special responsibility towards them and
their country, Bosnia and Herzegovina. For all those
reasons, Croatia ascribes the greatest importance to
the territorial integrity, stability and functionality of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The prosperity and well-being
of Bosnia and Herzegovina is therefore of strategic
significance for Croatia.

For today's discussion, I wish to focus on three
major points: stability and functionality, equality and
electoral reform, and European integration.

A stable, peaceful and prosperous Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which moves ahead with determination
on its European path and in which full institutional
equality among its three constituent peoples and all
its citizens is guaranteed, should play an invaluable
role in upholding the stability of South-East Europe
and contributing to the stability of the European
Union as a whole. At previous Council meetings on
that matter, Croatia cautioned that political impasse
and divisive rhetoric pose the risk of derailing Bosnia
and Herzegovina from the path towards much-needed
reforms and undermine the very functionality and
stability of the country.

The responsibility remains with the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to take ownership of political
reforms. Bosnia and Herzegovina must prove that it
knows how to and that it is able to organize its political
life effectively and that it will, in a spirit ofcompromise,
build the consensus of all political stakeholders in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is particularly important
for a country aspiring to one day become a credible
member of the European Union.

The European path and the reasonable expectations
of the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina to benefit
from much-needed reforms and advance towards
European Union integration must not be held hostage to
partisan politics and politicizing. In that sense, we echo
the European Union's position that urges all political
leaders to assume their responsibilities and proceed
without further delay to the formation of Governments.

The elections of last autumn were held in a very
complex political environment. Not only was the
election campaign rather heated and divisive but the
legal loopholes and inconsistencies with the country's
Constitution, which were not fixed in time for the
elections, created legal uncertainties and once again
opened the door to electoral engineering. We consider
that ignoring the aim and spirit of the Dayton Peace
Accords remains counterproductive and dangerous and
we hope that a legal solution will be found in the future
with a view to ensuring the legitimate representation
of the political representatives of all three constituent
peoples in the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As one of the constituent peoples, Croats feel that
such electoral engineering has deprived them of their
legitimate representative in the Presidency. We cannot
pretend that nothing happened and a solution should be
actively sought. In this very Chamber, we have already
expressed on an earlier occasion our deep concern
regarding that adverse development and its important
political ramifications. It is therefore of key importance
to embark on the election law reform without any delay
in order to avoid similar situations in the future. Not
doing so or failing to take action would be much too
damaging for Bosnia and Herzegovina. Consensus
should actively be sought among all three constituent
peoples in that regard.

We stress, once again, that the urgent adoption
of electoral reform, following the rulings by the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
the Ljubie case and in the case of the city of Mostar,
is necessary and of paramount importance for the
stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Ensuring equality
through the proportionate and legitimate representation
of the constituent peoples at all levels of Government is
essential for preserving the stability of the country. The
time to act is now; delays will only deepen the problem.

Next year, municipal elections are scheduled to
be held in Bosnia and Herzegovina. All necessary
improvements of the electoral process must be
accomplished before that. We truly hope that the people
of Mostar will be in a position to go to the polls and
stand in the elections. In that sense, the year 2019
does not have to be a part of the negative cycle; on the
contrary, it provides an opportunity for the country
to enhance its functionality for years to come. The
functionality of Bosnia and Herzegovina remains one
of the most important issues in its European and Euro-
Atlantic integration. Bosnia and Herzegovina deserves
a secure and prosperous future and can rely on Croatia's
continuous and staunch support.

Our goal is to see Bosnia and Herzegovina fully
entrenched on its European path. That is the best catalyst
for addressing the internal outstanding issues and
providing a safeguard to ensure further democratization
and reforms. Strengthening institutions and ensuring
the freedom of media and an independent, impartial
and efficient judiciary are of the essence.

In conclusion, Croatia stands ready to render its
full support and assistance. A bilateral agreement on
European partnership is not only a token of political
support from Croatia, but also provides a substantial
framework for technical work and expertise. We extend
our full support to Bosnia and Herzegovina and hope
it finds internal strength and wisdom in overcoming
internal hurdles so that it can proceed more efficiently
and firmly on the European integration trajectory
and spare no effort in fully developing its vast yet
untapped potential.
