Mr. Bessho (Japan): I will try to be brief, because
I think much of what needs to be said has already
been said.

Japan's position, as the Council knows, is that we
supported the draft resolution (S/2016/846) submitted
by France and Spain, which called for an immediate
cessation of bombing against civilians. That is something
that we stand by. The Security Council should stand
by the very important principle that indiscriminatory
attacks on civilians must stop.

The other factor in this situation is fighting
terrorism. We must fight terrorism and we must fight
it strongly, but that does not justify indiscriminate
attacks on civilians. I think there should be a very wide
understanding and agreement on this point.

When the delegation of New Zealand proposed a
draft resolution trying to unite the Security Council,
we supported that move and felt that it could be a useful
way of proceeding. However, as the representative of
New Zealand said himself today, the situation does not
seem to allow drafting to be a useful thing to do right
now. We do need a better, united understanding within
the Council in order to adopt a resolution.

Therefore, I once again feel, in listening to the
disagreement today, that we really need to go back
to the basics - saying no to indiscriminate attacks
on civilians and trying to save civilians. Like France,
I welcome the cessation of bombing by Russia and
Syria, which lasted for a number of hours. However,
the problem was that it was unilateral, and a unilateral
cessation requires a lot of work to be done by the United
Nations in order to make evacuations possible. Right
now, I can say only that we must stop the bombing and
that a ceasefire should last much longer. We should try
to find a way to prevent unilateral action from Russia
and Syria. Rather, we should seek an agreed cessation
of hostilities.

Again, I call on the countries on the ground
to realize that it is not just their strategic or tactical
interests that are on the line; it is people's lives that
are on the line. I urge all those around the table and
all the members of the Security Council to really sit
down and think again so that we can perhaps revise the
draft resolution proposed by New Zealand and make
it useful.

