Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I will be very brief
because the explanation given by the representative of
Cuba allows me to leave out major details. I should like,
however, to reiterate our request to the Government of
the United States to expedite the extradition requested
by our Government on the basis of the treaties and
conventions we referred to in our statement.

The terrorist Luis Posada Carriles, after having
committed his crimes against the Cubana de Aviacio'n
aircraft, was detained and tried in Venezuela. He then
escaped from prison there and has since evaded justice.
Thus, in addition to his other crimes, he is a fugitive
from the Venezuelan legal system, which had granted
him all the legal provisions required to exercise his
rights.

He escaped, as I said, from a Venezuelan prison
and somehow ended up in this country. The
Government of the United States was well aware of his
presence here. We should like to reiterate Venezuela's
call on the Government of the United States to give due
attention to our request for this convicted and self-
confessed criminal to face the consequences of the law.
Venezuela will guarantee all the conditions needed for a
transparent trial even though we know, because Posada
Carriles himself has said so, that he was the brains
behind the bombing of the Cubana de Aviacion airliner.

We are, of course, concerned that allegations of
lesser crimes, such as immigration offences, continue to
be pursued against Posada Carriles, while the major
crimes committed by that international terrorist are
being ignored. Those crimes were committed not only
in Venezuela, but also in several Central American
countries, because Posada Carriles was for many years
in the service of the Central Intelligence Agency and, in
that capacity, committed terrorist acts in many countries
of Latin America and the Caribbean. He was even
responsible for many acts of torture against political
leaders of the left in Latin America and the Caribbean.

We wish to stress that Luis Posada Carriles must
be prosecuted as a terrorist in the United States or that
the United States must heed the extradition request
made by the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
