The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Heads of State and Government, the Secretary-General,
the Ministers and other representatives present in
the Security Council Chamber. Their presence today
underscores the importance of the subject matter under
discussion.

Members of the Council have before them a
list of speakers who have requested to participate
in accordance with rules 37 and 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, as well as with previous
practice of the Council in this regard. We propose that
they be invited to participate in this meeting.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2014/688, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
sponsored by Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, C6te d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mauritania, the
Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Nepal, the Netherlands, New Zealand, the
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, The
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United Republic of Tanzania,
the United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu and
Yemen.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/648, which contains a letter dated
3 September 2014 from the Permanent Representative
of the United States of America to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America

The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2178 (2014).

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.


