Mr. Vamos-Goldman (Canada): Canada would
like to express its strong support for the exceptional
work being done by the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) under the
leadership of Special Representative Jacques Paul
Klein. He and his staff can count on the continued
support of the international community as they carry
out their responsibilities as mandated by the Security
Council.

The United Nations has an important role to play
in implementing the Dayton/Paris Peace Accord. To
this end, the work of the Peace Implementation Council
has an impact on the execution of UNMIBH's mandate.
It is therefore right that the Security Council recognize
this linkage accordingly in the resolution we have
adopted today by supporting the Brussels Declaration.

Canada fully supported the decision not to invite The President (spoke in French): There are no

the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to the Peace other speakers on my list.
Implementation Council Ministerial meeting in
Brussels. As we argued at the time, along with the
majority of our Steering Board partners, the Belgrade

. . , , , , avenda.
regime, under the leadership of indicted war criminal °
Slobodan Milosevic, has consistently sought to actively The meeting rose at 10.50 am.
undermine the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement.

As my Government made clear at that meeting.
we look forward to the day when a democratic
Yugoslavia begins to participate constructively in the
peace implementation process throughout the region.
Unfortunately, this will not be possible under the
current regime in Belgrade.

We regret that the Russian Federation decided not
to attend the Brussels Ministerial meeting. We have
worked closely with Russia in helping to bring peace to
the region. and we look forward to its cooperation, as a
responsible Steering Board member and an important

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
contributor to the Stabilization Force (SFOR), in
bringing about the full implementation of the Brussels
Declaration.

