Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mark Malloch Brown for his
briefing.

The meeting that you have convened today,
Mr. President, is clearly an important one. It gives us
an opportunity to have a useful - indeed, a
necessary- discussion about the actual conditions
under which peacekeeping operations, for which the
Council has responsibility, unfold.

At the outset, I would like to reiterate what Mark
Malloch Brown said earlier in recalling that the
maintenance of international peace and security is, now
more than ever, at the very heart of the mission of the
United Nations. It is an activity that has evolved
considerably over the past few years. I believe that we
are all familiar with the figures; they have just been
repeated. The United Nations now has 18 peacekeeping
missions, involving 85,000 people. That has meant an
explosive increase in procurement. As we heard earlier,
and as Louise Frechette too has reminded us,
procurement costs have risen from $400 million to
$2 billion in just a few years, and the Secretariat
simply does not have the capacity to deal with such a
dramatic increase.

Let us not lose sight of the crucial fact that our
Organization should be proud of what it is doing in that
area. United Nations peacekeeping efforts are easy to
denigrate, but in fact they are effective and efficient. It
is important to remember the level of commitment of
the people on the ground. I would like, on behalf of my
Government and on my own behalf, to pay tribute to
the people on the ground for the work that they are
doing and to the activities of the United Nations in
general in the area of peacekeeping.

The material conditions surrounding
peacekeeping operations must be monitored very
rigorously on an ongoing basis. In my view, the
General Assembly clearly has an important part to play
in this respect. My delegation counts on the Assembly
to complete and follow up on reports that it has itself
requested. However, the Security Council, too, was set
up to examine such questions. It has the responsibility
for international peace and security and cannot remain
aloof from the material conditions surrounding that
mission.

Our objective in the Assembly and in the Council
must be the same: to ensure that peacekeeping
operations have the resources they need and that the
way in which such resources are used is above
reproach. In that respect, some information has been
given us that might prompt us further to increase our
vigilance.

One of the reports that the General Assembly
requested of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
relating to the peacekeeping business is a legitimate
cause for concern. Some alarming figures are cited -
sometimes hastily. Indeed, sometimes the losses
reflected in the report are aggregated with potential
losses - losses that could occur if procedures are not
strictly complied with or adapted.

However, it is true that light must be shed on any
misappropriation of funds, which must be followed up
on, including at the judicial level, and all necessary
remedies must be employed. I personally was reassured
by Mr. Mark Malloch Brown's indications of the
resolve of the Secretary-General in that respect.

However, we would have liked this report to be
clearer and more readable, because it does not provide
all the answers we would like in respect of some
fundamental issues.

We have taken note of the clarifications presented
by Mr. Mark Malloch Brown. Our concern is to be able
better to understand the situation. We have several basic
questions to which we would like answers, so that, as I
said earlier, we can better understand the problem.

First, how much of the problem is caused by
planning and programming difficulties, for example in
deciding the rate of deployment for an operation such
as the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS)?
How much is caused by mismanagement or to the
misuse of certain procedures, for example with respect
to guarantees requested of certain subcontractors? And
how much is caused by embezzlement, which means
that funds are misappropriated to the detriment of the
Organization?

We would like to know the relative importance of
those three different problems and to be made aware of
responsibilities in that respect.

While those three categories require close
vigilance and, of course, a response, we must be
careful not to lump them together.

Secondly, while procurement regulations are, of
course, very strictly applied at Headquarters, can they
be applied equally strictly at the local level in various
places, where conditions are not the same and where
competitive bidding is difficult? What would be some
possible alternatives?

I have a third question, which Mark Malloch
Brown has answered to some extent. How can we help
the Secretariat remedy these aberrations? We have
noted the clarifications and the corrections Mark
Malloch Brown has given us, and we await the report
to which he has referred. We believe that monitoring
must be more effective. However, can new rules and
regulations - even if necessary - be put into place
without also ensuring that the human and financial
resources are available to the Secretariat to enable it to
operate under more strict conditions? I believe that this
must be done. There is a need for greater monitoring,
and the required resources must be provided.

I believe that we all realize that this issue is a
very important and sensitive one and that there is much
at stake. Accordingly, my delegation will seek to
ensure that this issue is dealt with within the United
Nations with the required thoroughness and
seriousness, in conditions of transparency. In that
respect, it would be useful for us to have responses
from the procurement department and from the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to the earlier
OIOS report.

We believe that the ongoing audits and the
specific investigations under way are not yet completed
and that they must be carried out properly and with
diligence. The appropriate conclusions must be drawn
when the time comes. We believe also that the process
must continue, and that all competent bodies must
discharge their mandates with respect to these cross-
cutting issues, which relate to peacekeeping and to
respect for the financial and budgetary rules of the
Organization.

In our own countries, we all are aware of the
problems that can crop up when we try to improve our
management systems and make our policies more
effective. The United Nations must undergo the same
process, but it should not be treated more harshly. As
we prepare to launch a large-scale operation, in Darfur,
we must help the Secretariat. We must ensure that it is
not destabilized. We must be aware of the fact that
political impatience, although often justifiable, does
not always go very well with good management. There
is an old French saying to the effect that one must not
confuse speed with haste or precipitous action.

In conclusion, while thanking you once again,
Mr. President, for having convened this open and
inclusive debate, let me state that I believe that this
question must be dealt with in a level-headed manner,
because otherwise we will not attain our common goal:
to help the United Nations become more effective and
work better for peace. My delegation will do its utmost
to be helpful in that respect.

