Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Today is a
significant day for the Security Council, as the applause
ringing around the Chamber earlier this afternoon
attests. I was so very pleased that in this last meeting
of the year we are able to adopt a very positive step
on this most very difficult issue. The applause reflects
the pent-up frustration that the Council has been unable
for so long to adopt a resolution on the Israeli-Palestine
issue, despite regular reports from the Secretary-
General and the Special Coordinator that the two-State
solution was slipping away and that urgent action was

necessary to arrest it.

As I noted earlier, the focus of resolution 2334
(2016) is on settlements: the primary threat to the
viability of the two-State solution. However, as others
have pointed out, the resolution also includes welcome
elements on the need to stop violence and incitement and
lays the groundwork for a return to negotiations. There
is no question that ongoing Israeli settlement in the
occupied territories is a significant obstacle to a return
to negotiations and a grave threat to the very viability
of a future Palestinian State. As my Foreign Minister
said earlier this month, those settlements violate
international law, and those settlements have created
enemies where there should have been neighbours.

Every settlement creates false hope for the settlers
that the land will one day be part of a greater Israel.
Every settlement takes land away from Palestinians
needing homes or farmland or roads. Today's resolution
provides important signals to the parties and to the
international community about the way forward. It
reaffirms the central importance ofpreserving the two-
State solution as the only model we have for achieving
a negotiated peace. The resolution also prepares the
ground for a return to negotiations as soon as possible.
The resolution reaffirms, through the United Nations
most powerful organ, that settlements in the occupied
territories are contrary to Israel's obligations under
international law and a major obstacle to peace. It
condemns the acts of violence, provocation, terror and
incitement that have driven the two sides apart and
hardened feelings ofhostility and mistrust on both sides.

The reporting mechanism the resolution establishes
should provide a firm foundation for the Council to
continue to encourage the parties towards negotiations
on a viable two-State solution. We recognize that there
is much more that the resolution might have done. The
Council must stand ready to provide additional support
to the parties, including by setting out the parameters
for negotiations when the time is right. But today we
have focused on what is achievable right now, and that
is what we believe today's text represents.

