Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
Since the two terrorist attacks on an American and a
French civilian aircraft in 1988 and 1989, Libya has
suffered from sanctions imposed on it by the Security
Council under resolutions 731 (1992), 748 (1992) and
883 (1993) on the grounds that two of its nationals were
suspected of committing the attacks.

The first resolution asks Libya to cooperate in
establishing responsibility, while the second refers to the
well-foundedness of the sanctions, calling on Libya to
renounce terrorism. The third asks Libya to hand over the
two suspects to the judicial authorities of the United
States, the United Kingdom and France.

The third resolution also decides that the sanctions
should be reviewed every four months. The sanctions
include prohibition of civilian flights abroad, freezing of

 

Libyan assets, imposition of diplomatic restrictions and a
prohibition on the export and import of certain articles and
items of equipment, excluding oil and related products.

It is clear that the two terrorist attacks are a criminal
matter that only a court can decide, but the Security
Council decided to deal with the issue on its own, feeling
that, as the sixth preambular paragraph of resolution 883
(1993) indicates, that this matter was a threat to
international peace and security. This opinion was not
shared by Libya, which brought the matter before the
International Court of Justice for a decision.

Despite the objections raised by the other parties and
despite the fact that sanctions had been in place since the
adoption of resolution 748 (1992), the International Court
of Justice, on 27 February 1998, handed down a Judgment
declaring itself competent, under the 1971 Montreal
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against
the Safety of Civil Aviation, to have jurisdiction. This
Judgment by the International Court of Justice is, of course,
a procedural Judgment. But, like any other tribunal, this
Court takes a decision first on its competence and then
considers the substance of a matter. Since its Statute is an
integral part of the Charter of the United Nations, and since
it is the judicial organ of this Organization, as provided
under Article 92 of the Charter, the fact that it decides on
competence gives a new turn to the issue that is now before
us. This places the matter once again in the hands of the
authority that is in the best position to decide on it.

The three resolutions of the Security Council are thus
political in nature, while the Judgment of the Court is
judicial in nature and the latter has characterized the dispute
as a judicial one rather than a political one. Therefore, the
Security Council would have been expected to take into
account this new and logical turn that the situation has
taken when it conducted its eighteenth review of sanctions
on 6 March last. Unfortunately, this was not the case, in
spite of the five years and 351 days elapsed since the
sanctions were imposed on Libya.

The Judgment of the International Court of Justice,
which confirms its competence in this connection, logically
requires that the Security Council consider the suspension
of sanctions, at least until the Court takes a decision on the
substance of the matter. The harmful effects of these
sanctions in the long term have begun to be felt by the
Libyan people in spite of Libya's oil riches. We can even
go so far as to say that in spite of the presence of these
riches, the Libyan authorities are completely unable to
ensure air transport for their pilgrims or to ensure the
emergency evacuation of sick people who need immediate
health care abroad. And this, of course, has a considerable
psychological effect on the population.

By way of evidence, I might mention paragraph 15
of the report of Mr. Vladimir Petrovsky, who was sent by
the Secretary-General of the United Nations to conduct a
fact-finding mission to Libya from 13 to 18 December
1997. This paragraph refers to the psychological effects
of the sanctions:

"It was apparent that the sanctions had a
psychological effect on the Libyan leadership. It
feels isolated, targeted and unjustly subjected to a
form of collective punishment even before the guilt
or innocence of the two suspects had been
established through an appropriate judicial process.
The Libyan officials underscored that the stigma of
a rogue State was hurting the people at large, and
the damage to national pride has been grave. They
noted that the psychological impact also constrained
other countries from dealing with the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya in areas outside the purview of the
sanctions. They also seemed perplexed that the
initiatives and alternatives proposed by the
Organization of African Unity and the League of
Arab States, among others, to facilitate a resolution
of the problem were not accepted by the Security
Council." [5/1998/201, annex, para. I5]

Even before the International Court of Justice
handed down its Judgment, which pointed to the normal
framework for resolving this problem, many international
and regional initiatives had taken that direction. But when
the Court declared itself competent, these initiatives were
stepped up, and in fact 21 letters were addressed to the
President of the Security Council on this subject.

As for the substance of the issue, not only does this
matter come under the purview of the Montreal
Convention - hence the International Court of Justice's
decision that it is competent to hear the case - but other
regional and international organizations, such as the
League of Arab States, the Organization of African Unity,
the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the Non-
Aligned Movement, also submitted the following three
options, which take into consideration the rights of all
parties: first, to hold the trial of the two suspects in a
neutral country to be determined by the Security Council;
secondly, to have the two suspects tried at the
International Court of Justice by Scottish judges in
accordance with Scottish law; and thirdly, to establish a

 

special criminal tribunal at the Court's headquarters at The
Hague to try the two suspects.

These are the options that will undoubtedly make it
possible rapidly to take a decision on this matter. They will
help shed light on the entire matter for the benefit of the
families of the victims and in connection with lifting the
sanctions on Libya. These options also ask Libya to
cooperate and to respond favourably, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 731 (1992). Since the other two
resolutions- 748 (1992) and 883 (1993)- imposed
sanctions after the matter was brought by Libya to the
International Court of Justice and not before, they are not
justified.

My delegation believes that the Security Council must
re-examine the sanctions decreed against Libya because of
the new factors in the case: the Judgment handed down by
the International Court of Justice and the options submitted
on this matter, which is legal in nature and not political.
The Council should respond by decreeing a suspension of
these sanctions until a ruling is handed down.

As for the travel of Libyan nationals to fulfil their
religious obligations or to receive medical care abroad,
neither the principles of monotheistic religions nor
humanitarian considerations can tolerate any obstacle. That
is why it is difficult to approve of the current procedures of
the sanctions Committee, which consist of examining
requests on a case-by-case basis. Rather, it is necessary to
completely exempt pilgrimage and medical care from these
sanctions. Any believer must turn to God and God alone in
order to fulfil religious obligations, and no believer can
compromise on his or her health, because without health,
nothing is possible in this world.

