Mr. Morales (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for introducing his
third report to the Council.

We welcome the progress made in the transitional
process in Libya, despite its vulnerability, and we trust
that with the passage of time its progress will be
consolidated and become more perceptible. We
therefore trust that the upcoming elections will provide
a sound basis for the reconstruction of a State that
guarantees human rights, the rule of law and an end to
impunity.

At the same time, we believe that it is of the
greatest importance to continue our cooperation with
the ICC and the Office of the Prosecutor. It is crucial
that these bodies carry out their mandate with the
necessary support and assistance that all States,
including those that are not yet parties to the Rome
Statute, must provide.
In all things, as Security Council members we
must tread carefully. Our support must not turn into

interference in the Court's decisions or into pressure.
Guatemala is of the opinion that we must be careful in
making any observation on the challenge of the Libyan
Government regarding the admissibility of the case
against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi. In that regard,
although we appreciate the work done by the Office of
the Prosecutor of the ICC in the case against that
individual, we must view as positive the involvement
of the Libyan authorities in the proceedings. We
believe that it is a good sign that the Libyan authorities
wish to demonstrate that their judicial system can meet
this unique challenge.

In short, we believe that the Pre-Trial Chamber
must take the decision on the challenge brought by the
Government of Libya. However, whatever decision the
Chamber reaches, we believe that the Office of the
Prosecutor must remain informed on all steps and
decisions taken in this matter.

Lastly, in regard to other crimes committed in
Libya, our position is that investigations of violations
of human rights and crimes against humanity in Libya
must be pursued, regardless of their perpetrators. We
are also concerned about the situation regarding gender
crimes committed during the conflict, and we trust that
the investigations of these will continue.

We also believe it essential, in order to support
the rule of law in Libya, that all detention centres come
under the control of the national security forces. It is
unconscionable that these detention centres should
remain under the control of groups not representing the
Government of Libya and could be used by them as
tools to violate human rights. We trust that such
violations will be investigated and that the efforts to
put an end to this situation will be supported. For its
part, the Government of Libya must take specific
actions to avoid cataloguing ethnic groups in order to
violate their rights.

