Ms. Nagarajan: I thank the Kingdom of the
Netherlands for inviting me to participate in this
briefing as its presides over the Council this month.
I also thank my fellow briefers, Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed and Mr. Mohammed Bila
of the Lake Chad Basin Commission.

This year marks 15 years since the start of the
violence we identify with armed groups in Lake Chad
region. I will focus my briefing on current conflict
dynamics, potential trajectories and the need to prevent
the root causes of future conflicts. I was born and lived
in Maiduguri. I have been working on conflict analysis,
human rights, peacebuilding and protection for the
past 12 years. I will talk about the region as a whole,
but given my background I will draw a great deal on
Nigeria. I will talk about four sets of dynamics.

The first revolves around environmental and climate
factors. The problem is not the alleged shrinking ofLake
Chad, but rather, as just presented by my colleague,
Mohammed Bila, increased variability. Lake Chad has
fluctuated throughout history. Communities adapt to the
changes, although, recently, coping mechanisms have
been tested. The issue is rather that ofthe governance of
and access to natural resources, the impact of insecurity
and increased climate variability. Farmers with whom
I spoke complained of the impacts of changing lake
levels and increased rainfall variability, and said that
that causes their inability to plant properly, lower or no
crop yields, and insects that do not die because there is
no rain. Pastoralists have had to change grazing routes.
Fishermen talk of changing amounts of fish in water
bodies. We are seeing, above all, decreased resilience
owing to conflict and climate.

In December 2017, one Nigerian farmer told me
how he used to farm by relying on the rainy season,
the lake or a stream for irrigation in any given year.
He said that if any one of them were insufficient in any
given year, that was okay, as all three disasters would
not occur at the same time. However, he said that now,
owing to the crisis, every avenue to develop oneself
economically has been destroyed. One does not have the
money, and even if one did and failed - which is likely
because of the lack of rainfall, security restrictions and
Boko Haram - one cannot do the others. Virtually all
economic activities have collapsed.

Secondly, we also see tensions among and within
occupational groups. The conflict among and within
the groups of farmers, pastoralists, fishermen and
hunters has been exacerbated by a decrease in arable
land. Planting crops on grazing routes and areas,
changing movements of pastoralists, changing rainfall
patterns affecting crop yields and cattle health, military
restrictions, security concerns and an insufficiency
of land and water result in an increase of population
density owing to displacement. Moreover the conflict
has led to increased ethnic and social tensions because
of the economic impact in all four countries.

Thirdly, firewood collection by civilians and the
cutting down of trees by the military are increasing
deforestation. That, as well as agricultural burning of the
vaster region, has not only a current impact on protection
and security, but also entails future ramifications
related to soil degradation, desertification, agricultural
livelihoods and the availability of wood for smoking
fish. There have been no clear empirical links made
between those changes and recruitment into armed
opposition groups, but those impacts on livelihoods and
increasing inequality are natural incentives to join such
groups, while they are happening in the same space.
There may well be a link.

The second dynamic that I will talk about is the
gendered nature of violence. Men and older boys
are often the first to flee insecure areas. They are
deliberately targeted, killed and forcibly recruited by
armed groups. They are viewed with suspicion, arrested
and detained by security agencies, and they are involved
in fighting, thereby leaving women of all ages, as well as
girls, younger boys and older men, struggling to cope.
At the same time, with the increasing level of crime
directed against women and girls, from their abduction
from schools, which we have seen in international
headlines to their use as human detonative explosives
or so-called suicide bombers. We also see higher levels
of early and forced marriage either to fighters or due to
familial pressures owing to a lack of resources, sexual
exploitation, abuse and violence, including by those
who are supposed to protect and not exploit them, and
survival sex.

People with disabilities are also disproportionately
affected. They are unable to escape violence and
struggle to cope when they are displaced. Unknown
numbers of people have also acquired disabilities
because of the violence. Their experiences have led
many to struggle with their trauma. What does that
mean for the long-term when many men are missing,
thereby leaving the women to cope without them; when
many women have suffered violence and trauma; and
when all children and young people have either taken
part in or experienced violence?

The third dynamic that I will talk about concerns
tensions among internally displaced persons (IDPs),
refugees, returnees and host communities. The people
of the region have been extraordinarily generous in
sheltering and assisting those displaced, which began
long before the humanitarian community showed
up. With time, that dynamic has given rise to some
tensions. For example, together with Mohammed Bila,
I was in Baga Sola in Chad two weeks ago. There,
Nigerian fishermen feel discriminated against with
regard to access to information and services as they
cannot speak the local languages. Those tensions are
unfortunately exacerbated by humanitarian assistance
as it is seen as benefiting only IDPs despite the violence
affecting everyone.

The fourth dynamic concerns governance and
providing security. The region has long suffered from
weak Government and certain State services or their
absence, which has been worsened by the conflict.
There is also dissatisfaction with community leaders.
Before the crisis, they were viewed at times as
politicized and corrupt, and they are now increasingly
seen as diverting aid for themselves and their families.
Moreover, we know that corruption and inequality are
root causes of conflict, and people believe that those
have worsened. Providing security is also problematic.
Military action or inaction has caused harm to civilians
through, first, failure to protect communities from
violence; secondly, failure to prevent collateral damage
during operations; and, thirdly, the direct targeting of
civilians with human rights abuses.

I do not underestimate the scale of challenges
facing the militaries of the region, and we have seen
some positive developments. For example, in Nigeria
a national policy on civilian protection is currently
awaiting President Buhari's signature, and the
military is trying to further institutionalize civilian
protection and harm mitigation into their training.
However, civilian harm continues, thereby increasing
unhappiness and frustration with the State. There are
also issues concerning community militias originally
set up to protect civilian populations. In Nigeria,
there are increasing concerns about the yan gora, or
Civilian Joint Task Force, in particular. People say
that they intimidate, settle scores, trade drugs, extort,
steal, divert aid and sexually harass, exploit and abuse.
People are worried that that increasing politicization,
electoral mobilization, levels of criminality and the
number gangs will lead to a new conflict phase.

Although we hope that peace will return soon, I
will now outline for the Council three ways in which
the conflict might further develop.

First, the group headed by Shekau may be defeated,
but the group headed by Abu Al-Barnawi may grow
stronger and more difficult to combat because avoiding
civilian harm means that it might be able to retain its
own fighters and also ensure more strategic relations
with the local populations.

The second scenario is that community militias,
owing to incomplete and ineffective processes of
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and
reintegration, form the next phase of the conflict,
whereby engaging in criminality escalates into
sustained violence against civilian populations and,
perhaps, the State.

The third scenario is that intercommunal tensions,
coupled with reprisal attacks and decreased access
to resources, as people are living in increasingly
crowded spaces, lead to the formation of identity-
based community militias, thereby resulting in clashes
and violence. Let us also remember the upcoming
elections to be held in Cameroon in October and in
Nigeria in February 2019. It is important that political
constestations do not affect and are not affected by
those unknowns.

What are therefore the pathways to peace? First of
all, the crisis is not over. Unfortunately, humanitarian
needs continue. Funding and support for humanitarian
action are essential. We must also pay attention to
current conflict dynamics and trajectories.

The Lake Chad region needs to be on the Security
Council's agenda. The Council needs more systematic
reports that are conflict-, climate- and gender-sensitive
from the Secretariat, including on root causes and
conflict drivers, as well as more regular situational
briefings to ensure that the Council is attuned to
changing conflict dynamics in a volatile region.

Secondly, we need proper analysis on which to
base policy and programme decisions. There may be
humanitarian needs assessments that are sufficient for
the humanitarian community, but proper integrated
analysis that links conflict, climate, gender and social
inclusion is lacking. That does not mean we should do
nothing while awaiting the analysis, but we must ensure
that inspections are meaningful, do no harm and are
responsive to the situation.

That brings me to my third and final point. The
United Nations, donors and affected States must ensure
that every cypher, naira, euro, pound and dollar spent in
the region from now on is context-sensitive and covers
climate, conflict, gender and social inclusion and
that the impact of interventions against those factors
is monitored. For example, a livelihoods programme
must look at future rainfall trajectories to see which
crops would remain viable in future. If it supports the
polder system in Chad, it must consider who will and

will not have access to the increased areas of fertile
land that would bring about and how that would play
into existing tensions. Otherwise, interventions will
not lead to sustainable change and improvement in the
lives of the people in the Lake Chad basin region.

Even worse than a bad situation is hope for change
only for the optimism to turn to ashes. A few weeks ago,
I met a young former member of the Jamaah Ansharusy
Syariah. She joined the group to make society better.
She told me that she thought society would have
improved while she was away but when she returned,
she saw that society had become worse. Looking back
15 to 20 years ago, we can see the genesis of where we
are today. For most people, circumstances have greatly
deteriorated. The question is: Did the previous situation
lead to the current conflict and crisis? Is the current
situation is worse than the previous one and, if so, what
does that mean for the future?

I urge the members of the Security Council to take
action now so as to prevent the current conflict dynamics
from becoming the root causes of future conflicts.

