Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We
wanted to participate in today's meeting because we
believe that this issue, and the debate that is taking
place on it within the United Nations, are of great
importance, given the threat posed by international
terrorism - a threat that has been manifested in a
number of different ways. Peace, security and
economic and social development have been
jeopardized. All parts of the international community
must therefore come together to show their
determination to confront terrorism. A high degree of
international involvement is required if we are to
combat that scourge in all of its manifestations.

I would like to take up a number of points that we
believe are essential in the context of this debate.

First, terrorism has forcefully imposed itself on
the United Nations agenda, as it represents an
international threat that makes no distinction among
peoples, countries, religions or cultures. Egypt was,
and remains, among the first countries to affirm that
terrorism is an international phenomenon to which we
must develop a common response in order to defeat it
and that we must do so while avoiding unilateral
measures or actions directed against any particular
culture, civilization or religion.

Secondly, in the past two years the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) has succeeded in
reaffirming that the United Nations, through its various
bodies, is in a position effectively and resolutely to
deal with the varying and growing international threat
posed by terrorism. In that context, Egypt has done its
utmost to cooperate with the CTC, having submitted
three reports to date. We are fully committed to
following up on them and to strengthening our
cooperation in that respect.

Thirdly, the United Nations has shown that it is
the most effective instrument for combating terrorism.
It can coordinate and consolidate efforts, whether
within the General Assembly - which has always
played an important role as an effective legislative
instrument in fighting international terrorism - or in
the Security Council. In this context, I would like to
stress that while we fully support the efforts of the
Security Council in this respect, the General Assembly
has a role to play in thwarting the international scourge
of terrorism.

We are all well aware of the fact that terrorism
manifests itself in a number of different ways, and that
we must therefore respond to it on various levels. In
order to counter this scourge, we must not confine
ourselves to a purely security-oriented approach,
adopting mere surveillance or monitoring measures.
The actions we undertake must also have a political
dimension, and must address the legal system and
social and economic issues. It is very important to take
all of those aspects into account if we are to succeed in
depriving the terrorists of support and to tighten the
grip around them so that they cannot gain access to
financial or political support. It is vital, therefore, to
ensure complementarity between the efforts of the
Security Council and those of the General Assembly.

The General Assembly must play an important
role because it deals with the aspects of terrorism to
which I have referred and should not therefore be
dismissed or sidelined. We must avoid the duplication,
fragmentation and tinkering that can have a negative
impact on international cooperation in the fight against
the pernicious activity of terrorism. Thus, we need
integrated, unified strategies and visions that will
enable us to deal with this growing threat in a
coordinated and effective way.

Fourthly and lastly, there have been a number of
proposals for revitalizing the CTC and making it more
effective. The issue of technical assistance to States
should be included in those proposals. Our experience
shows that, due to a lack of technical assistance, some
Member States are not always able to submit their
reports to the CTC. As a result, those States are unable
to take the necessary measures under resolution 1373
(2001) at the national and international levels.

In conclusion, I stress the importance of
complying with the provisions of the Charter regarding
institutional issues, in particular Chapter XV and the
relevant financial, administrative and legal rules and
regulations. Those provisions should be complied with
by the organs and agencies of the United Nations, and
we must take them into account when we consider
proposals for assisting and enhancing the role of the
CTC. That way, the revitalization process will be able
to move forward soundly and firmly, as it should,
giving the CTC the necessary momentum for achieving
its objectives.

I thank the members of the CTC for their efforts
in the negotiations and for their proposals. I also thank
Ambassador Inocencio Arias, the Chairman of the
CTC, for devoting his energy, dedication and
experience to ensuring the future success of the CTC.

