Mrs. D'Achon (France) (spoke in French): On
behalf of my delegation, Sir, I congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. We also
thank the delegation of Chile for its excellent work in
January.

France sincerely joins in your words of
condolence to the Russian delegation with respect to
this morning's attack in Moscow.
I also wish to welcome the presence at this
meeting of the Assistant Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia and Montenegro, Mr. Perovic.

In my turn, I thank Mr. Holkeri for his comments,
which usefully complement the Secretary-General's
report. France fully endorses the statement shortly to
be made by the Irish presidency of the European
Union. I will therefore limit my statement to a few
brief remarks.

First, we feel that the offer of a mechanism to
review progress in the implementation of standards has
given positive momentum to the cooperation of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo
with the international community, which we should
welcome. Such good prospects, however, must now be
reflected in concrete action. We are well aware that the
elaboration of the plan to implement the standards will
require considerable work. We therefore support all the
efforts of the Special Representative to ensure that the
plan be made available as soon as possible. Close
consultation with the Provisional Institutions and
Belgrade is desirable. That being the case, it is clear
that the length of such consultations will reduce the
time available to the Provisional Institutions to
implement the standards prior to the mid-2005
comprehensive review. We have every confidence that
Mr. Holkeri will strike an appropriate balance.

Secondly, the implementation plan will be an
important document. It will provide a reference point
for measuring progress made by the Provisional
Institutions towards the implementation of the
standards. With the issuance of the Secretary-General's
next report, and every quarter thereafter, we will be
able, in full transparency and together, to assess the
benchmarks attained. This is a matter of concretely
implementing the "standards before status" policy. The
policy, supported by the international community,
consists of requiring that the Provisional Institutions,
and they alone, achieve progress before the issue of
status can be addressed. The plan must therefore be
clearly addressed to the Provisional Institutions and to
them alone. Any ambiguity could blur our common
message. On that point, too, Mr. Holkeri has our full
trust.

Thirdly, I wish to stress our hope that the
quarterly progress reviews will confirm the positive
momentum noted since November. Steady progress
should enable us to look forward with some optimism
to the comprehensive review planned for the second
half of 2005. Clearly, however, the comprehensive
review will not signal the automatic launching of
discussions on status. I believe that we all agree in
reaffirming that there is no automatic trigger of the
date for beginning status discussions. Only sustained
and steady progress will allow us to decide when the
final status process should begin.

Finally, I conclude by endorsing the Secretary-
General's words of encouragement to Belgrade and
Pristina in his report. It is important that Serbia and
Montenegro and the Kosovo Serbs promptly contribute
to finalizing the plan to implement the standards. Their
current disengagement can only harm their own
interests. We heartily encourage them to participate
with Mr. Holkeri in the process launched by the
international community. For their part, the Provisional
Institutions must henceforth confirm their commitment
to implementing the standards. One clear signal of that
would be their participation in direct dialogue with
Belgrade, which not only is one of the eight standards
7 as several speakers before me have underscored 7 but
would also enhance many real aspects of the daily lives
of the people of Kosovo. We therefore hope that
Pristina will soon send a positive signal in that area.

