Mr. Lancry (Israel): At the outset, I would like
to welcome Secretary-General Kofi Annan and to
express my gratitude for his unshakeable faith in peace
and for his statement, delivered moments ago, in which
he indeed expressed this vision and this faith.

The latest horrific acts of Palestinian terrorism
are occurring as Jews throughout Israel and throughout
the world celebrate Passover, the festival of freedom.
The Passover massacre on Wednesday, which has
claimed the lives of 22 innocent civilians and injured
well over 100, occurred as 250 people sat down to
enjoy their festive Seder meal at the Park Hotel in the
coastal city of Netanya. The attacker, Mr. Odeh, was a
man whom Israel has been requesting Palestinian
security forces to arrest for involvement in terrorist
activities for some four years.

Before and since that reprehensible massacre just
48 hours ago, which the world has watched in horror,
there have been yet more acts of terrorism. A
Palestinian policeman gunned down two members of
the Temporary International Presence in Hebron,
injuring a third. A 16-year-old Palestinian girl blew
herself up at a Jerusalem supermarket, killing two
shoppers and injuring many more. A family of four in
Alon Moreh was gunned down by a Hamas gunman.
Many of these acts were committed by members of the
Al-Aksa Brigade, the military wing of Chairman
Arafat's own Fatah movement, over which he exercises
direct responsibility. In all, since General Zinni's
arrival in the region, 49 Israelis have been killed; in the
month of March alone, 102 Israelis have been
murdered.
This, then, has been the Palestinian leadership's
response to Security Council resolution 1397 (2002)
and to the mission of United States Special Envoy
Anthony Zinni and the visit of Vice-President Dick
Cheney to the region. These measures were designed to
bring about a ceasefire and to enable the parties to
implement the Tenet plan and the Mitchell Committee
recommendations to pave the way to a political
settlement.

For its part, Israel took clear and specific steps to
ensure that these measures would succeed. We
welcomed resolution 1397 (2002), both in the vision
that it endorsed and in the concrete details it outlined to
bring an end to the violence, terrorism and incitement.
It is not included in my written statement, but if
Ambassador Al-Kidwa should somehow remain
doubtful, I would be more than happy to send him the
official statement of Foreign Minister Shimon Peres on
behalf of the Israeli Government. Maybe it will
convince him that we have, in a genuine way, embraced
both the vision and the concrete details of Security
Council resolution 1397 (2002). I say this in a
spontaneous way in the English that I practice,
according to Ambassador Al-Kidwa.

Israel withdrew its troops from territories under
Palestinian control. Prime Minister Sharon declared
that Israel would not insist on seven days of quiet
before entering the Tenet and Mitchell process, and we
have accepted the compromise proposals presented by
Special Envoy Zinni to begin the implementation of the
Tenet plan.

Everyone is aware - contrary to the assertions of
my colleague, Ambassador Al-Kidwa - that Israel has
accepted, and has declared its acceptance, of Mitchell
and Tenet in full. If any more proof were needed of
Israel's unequivocal commitment to a ceasefire and to a
political settlement, it could be found in the support
expressed for certain promising aspects of the Arab
summit peace proposal and in the fact that in the past
week, despite continued terrorist attacks, including a
devastating suicide bombing at a Jerusalem cafe', we
continued to show maximum restraint and withheld any
response.

But Israel cannot walk alone on the path leading
to a cessation of violence and a resumption of political
dialogue. Throughout this entire period, the voice of
the Palestinian leadership has not been one of
moderation; it has been a voice of terrorism. Chairman
Arafat and the Palestinian Authority have failed to take
even the most minimal steps to end the violence and
terrorism, in blatant disregard of the will of the
international community, including resolution 1397
(2002). Despite that most fundamental obligation,
which Chairman Arafat accepted at the beginning of
the Oslo process, to renounce terrorism and resolve all
disputes by peaceful means, Chairman Arafat has made
it abundantly clear, both through his actions and his
inaction, that the murder of innocent Israeli civilians is
legitimate and desirable, that somehow terrorism and
dialogue can live side by side.

The glorification of suicide bombings against
innocent civilians - targeted precisely because they
are innocent - the rejection of envoy Zinni's
proposals and the continuing failure to arrest known
terrorists enjoying protection and support in Palestinian
territory and in the presidential compound of Chairman
Arafat, are but some of the signs that Chairman Arafat
has no intention of reaching a peaceful settlement.

What is Israel to do in the face ofthese deliberate
massacres of its civilians and the abject failure of the
Palestinian leadership to fulfil its most basic moral and
legal commitments? At a time when the world has
come to realize to dangers of terrorism and the dangers
of appeasing terrorists, can there be any doubt as to the
right and fundamental duty of States to protect their
civilians from this deadly scourge?

Are we supposed to find comfort in the most
recent feeble call by Chairman Arafat, which is
accompanied not by concrete measures but by calls to
martyrdom? Is this any different from the 11 other
ceasefire initiatives which Chairman Arafat brazenly
violated, affirming his infamous practice of double
talk, by which he seeks to placate his Western audience
on the one hand, while stoking the flames of hatred and
terror on the other?

In these circumstances, Israel is compelled to take
the measures Chairman Arafat and the Palestinian
leadership have steadfastly refused to take. We will
exercise our basic right of self-defence and target the
vast terrorist infrastructure that the Palestinian
Authority continues to nurture and sustain in its
territory. In doing so, we will take all necessary
measures to minimize harm to innocent civilians. In
doing so, we will make clear that there can be no
tolerance for terrorism, which deliberately targets the
innocent; that terrorism and peace cannot coexist; that
they are, simply, each other's enemies.

We have no intention of occupying any territory
under Palestinian control; our intention is to uproot the
terrorist network that exists there. And in doing so, we
will, as we always have done, keep our hand
outstretched for peace.

To the Palestinian people we say, once again, that
if the vision outlined in resolution 1397 (2002) is your
goal, then peace is no illusion. That vision, as we do
remember, was reached at Camp David, and it can
unfold in the future. We can walk that road together -
through dialogue, not through confrontation. But the
Palestinian leadership, and the terrorist organizations
flourishing in its territory, send Israelis and the world a
very different message. Every suicide bombing, every
glorified martyr, every terrorist released from a
Palestinian jail, every parent that wishes her son or
daughter to grow up to kill Jews, undermines that
vision and hurts the Palestinian cause and the cause of
peace.

To the international community we say, once
again, that we must make it absolutely clear that
terrorism can never be tolerated. The focus must be -
can only be - on the complete de-legitimization of
terrorism as a means to achieve political ends. If we are
serious about the war on terror, we must condemn it
wherever it breeds. What incentive do we give the
Palestinian leadership to renounce terror as a strategy,
when we tolerate terrorism and focus attention on those
defending against it rather than those perpetrating it?
What dangerous power do we give extremists
throughout the world if we create the impression that
their deadly methods can succeed?

Events have shown that international pressure on
the Palestinian leadership to end terrorism can yield
results. Chairman Arafat, with a 40,000-strong police
force, can be convinced to fight terrorism. But for that
to happen, for peace for Israelis and Palestinians to
have a chance, the message to Chairman Arafat must
be clear, comprehensive and unrelenting.

Let us hope, at least, that the Palestinian people
themselves will heed this call and demand of their
leaders to finally live up to their most basic
responsibilities.

