Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to apologize on behalf of
Ambassador Al-Nasser, who is unable to make this
statement as he had to travel outside of the United
States.

I would like to join the others who have
congratulated you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council during the month of
December, and would like to thank Council members,
through you, for holding an open meeting to discuss
this important matter.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict leads
us to the basic reason for the establishment of the
United Nations and for the promotion of respect for the
rule of law, including international humanitarian and
human rights law. As such, the provision of such
protection is not an option, but a duty and a raison
d'etre of the United Nations. It is one of the most
important issues on the Council's agenda because of its
close linkage to the maintenance of international peace
and security.

We would like to commend the Secretary-General
for his excellent report on this matter in document
S/2005/740. The report clearly sheds light on the
problem and on the road to achieve progress, and
places the humanitarian aspect of the issue before the
Council.

The State of Qatar expresses its grave concern
over the proliferation of war and conflict in poor
developing countries, where the majority of the victims
are women, children and the elderly. Furthermore, war
and conflict directly threaten international peace and
security, adversely affect the sustainable development
of small developing countries and consume valuable
resources directed towards conflict resolution and
peacemaking efforts. To that, we add the life-long scars
and trauma that surviving victims often suffer, which
alone become great impediments to progress and
development.

We also note the dramatic increase in the
recruitment of children and youth as soldiers and the
use of civilians as human shields. Increasingly, modern
wars are no longer confrontations between regular
armies, but more like street and urban warfare fought
by civilian rebels and uniformed soldiers - citizens of
the same country - or local conflicts raging among
civilian factions. Such non-conventional battles are
extremely lethal, with no marked distinction between
combatants and non-combatant civilians and a total
lack of respect for law.

My delegation notes with concern that civilians
are the most adversely affected parties in armed
conflicts and that, by comparison in many instances,
fatalities and injuries are disproportionately high
among civilians, despite the fact that they do not
participate in combat activities. Moreover, civilians are
often attacked and tortured and are subject to other
serious violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law.

Targeting United Nations and other humanitarian
personnel who work in the humanitarian field is clear
evidence of the increasingly vulnerable environment in
which they live, attacked and killed as they often are
because of the lack of any security guarantees. The
international community and the United Nations should
continue to denounce and strongly condemn such
violations and attacks, which are cowardly and
inadmissible acts.

We should therefore spare no effort to
mainstream questions pertaining to the protection of
civilians into State policies, United Nations
programmes and the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. Those questions must include reporting
human rights violations and taking the necessary legal
actions, as well as putting in place strict special
measures to protect women and girls from rape and
other forms of violence and exposure to HIV/AIDS
infection and the destruction of homes and property, as
well as to put an end to the displacement of entire
communities.

Member States should guarantee the success of
efforts aimed at capacity-building in this field. They
must also be encouraged to sign and ratify existing
legal instruments within the wider framework of
protecting civilians in armed conflict. Pressure must be
also brought to bear on belligerent parties to bring
them into compliance with the rules and principles of
international law. The United Nations has an important
role to play in that regard. It is impossible to develop a
culture of protecting civilians in armed conflict unless
all stakeholders adequately coordinate their actions.
The time has come to act seriously and decisively and
to pursue an integrated and systematic approach to
preventing the outbreak of conflict, promoting a
culture of respect for human rights and putting an end
to impunity from law. Failure to take such action would
mean that the universal culture of protecting civilians
pursued by the international community had failed.

We would like to emphasize that the protection of
civilians - whether in times of transition and armed
conflict or while fighting terrorism - should be
anchored in respect for international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee laws. Respect for the
relevant instruments requires raising awareness among
the ranks of protagonists to ensure that they shoulder
their responsibilities. We must end impunity from law
at the national and international levels. Since
protagonists include States, and in particular their
armed and police forces, as well as non-State armed
groups, we should underscore the fact that the
fundamental humanitarian principles of independence,
integrity and neutrality apply to this question in all
circumstances. Respect for those principles is a sine
qua non condition for the creation of an adequate
environment for humanitarian intervention, whether
inside or outside the United Nations umbrella.

Last but not least, the State of Qatar is
determined to spare no effort to promote those
principles and values during its tenure as a non-
permanent member of the Security Council for the
period 2006 to 2007. We call on the Council to use
monitoring mechanisms and fact-finding missions and
to end the illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons, given the adverse impact of such weapons on
civilian populations. We also believe that the Council
should devote more attention to the impact of armed
conflict on women and girls, and in particular to the
use of sexual violence as a weapon and tool of war and
suppression, take steps to end the forced displacement
of populations and pursue further approaches and
measures to protect civilians in armed conflict. We
want the dignity of women to become the centre of the
international community's attention. We also need to
ensure that terrorist groups committing such atrocities
do not escape punishment, as mentioned in the Security
Council's presidential statement of 14 April 2004. We
would also like to reaffirm that the 1949 Fourth
Geneva Convention remains entirely in effect, and
should therefore be complied with in all circumstances.

