Mr. Dahlgren: I can think of no better example
of both the opportunities and the difficulties of conflict
prevention than what is happening right now in the
countries of the Mano River Union - Guinea, Sierra
Leone and Liberia.

In Sierra Leone, its entire people deserve to be
congratulated upon last week's historic elections. The
elections mark the end of a decade of the most
gruesome domestic strife, and they took place basically
freely, fairly and transparently in a non-violent
environment. President Kabbah should also be
congratulated on his decisive election victory; this will
make it so much easier for him to continue the
consolidation of peace and democracy through national
reconciliation and through governing in an inclusive
manner.

But also the United Nations and the Security
Council deserve ample credit. Through the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), almost
50,000 combatants have been disarmed and
demobilized, and the United Nations troops have
provided peace and security in Sierra Leone. That is
good for the people of that country, but it is also a
success story that is good for the United Nations. That
success deserves to be sustained and must be sustained.
Most of the weapons may be gone, but the country
needs help to rebuild its infrastructure, its schools, its
clinics and its roads. Only a fraction of what we are
now spending every year on UNAMSIL would be a
great help for the future rebuilding of Sierra Leone.
And, equally important, peace and security will remain
in Sierra Leone only if the region is stable. Conflict
prevention will not succeed if fighting in neighbouring
States threatens to spill over.

I suggest that one could focus on three elements
to achieve regional stability in the Mano River
Union - three concrete steps for conflict prevention.
The first step is to build confidence through political
dialogue at the highest level. One summit, organized by
King Mohammed of Morocco, has already taken place
in Rabat in late February. Hopefully, another one will
soon take place. A good set of confidence-building
measures has already been agreed upon. The European
Union is ready to see how we can support their
implementation, together with the United Nations and
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). We recognize the important contribution
made by the Mano River Women's Peace Network in
these efforts.

A second element could be to find regional
solutions to reverse the destructive trend of conflict
and tension. This means finding joint solutions among
all three States on dealing with the disarmament and
demobilization of combatants; solutions to stop the
illegal flows of small arms and light weapons;
solutions to help reintegrate the hundreds of thousands
of refugees who have fled. The European Union hopes
to work closely with the new United Nations Office in
West Africa, in Dakar, to promote such solutions.

A third element could be to build a democratic
culture in all three countries to support peace-building
activities that involve the entire population, to build a
culture of peace, as someone said in this debate. Sierra
Leone has shown what can be done. We would like to
see the same basic democratic values reflected when
Guinea and Liberia prepare for their elections. That
also means involving civil society groups, including
political parties, in a fair and open dialogue on the
future of each country.
Our immediate attention these days may be
focused on the crisis in Liberia. Again, fighting there
has caused tens of thousands of innocent people to
move, becoming internally displaced or refugees in
other States. Immense human suffering has followed.
There is obviously a clear need to get the warring
parties to talk to each other and stop fighting. There is
no military solution to this crisis either. And, therefore,
last week's ECOWAS initiative to offer instant
mediation is a welcome first step. In the long run, of
course, Liberia also needs a process of national
reconciliation with all stakeholders involved.

The international community showed courage at a
critical time for Sierra Leone. It accepted the challenge
to help provide stability. If you travel now to any ofthe
villages in Sierra Leone, you can see how people have
returned to their deserted homes. You can see how they
rejoice at being able to live normal lives again. Then
you can understand how wise that commitment was.

In order not to risk all that has been achieved in
Sierra Leone it would be equally wise to work together
towards conflict prevention in the entire Mano River
region. That is a primary responsibility of the Security
Council. It is an important assignment on the agenda of
the ad hoc Working Group, and the European Union is
ready to play its role in that joint effort.

