Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let me
express our gratitude and appreciation to the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), my esteemed colleague from Bolivia, for his
briefing on the work ofthe Committee and for his efforts
to achieve the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). We furthermore welcome the new members and
Coordinators of the Group of Experts and wish them
well in their new positions.

I would like to touch upon three points: first, the
threat of weapons of mass destruction; secondly, the
importance of resolution 1540 (2004); and thirdly, our
work going forward.

On my first point, regarding the threat of weapons
of mass destruction, the use and the threat of use of
such weapons to international peace and security is and
remains real. When such attacks occur, death comes in
a gruesome way, and survivors have to deal with the
aftermath of such attacks for the rest of their lives. The
challenges and opportunities presented by scientific
and technological developments also have an impact
on the current situation. We feel very strongly that this
aspect should not be forgotten in the Committee's work.
Let me also reiterate that we fully support the ambition
of the Chair to bring the number of national reports to
100 per cent, as he just mentioned.

That brings me to my second point, the importance
of the mechanism to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction among non-State actors.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is key to addressing that
threat. With its focus on the use of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors, the resolution fills a
clear gap in the international non-proliferation regime.
Resolution 1540 (2004) also complements the other
important work being undertaken in the area of nuclear
security, such as by the International Atomic Energy
Agency, as well as the impetus in this field that was
achieved through the Nuclear Security Summit cycle.
Therefore, the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) should be a priority to us all. We underline the
importance of capacity-building in States that need
assistance when it comes to export controls, an issue
also mentioned earlier by the Chair. That issue is not
only relevant for the 1540 Committee, but for many of
the subsidiary organs.

Turning to my third point, the urgent need for
concrete measures to strengthen the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), in the light of the importance
of that implementation, we are pleased that agreement
was finally reached this morning on a programme
of work. Let me congratulate my colleague from
Bolivia for that achievement. However, this is not a
time to be complacent. Now we need concrete action.
The Committee must continue its work effectively
and efficiently in line with the measures set out in
resolution 2325 (2016), especially those in paragraphs
8 and 9. Outreach towards the wider membership
remains a key priority for us. In particular, we welcome
the conference just mentioned by the Chair focused on
Latin American and Caribbean countries, as three of
the autonomous countries in our Kingdom are found
there: Aruba, Curacao and Sint Maarten.

Let me conclude by reiterating our support for
the important work of the 1540 Committee. It is
necessary to build on the momentum created by the
2016 comprehensive review. It is only by working
better together to implement the resolution, both in the
Council and among the wider membership, that we can
prevent weapons of mass destruction from falling into
the hands of terrorists.

