Mr. Moussa (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): I
was extremely happy during the last few days to be among
those who welcomed you, Madam President, during your
first trip to the Middle East. Your visit succeeded in
introducing a distinguished personality who is deeply
appreciated, and it raised hopes for a balanced policy and
an active co-sponsorship of the peace process.

As the Security Council meets today at your initiative
to consider the situation in Africa, it gives me pleasure, on
behalf of Egypt as an African country, to express our
support for this initiative, both in its content and its timing.
The participation of His Excellency President Robert
Mugabe, the Chairman of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), is a clear testimony to the importance our continent
attaches to this initiative.
We take this initiative as a call to the international
community to reaffirm its determination to promote
common action in support of the African countries at this
historic juncture. Such support is necessary for Africa to
undertake its role as a full partner in laying down the
foundations of the new international order in all its various
structural, political, security and economic aspects.

Africa now needs to address three main
requirements: first, the striving for the peaceful settlement
of conflicts occurring in a number of its regions, as well
as for urgent solutions to the problems of refugees;
secondly, the achievement of economic and social
development and the enhancement of integration, both at
the level of the continent as a whole and on the level of
subregional groupings; and thirdly, the turn to
democratization and to the respect for human rights by
African communities.

We in Africa have already taken serious steps
towards the fulfilment of these requirements. As for the
first challenge, the establishment in 1993 of the African
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution was an affirmation of Africa's willingness to
shoulder its responsibilities in finding peaceful solutions
to these conflicts and in containing them before they
escalate. Moreover, the last few years have also witnessed
an effective contribution by African subregional groupings
in this respect. Indeed, African efforts frequently preceded
international endeavours in addressing crises in that
continent and their containment and solution. Africa has
also taken another important step by establishing an
African nuclear-weapon-free zone and adopting the Cairo
Declaration, which expressed the hope that this step
would be followed by similar measures in other regions
of the world, foremost among which is the Middle East,
whose security is closely linked to that of Africa.

These developments make it more imperative than
ever before that the international community enhance the
role of the Organization of African Unity and provide it
with the necessary political support and the required
material and technical capabilities to improve its
capabilities to contribute to the resolution of problems and
conflicts within an African framework. This should
encompass fostering the cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity and the
implementation of the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report on improving preparedness for
conflict prevention and peacekeeping in Africa, which
was presented at the fiftieth session of the General
Assembly in November 1995. The Secretary-General's
report articulated how to attain this goal through measures
designed to increase coordination and the exchange of
information between the two organizations. This is in
addition to the promotion of joint United Nations/OAU
approach in addressing those crises.

The Secretary-General's report concluded that the
success of preventive diplomacy, peacemaking,

 

peacekeeping and peace-building in Africa, regardless of
the level of preparedness and effective cooperation between
the two organizations, depends on the existence of a
political will of the parties to the conflict, as well as of the
Member States, particularly members of the Security
Council, to support peacekeeping operations and to make
available the human, material and financial resources
needed to discharge their mandates from inception. On this
basis alone, the mechanisms for the resolution and
management of conflicts could be effective in the post-cold-
war era.

I should like also to recall the report presented by the
Secretary-General to the General Assembly at this session
on cooperation between the United Nations and the regional
organizations in the field of preventive diplomacy and
peaceful conflict resolution. In that report the Secretary-
General cited the example of close cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity,
paying tribute to the nearly daily contacts between the
United Nations and the OAU, as well as to the appointment
of a Special Representative for the Secretaries-General of
both organizations for the situation in the Great Lakes
region.

We welcomed the initiative of the United States,
France and the United Kingdom to strengthen Africa's
peacekeeping capabilities. Yet we believe that such an
endeavour should take place in full cooperation with the
Organization of African Unity and its conflict resolution
mechanism. It should also take place in full conformity
with the United Nations mandate in connection with
peacekeeping operations. A joint mechanism should be
created to direct these efforts with a View to benefiting the
African countries in finding solutions to their crises.

While I am confident that we all agree on the need for
Africa to assume a greater role in dealing with its own
security problems, the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security still lies
with the international community, as represented by the
Security Council. What is needed now is a partnership that
enhances African capabilities in the field of conflict
prevention and peacemaking within African territories. This
would enable Africa to participate, together with the United
Nations, in shaping a stable world order, especially with
regard to addressing the root causes of crises, to
anticipation and prevention of conflicts, and to focusing on
development efforts.

As for the second challenge relating to the
achievement of economic and social development, despite
the difficulties which African States face in connection
with their commitment to economic reform and
restructuring programmes, the African States have been
keen on implementing these programmes seriously and
successfully, as was recognized by the relevant
international institutions, and this has led to a perceptible
improvement in the rate of growth.

Notwithstanding these positive indications, the
continent as a whole is still suffering from an increasing
external debt burden, receding standards of living, low-
level social services and health care for its citizens and a
diminishing capability to compete and to attract foreign
investments. All these elements are impediments to the
process of development, combined with the waste of
human and economic resources as a result of the
continued instability and conflicts in certain areas.

Since we in Africa realize the importance of these
variables, and keeping in mind the adverse impact of the
absence of effective economic integration in Africa, we
have taken a number of steps to establish the African
Economic Community and to revitalize the subregional
groupings that are the pillars of that Community. Such
steps include removing trade barriers and facilitating the
movement of capital and persons, along with creating a
better climate, one conducive to attracting foreign
investments, improving the infrastructure and enhancing
the role of the private sector in the economy.

Needless to say, these regional efforts require a
favourable international environment so they can yield
good results. Foreign assistance - while we recognize its
necessity and benefits - is still insufficient. The
implementation of concrete programmes of action adopted
by the General Assembly on more than one occasion did
not live up to expectations. Some of these programmes
and resolutions remain locked up in the archives and have
never been implemented.

Our need for new initiatives for Africa is far less
than our need for the creation of mechanisms to energize
and coordinate the existing initiatives, be they, as the
Secretary-General reaffirmed in his statement today,
United Nations or donor-country initiatives, the most
recent of which was that of last June's Denver Summit.
What really counts is to make available the resources
required to speed up the implementation of these
initiatives. What we need here is to strive to meet the
urgent needs of African States and in particular to deal
with and mitigate the burden of external debt, to enhance
 

foreign direct investments and to open markets for African
exports.

As for support for democracy and respect for human
rights in Africa, which is the third point I referred to at the
beginning of my statement, Africa is committed to this
approach. It is a serious commitment which has been
reaffirmed in the declaration adopted in 1990 by the Heads
of State and Government of Africa and has been
emphasized by the African Charter on Human and Peoples'
Rights which has already been adopted. Furthermore, the
elaboration of a protocol for establishing an African court
to consider human rights Violations is about to be finalized.
This is in addition to the elections that have been organized
in a number of African countries, co-observed at the request
of the African countries concerned, and recognized as fair
by the United Nations and several other international
organizations.

Among the strongest indications of African adherence
to legality and its refusal to depart from it is the continent's
firm and collective position vis-a-vis the developments in
Sierra Leone and before that in Liberia, our collective
endeavours regarding the situation in Angola or in Congo
(Brazzaville), as well as the active follow-up to the events
unfolding in Somalia and the Great Lakes region, together
with the measures taken regarding the developments in each
of them.

Having said that, we should not overlook the difficult
circumstances facing our African societies. Upholding
democracy requires a secure climate free from the
sufferings of poverty, hunger and war, as well as
satisfaction of basic needs to ensure a decent life for
people.

Africa needs support in its political, economic and
social reform process. It is keen to benefit from the
experience of others, taking into account that no uniform
approaches could be imposed in this regard in View of the
special circumstances, beliefs and stage of development of
every society.

Africa also seeks democracy at the international level.
Hence our collective African position in support of the
process of reforming the United Nations and restructuring
the Security Council and the attainment of a more just
representation of all regions, including Africa, in terms of
both the permanent and non-permanent seats in the Council.
This position has been underlined in the declaration which
was adopted at the African summit held in Harare in June,
and it is a position that we support and uphold.

In conclusion, I would also like to refer to another
issue which is of concern to the Security Council and the
African community, as it involves an African country and
an African people, namely the issue of Libya and
Lockerbie. Every aspect of this issue is well-known and
the African position regarding it is quite clear, as was
stated by President Mugabe, Chairman of the OAU.
While we all stress the importance of respecting the rules
of international law and Security Council resolutions and
the commitments which guarantee that justice is upheld
and that the suspects are given a fair trial, I recall, in this
respect, the initiative unanimously supported by member
States of the OAU and the options put forward for
consideration and possible adoption to put an end to the
current problem.

Justice has to be done for the families of the victims.
Let us consider how to facilitate bringing the suspects to
trial as soon as possible so as to preserve respect for the
legitimacy of the Security Council, to reach an agreeable
solution for all parties to this problem, and to alleviate the
suffering of the Libyan people and the families of the
victims.

We call for the enhancement of the role of the
United Nations and its specialized agencies in support of
Africa. Here, we agree with what was stated by the
Secretary-General. Our continent should be enabled to
take its rightful place in the international community that
has been denied to it because of certain historical factors
well known to all of us. What we have to strive for is the
establishment of an effective partnership between Africa
and the United Nations in the interests of peace and
development.

