Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): Mr. President, I would like
to thank you for convening today's public meeting. I
wish also to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Saren Jessen-Petersen, for his
briefing, which I found very illuminating and
insightful. We are fully aware of the fact that today's
meeting has significant implications for the coming
comprehensive review of the implementation of the
standards planned for the middle of this year.

Japan welcomes the relatively smooth
establishment of the coalition Government of
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, based on
the results of the election held last October, as
evidence of political maturity in Kosovo, which was
also acknowledged as such by the Secretary-General.
We would like to commend the proactive efforts of the
new Provisional Institutions for the implementation of
the standards, and we welcome the fact that measurable
progress has been made towards the implementation of
the standards, coupled with noteworthy concrete steps
in several areas.

Japan, however, acknowledges that many
challenges remain to be addressed by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government on the implementation
of the standards. In particular, I am concerned that
progress has been impeded in the areas of minorities'
freedom of movement and sustainable returns. While I
would like to express Japan's appreciation for the
efforts of all parties concerned, such as KFOR, to
maintain security as a prerequisite for implementing
the standards, it is important to point out that
minorities' fear is the major obstacle confronting them.
Therefore, I would also like to strongly urge political
leaders in Kosovo to make further initiatives to remove
such fear.

From that perspective, Japan calls on the
Provisional Institutions to engage in an inter-
community dialogue initiative in order to rebuild
confidence and trust. Through these efforts, we expect
increased participation by Kosovo Serbs in the
standards implementation process. They will also have
the effect of reminding us that the implementation of
standards must benefit all the people of Kosovo.

Japan appreciates the progress made in the
discussions on decentralization, as reported by the
Secretary-General. The results of the pilot projects that
are scheduled to be carried out in March in several sub-
municipal bodies, including one in an area where
mainly Kosovo Serbs reside, will be of importance in
that regard. I would like to reiterate my request here
for the united efforts of all Kosovo political leaders in
this undertaking. At the same time, the Belgrade
authorities must halt their assistance to parallel
structures and must encourage all Kosovo Serbs to
participate in the political process in Kosovo, including
in discussions on the issue of decentralization.

Macroeconomic indicators show Kosovo to be in
a calm recovery phase. Noting, however, that the
unemployment rate remains high, and that the poverty
rate is increasing, we continue to recognize that the
economic situation in Kosovo remains serious. We
expect that Mr. Joachim Rucker, the new head of the
UNMIK's pillar IV, in cooperation with the Provisional
Institutions, will make the utmost effort to realize
economic development through the privatization of
socially owned companies and the formulation and
implementation of a social development plan.

Japan also shares the View expressed in the report
of the Secretary-General that the lack of reliable
electricity is a serious constraint on Kosovo's
development. However, while the stable provision of
electricity is essential for the long-term development of
Kosovo, taking into account that electricity is a basic
need of the inhabitants of the region, the reform of
Kosovo's energy sector should not be politicized. Japan
calls on all parties concerned to seek a solution to this
issue with earnest and sincerity.

Japan co-hosted the Ministerial Conference on
Peace Consolidation and Economic Development of
the Western Balkans last April and is working on the
follow-up activities to that meeting. We wish to
reaffirm our commitment to the region, including our
intention to provide assistance, in cooperation with the
international community, to advance the Kosovo
Standards Implementation Plan. As a member of the
Security Council, Japan would like to express its
readiness to participate constructively in the
comprehensive review of the standards scheduled for
the middle of 2005.

