Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun, Mr. Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), and Ambassador Vieira for their
insightful briefings on the latest developments in
Guinea-Bissau.

Kazakhstan welcomes the recent encouraging steps
by all parties to end the protracted political stalemate in
Guinea-Bissau. It is heartening to note the appointment
of Prime Minister Gomes by consensus, the formation
of an inclusive Government and the agreement to hold
legislative elections on 18 November.

We would like to congratulate the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jose
Viegas Filho, on his appointment, and we wish him every
success. We extend our full support for his commitment
to facilitating a political solution to the crisis. We join
others in expressing our deep appreciation to the former
Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), Mr. Modibo
Toure, for his dedicated service.

We also commend the mediation efforts undertaken
by the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) under the leadership of Presidents Faure
Gnassingbe' of Togo and Alpha Conde of Guinea. We
acknowledge the efforts of the members of the Guinea-
Bissau group of five international organizations. We
believe that all of those measures have significantly
contributed to the recent positive developments and are
steps in the right direction. We welcome the decision to
extend the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-
Bissau until 30 June, given that the Mission plays a
crucial role in contributing to stability in Guinea-
Bissau. We therefore hope for the further extension of
the Mission's mandate.

Expeditious preparations for the elections are now
necessary. It is clear that international partners must
come together to provide the necessary technical,
logistical and financial support for the electoral process.

Using that constructive momentum, we call on
all parties to promptly take the necessary steps to
implement the other outstanding provisions of the
Conakry Agreement, including the constitutional
review and the adoption of a stability pact. Other matters
of concern that must be given urgent attention by all
of us are drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime. National engagement is critical to implementing
the various international programmes and projects
aimed at strengthening the security, judicial and law
enforcement sectors. We therefore support the technical
assistance package for Guinea-Bissau developed by
UNODC. We call on the authorities of Guinea-Bissau
to continue to strengthen cooperation with UNIOGBIS,
UNODC and INTERPOL in those areas.

In addition to such steps, the most effective
measures must be sought to ensure the country's
stability and resilience by increased support for the
existing development plans and the United Nations
peacebuilding strategy, with a special focus on
education and health care. Ensuring the participation of
women and youth in the political process at every stage
and at all levels is equally important. We call on all
donors to provide the necessary funds for implementing
all such measures.

We welcome the plans of Ambassador Mauro Vieira
and of Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba, as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2048
(2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau, to visit the country.
That will further contribute to improved dialogue among
the parties. We reaffirm our readiness to work closely
with all the relevant parties to support peacebuilding
and consolidation efforts in Guinea-Bissau.

