The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the Secretary of State for Foreign
and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

It is an honour to follow the Prime Minister
of Somalia, who is working so hard to rebuild his
country. Let me also thank the Secretary-General
and Ambassador Tete Antonio for all that the African
Union has done to ensure that the United Nations and
the African Union are working together to bring peace
and prosperity to the people of Somalia.

Our purpose today is to discuss what more we can

do to defeat Al-Shabaab and deliver a better future for
Somalia. But before we do so, I think it is helpful to
remind ourselves of the past. Just four short years ago,
Al-Shabaab controlled major cities inside Somalia,
including Kismayo and the capital, Mogadishu. The
security environment made trying to run a business
a high-risk venture, where owners risked their goods,
their property and sometimes their lives. That affected
all of us directly too. In 2010 alone, there were 174
pirate attacks, and Somali pirates held 404 hostages.
Fortunately, there has been much progress. Al-Shabaab
is on the back foot, with the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National Army now
controlling 80 per cent of Somali territory. Somalia's
economy is reviving, with gross domestic product on
the increase and shops and businesses opening at ever
increasing rates. Offthe shores of Somalia, as the Prime
Minister has said, there have been no successful pirate
attacks for over two years.

I am pleased to describe that progress, because
the United Kingdom has long recognized the need to
build enduring peace and security in Somalia. Our
commitment is clear and we have invested heavily. We
are Somalia's second-biggest bilateral donor. We have
opened an Embassy in Mogadishu, the only European
Union member State to do so. And we have strong
personal links with the thriving Somali diaspora in the
United Kingdom.

But we must today take time to recognize and pay
tribute to the bravery and sacrifices made by the brave
AMISOM. and Somali National Army troops on the
front line of the fight. We should also pay tribute to the
Federal Government of Somalia for the commitment it
has demonstrated in helping to steer Somalia towards
the completion of the federal map and a permanent
sustainable political settlement.

I also commend the vital role of the United Nations.
Nick Kay has worked tirelessly since July 2013 as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to ensure that the United Nations is at the centre of
international coordination and support for Somalia
under difficult conditions, including the tragic loss of
seven United Nations civilians. We are very grateful
to him and his team for everything they have done. I
am also grateful to the United Nations Support Office
for AMISOM. (UNSOA), the most direct and tangible
contribution of the United Nations to countering
terrorism and extremism in the Horn of Africa. The
successes of AMISOM. and the Somali National Army
in combating Al-Shabaab would have been impossible
without the essential logistical support the Mission
provides. It is clear that UNSOA has been under-
resourced and that it has been operating at the very edge
of its capabilities. I am therefore pleased that today we
have all agreed to put that right, and I thank the Council
for supporting resolution 2245 (2015).

But the challenge for all of us - Somali and
non-Somali alike - is to sustain effort and momentum,
and to be fully coordinated as we do so. On security,
that work has started. The President has committed to
significant security sector reform, and I urge him and his
Government to press forward with the implementation
of those reforms. The United Kingdom will continue
to play its part. As our Prime Minister announced
here in September, we will deploy military, logistical,
engineering and training expertise to reinforce the
United Nations Support Office in Somalia in support
of the African Union peacekeeping mission in Somalia.

Building security and stability are key, but the
foundation on which they rest is political progress.
In 2016 the eyes of the world will be on Somalia.
Conducting a credible electoral process next year is
critical. A failure to do so would risk undermining the
collective effort to defeat Al-Shabaab, and all that has
been achieved so far. It would risk undermining the
international community's support for Somalia but,
most important, it would undermine the right of the
Somali people to hold its leaders to account. Ensuring
a credible electoral process will allow Somalia to show
the world just how much progress has been made since
2012. It will quieten the remaining sceptical voices that
say that political renewal cannot be achieved, and it
will help in ensuring that the international community
remains committed to supporting Somalia on the right
path - a path towards a more secure, peaceful future.

The United Kingdom remains committed to
supporting progress in Somalia. I urge the Council and
other international allies to continue their commitment
to the country. Unity of purpose and effort will ensure
success. Over the coming year, our commitment
must be shared by all across the political spectrum
in Somalia. Personal differences and vested interests
must be set aside for the good of the nation as a whole.
As the Council has set out in resolution 2232 (2015),
all key actors and institutions in Somalia, including
Parliament, should engage constructively to ensure
progress. Only then can we truly say that Somalia has
turned a corner.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council. I now give the floor to other members of the
Security Council.

