Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China applauds the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the African Union and countries
of the region for their good offices in seeking to resolve
the conflict in South Sudan. China supports the people
of Africa in resolving African issues in an African way.
We also support IGAD in playing its leading role in
addressing the issue of South Sudan.

China's position on the issue of South Sudan is
underpinned by an immediate restoration of peace
and stability in the country in order to ease the impact
of the situation on countries of the region. As the
situation in South Sudan remains serious and complex,
the international community must make collective
efforts to bring the parties concerned back to the
path of political settlement and implementation of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, so as to immediately achieve
stability and national development and to provide the
people of South Sudan with a peace dividend at the
earliest date.

The regional protection force, in its deployment
process, must conduct full consultations with the
Transitional Government of National Unity of South
Sudan on specific issues, obtain the consent of and work
in coordination with the Government, and carry out its
work in a way that is truly useful for the process of
bringing about peace in South Sudan and is conducive to
the efforts of the Transitional Government to maintain
stability. Only by doing that Will the regional protection
force truly achieve what is provided for in resolution
2304 (2016) in terms of promoting peace and stability
in South Sudan with a view to creating favourable
conditions for the implementation of the Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict by all parties in the
country.

Due to the fact that those principles are not fully
reflected in resolution 2304 (2016), and that the
revisions that China and some of the African members
proposed are not fully incorporated in the adopted text,
China had no other option but to abstain in the voting
on resolution 2304 (2016).

As directed by the IGAD Plus Extraordinary
Summit on 5 August, the IGAD regional Chiefs of
Defence Staff will hold consultations with the military
leaders of the Transitional Government of National
Unity of South Sudan on the deployment of the regional
protection force. The African Union Peace and Security
Council will also hold a meeting on 18 August to discuss
the deployment of the force. China hopes that all the
parties concerned will reach consensus on specific
issues related to the regional protection force and is
ready to continue playing its constructive role in favour
of sustainable peace and stability in South Sudan.

