Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): 1 would like to express our gratitude to the delegation of the Niger for having taken the initiative to convene this important meeting. We would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary- General, Ms. Gamba de Potgieter; the Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Fore; and the other briefers for their Contributions to today's discussions. The succession of never-ending armed conflicts and the alarming information that we receive periodically about civilian casualties, including children, are proof of the relevance of the topic of today's meeting. Fifteen years ago, the Security Council adopted its flagship resolution 1612 (2005), through which the members of the Security Council unanimously showed their determination to protect the most vulnerable people in any armed conflict, that is, the children. In resolution 1998 (2011), the Council stressed in particular that it is unacceptable to attack the most important civilian objects: schools and hospitals. Since then, the situation of children who, by accident and against their will, find themselves in situations of armed conflict is subject to continuous monitoring by the Security Council and its specialized Working Group. We hope that the presidential statement adopted today (S/2020/PRST/8) will enable us to strengthen the protection of children and respect for international law, particularly international humanitarian law. We are in full agreement with the efforts of States to protect civilian objects, including schools, from unlawful armed attacks. We are heartened to see that existing norms of international humanitarian law provide us with an answer to the question of which buildings are civilian objects and which are military, and under which circumstances. It is important that this statement be unequivocal on that account. It is necessary to respect universal norms of international humanitarian law and work on the basis of generally accepted international legal tools. The Safe Schools Declaration is a_ political initiative by a small group of countries and does not yet enjoy universal support. Unfortunately, the presidential statement does not reflect one of the most relevant aspects of the agenda on children, that is, their repatriation from conflict zones. Recently the Russian Federation evacuated another group of Russian children from the Syrian conflict zone. We call on all Member States to step up their efforts to repatriate children who find themselves in conflict zones. Children should not suffer because of the unlawful terrorist activities of their parents and guardians. How a State treats its children shows how civilized that State is. Syria, including with the support of the Russian Federation, has weathered the fight against international terrorism and against those who hatched the plan to destroy the Syrian State. Throughout the war, housing, hospitals and schools have greatly suffered, and the task now is to rebuild those facilities. Given the start of the school year, we should pay particular attention to rebuilding schools and ensuring that children have access to education. To that end, we need the necessary school equipment, which has been regularly sent to Syria as part of Russian humanitarian aid. Russia shares the concerns on security in the Sahel. In that region, terrorist activity and inter-ethnic and intercommunal conflict are increasing, as is drug trafficking and organized crime. Armed groups openly resort to barbaric methods of warfare, deliberately targeting civilian objects, including schools. It is children who suffer from this situation. The coronavirus disease pandemic has rendered the situation in the region even more complex, heightening the distress of the population, including children. In that connection, we reaffirm our full support to all of those who are fighting a tough battle against terrorism in the region. We are certain that even given the limitations resulting from the epidemic, African States and public institutions will be able to successfully overcome the challenges before them. The work done by the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and cooperation with the African Union and other regional organizations should make this possible.
