Mr. Casimiro (Angola): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, for introducing the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2015/579). We welcome the
participation in today's briefing of Mr. Ivica Dacie,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia and thank him for his statement. We
equally welcome Mr. Hashim Thaci.

Angola reaffirms its position that resolution 1244
(1999) remains the applicable legal framework in efforts
to reach a solution for Kosovo through dialogue and
negotiation, based on the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and relevant Council
resolutions. We therefore support the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Serbia and understand the
legitimate concerns of that country on the Kosovo issue.

We underline the fundamental role played by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in the Kosovo region in promoting
security, stability and respect for human rights, its
cooperation with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, and its engagement
with Pristina and Belgrade. We continue to note that
the overall security situation in Kosovo remains calm
and stable.
Concerning the general political environment,
we value the ongoing Belgrade-Pristina high-level
engagement in the European Union-facilitated dialogue,
in particular the meeting in Brussels on 23 and
29 June under the auspices of the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
Addressing outstanding issues of implementation,
including the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities, is one
of the main points of contention in terms of the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013. We hope that a final
political agreement can be reached soon.

We welcome the resumed participation of Kosovo
Serb representatives from the Serbian Civic Initiative in
the Kosovo Government and Assembly after an absence
of two months, enabling the governing coalition to
promote its extensive legislative programme. We regret
the failure of the Assembly of Kosovo to approve a
constitutional amendment on the establishment of
a specialist court for the prosecution of war crimes
committed during the Kosovo war.

Concerning human rights, we welcome the
organization on 21 and 22 April of a conference
on the implementation of a legal framework on the
protection of the rights of women and gender equality,
which took place in Pristina. We also welcome the
adoption on 28 May by the Assembly of Kosovo, with
assistance from the OSCE, of the human rights law
package, comprising new laws on gender equality,
anti-discrimination and the Ombudsperson institution,
as well as amendments to laws on the composition and
functions of the judiciary and the Kosovo strategy on
property rights.

We are deeply concerned over youth radicalization,
violent extremism and other transnational challenges
affecting the Kosovo region. We call on the authorities
to adopt and implement energetic measures and policies
to counter such negative and dangerous trends.

Finally, we commend the continued active role of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo in facilitating dialogue among communities
and officials and with international organizations,
particularly those focused on efforts aimed at preventing
and reducing tensions and promoting cooperation
among local authorities. We value the work carried
out by UNMIK under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, in the promotion of security, stability, rule of law
and respect for human rights, in accordance with the
Mission's mandate.
