Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): We
want to welcome you back to the Security Council, Mr.
President, and to thank you for bringing the issue of the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and the
use of mercenaries to the Security Council today. We
think that this is a very important initiative on the part
of your country.

We are also pleased to welcome your minister
colleagues from the African continent who have joined
this meeting today, as well as the representative of the
Programme for Cooperation and Assistance for
Security and Development (PCASED), the executive
secretariat of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the representative of the
African Union.

I would also like to thank your delegation for
drafting the non-paper on the subject of our meeting
today, which informs our current discussion. The illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons contributes to
violence and suffering around the world, but the
situation in West Africa is particularly grave. The
catalogue of conflict in the region is long, and
regrettably the indiscriminate traffic in small arms and
the use of mercenaries only exacerbates the situation.

To help stem the tide of violence, in October
1998 ECOWAS declared a moratorium on the
importation, exportation and manufacture of light
weapons. The international community, including the
United States, praised ECOWAS in 1998 for this
landmark effort. The Moratorium called for the
creation of individual national commissions to be the
focal points for the implementation of measures at the
State level.

Since that year, little progress has been made. It
is disappointing that some States have not developed
functional national commissions. Despite the 1998
Moratorium, West African societies remain awash with
small arms and light weapons. Now is the time to
complete this effort and move from political
declaration to full practical implementation.

We continue to support all signatories to the
ECOWAS Moratorium in their commitment, renewed
in 2001, to carry out its mandate. It is crucial that
ECOWAS members themselves take the necessary
steps to effectively enforce their own Moratorium on
the import, export and manufacture of small arms and
light weapons by fully establishing functional national
commissions and implementing the Code of Conduct at
the State level.

As my colleague Richard Williamson said in the
October meeting on small arms and light weapons, the
United States believes that solutions to the problem of
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons must be
practical and effective. The most effective ways of
preventing small and light weapons from getting into
the hands of those who will misuse them are
implementing and enforcing strict export and import
controls and strong arms-brokering laws, ensuring the
security of national small arms and light weapons
stockpiles, and destroying excess weapons.

Additionally, we must address the combatants
themselves, not just the weapons they wield. The
critical process of reintegration as a component of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
offers hope for soldiers who have known only violence
and destruction. In Sierra Leone, 48,000 weapons have
been turned in since the end of the conflict there.

Former rebels have been brought into camps
where they have been given tools to begin the process
of reintegration into society. Rebels have been given
monetary payments that correspond to their ranks and
were provided training to assist them in finding and
obtaining jobs.

The international community, including
individual States, such as Sweden, Norway, the United
Kingdom, Belgium, Canada and France, has
contributed generously to the implementation of the
ECOWAS Moratorium and to the rebuilding of
societies.

The United States has recently undertaken
bilateral projects with Senegal and Guinea to destroy
tens of thousands of excess small arms and light
weapons. We have provided training and
communications equipment to Guinea and Sierra Leone
to assist them in controlling their borders with Liberia.
We have also funded aerial surveillance to monitor
illicit trafficking in the Mano River border region. We
have funded a joint training programme to instruct
Nigerian law enforcement officials on tracing and
interdicting illicit small arms. The United States
remains committed in its support for both the Security
Council embargoes in the West African region and the
ECOWAS Moratorium.

My delegation urges ECOWAS member States to
establish effective national commissions and to
implement the Code of Conduct for the Moratorium, as
mandated in 1998 and 1999. I also urge ECOWAS
member States and those States that supply illicit small
arms to comply with two pertinent paragraphs in the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted in July
2001.

Paragraph 12 of the Programme recalls,

"the obligations of States to fully comply with
arms embargoes decided by the United Nations
Security Council in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations." (A/CONF192/15, article 12)

Paragraph 13 declares that States believe,

"that Governments bear the primary
responsibility for preventing, combating and
eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects and, accordingly,
should intensify their efforts to define the
problems associated with such trade and find
ways of resolving them." (article 13)

As we all approach the 2003 biennial review
meeting that will be held here in New York in July, my
delegation strongly urges all Governments to provide
national reporting on efforts taken to implement the
United Nations Programme of Action for Small Arms
and Light Weapons to the United Nations Department
for Disarmament Affairs. It is only through full, candid
reporting by States in affected regions that the
international community can take stock of progress
made or lack thereof in implementing the United
Nations Programme of Action and properly assess
priorities for international action on small arms and
light weapons in the future.

The United States is aware of the tragic history of
the conflict in West Africa. We are ready and
committed to work with all Security Council members
and ECOWAS member States to find practical and
effective ways to curb the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and the use of mercenaries that are
threatening peace and security in West Africa.

