Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We too
would like to thank Mr. Le Roy and Mr. Mkapa for
their very valuable briefings. We would like to
particularly welcome the presence of Mr. Mutrif Siddiq
and Mr. Pagan Amum with us here today.

Only a few days before the date set for fulfilling
one of the key provisions of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), the situation still presents
significant challenges for the parties and for the
international community, as we have heard. We think
that the parties have a great advantage because, thanks
to the extensive work of important national and
international actors, they have been able to identify the
specific steps necessary to prevent a return to armed
conflict, and they have established the necessary
mechanisms for dialogue to guarantee understanding
between them.

However, despite encouraging progress, we
believe that further efforts are still required to make
progress on some fundamental issues.

Without any doubt the immediate priority is
holding the referendum on the date set in the
Agreement. The completion of voter registration was
undoubtedly another encouraging step, and it means we
must continue the remaining preparations urgently. Full
funding of the Referendum Commission is essential at
this stage of the process, and we therefore reiterate our
call for parties to fulfil their commitments in that
regard.

The referendum and its results must be part of
this process and must be absolutely transparent so as to
be a convincing reflection of the will of the population
of the South. In that context we believe that the role of
the Secretary-General's Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan is of exceptional relevance, and we thus reiterate
our full support for and trust in Mr. Mkapa and the
other members of the Panel.

The lack of an agreement on the situation in
Abyei is a source of concern because of the volatility it
represents for the whole process.

We must by no means overlook the need to
establish the bases for post-referendum arrangements,
which will be essential to ensure a peaceful transition
in the short term and stable relations in the long term.

We would also like to reiterate that the United
Nations and the international community must be fully
prepared to react expeditiously in any scenario.
Although the outlook is encouraging it is still
uncertain, and we must remain alert, ready to offer
needed assistance and to safeguard the well-being of
the civilian population.

We must not lose sight of the situation in Darfur,
where conditions on the ground remain worrying,
especially with regard to the security situation. We
stress once again that it is urgent for hostilities to end
and for all parties to the conflict to return to the
negotiating table.

To conclude, we would like to stress that, given
the difficulties foreseen in the next few weeks, we
should repeat our call for calm and prudence. We
believe that if the leaders of the Sudan can maintain
those virtues, they will make a very valuable
contribution to maintaining the stability that their
citizens have been calling for these past five years and
call for just as forcefully today.

