Mr. Fall (spoke in French): On 20 November
2003, the Security Council held a meeting (see S/PV.4865) to consider the report of the Secretary-
General on preparations for an international conference
on the Great Lakes region (S/2003/1099). There have
been many developments since that meeting took
place. A fact sheet in that regard has been sent to
members of the Council, and I will therefore not
describe the various events in detail. The fact sheet is
helpful, in that I believe that the Council has allotted
me 15 minutes to brief it on the current situation. I
shall confine my comments to those 15 minutes.

It is just less than a month until the first meeting
of heads of State or Government in the context of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
The summit is to be held at Dar es Salaam on 19 and
20 November. By fortunate coincidence, the Security
Council will be holding a particularly important
meeting in Africa at the same time, on the subject of
the Sudan. Thus, in the course of that one week, Africa
will be given very special attention.

The Dar es Salaam summit will be followed in
2005 by a second and final summit in the context of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
After the second summit, an agreement on security,
stability and development in the Great Lakes region
will be adopted. The agreement will have two
constituent parts. The first will be the Dar es Salaam
declaration, which is expected to be adopted at the first
summit, describing the general framework, the political
options and the guidelines and directives offered by the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
The second part will contain protocols and programmes
of action, which will be prepared between the two
summits by a ministerial committee at the request of
the Dar es Salaam summit.

We are now at the stage of preparing the
declaration. Since the Security Council's last meeting
on this issue, we have been holding preparatory
meetings at the regional level, in three different
settings. First of all, the Regional Preparatory
Committee, made up of representatives of national
preparatory committees, met at Bujumbura and at
Kinshasa, and it will meet from 8 to 10 November in
Kampala.

Afterward, special regional meetings have been
held to enable three specific categories of society to
offer their particular input to the preparatory process.
These were the women's regional meeting in Kigali,
the young people's regional meeting in Kampala and
the non-governmental organization regional meeting in
Arusha.

Finally, other special meetings, organized by
religious organizations, trade unions and
parliamentarians, have enabled sectoral input to the
preparatory process, which is designed to be an
inclusive one.

That entire process has given rise to ideas and
suggestions for the regional preparatory meeting. It is
on the basis of those ideas and suggestions that an
initial draft text of the Dar es Salaam declaration was
considered in Kinshasa and will be finalized in
Kampala before being submitted to a meeting of
foreign ministers to be held on 16 and 17 November in
Dar es Salaam, just before the summit.

This inclusive regional preparatory process has
yielded some results, the first of which is of a political
nature. There has been a geographical broadening
among countries participating in the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. We moved
from six to seven at the time of the 20 November 2003
Security Council meeting, and now there are 11, with
the addition of Angola, the Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic and the Sudan. This
enlargement is very important in ensuring the
consistency and unity of the Conference, because our
goal from the start was to bring together everybody,
whether they affected or were affected by the situation
in the Great Lakes region.

The second result has been the trend towards
common positions on the part of all of the countries. At
the beginning of the regional process, there were some
questions that were particularly delicate, not to say the
object of confrontation. Now, two regional meetings
have been held, and we are moving towards consensus,
even on the most delicate issues.

The third result has been the emergence of a
number of priority areas. The Conference itself is built
on four priority areas: peace and security; governance
and democracy; economic development and regional
integration; and social and humanitarian issues.
However, we can identify several priority areas that
transcend these four categories.

The first is education for peace, tolerance,
multiculturalism and democratic values. This is along
the lines of the preamble to the constitution of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, which reminds us that "since wars begin
in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the
defenses of peace must be constructed". Education for
peace is thus crucial to a region that has suffered such
upheaval because of war.

Secondly, on the social level, there is the fight
against endemic and pandemic diseases. AIDS affects
all of Africa, but more specifically the Great Lakes
region. This is true also of malaria and tuberculosis.
Epidemic and pandemic diseases require a
multidimensional approach taking into account not just
health issues, but also the social, political and security
dimensions.

The third is the centralization of women's rights
and their role in peace and security of course, but also
in governance and democracy and in promoting
economic development.

The fourth area is the promotion of joint
strategies and policies in the priority sector of the
Conference's four themes.

Finally, the fifth area is that of returning to the
borders in the Great Lakes region their natural purpose.
This goes beyond providing administrative and
political separation lines between two States. Borders
must become a framework for political, economic and
social cooperation in order to lay the foundations for
peace.
I have mentioned just a few points that have
emerged from the preparatory process, but let me also
mention the dynamic of the preparatory process. It is
one of inclusion, in which the United Nations is
involved through all its relevant departments,
programmes and specialized agencies. The African
Union, the subregional organizations and development
partners - through the Group of Friends of the Great
Lakes, headed by Canada and the Netherlands - are
also involved, as is civil society in the various
countries.

Finally, as concerns the various sectors - peace
and security; governance and democracy; economic
development and regional integration; and
humanitarian and social issues - in the light of the
two Regional Preparatory Committee meetings that
have been held, we see a number of sectors to which I
would like to refer.

Under peace and security, there are a number of
sectors: education for peace; a joint management
strategy for border issues; the involvement of social
actors in the prevention, management and settlement of
conflicts and reconstruction; common strategies to
combat crime; regional mechanisms for non-aggression
and for the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes; and
political mechanisms for combating sexual violence
and for combating crime in general.

Turning to the issues of democracy and
governance, the priority sectors for democracy appear
to be, first, the promotion and protection of human
rights in the three main areas of education, monitoring
and sanctions; secondly, multicultural education; and,
thirdly, the institutionalization of rights and of the role
of women in government. Priority areas in the area of
governance include the rule of law and the
criminalization of divisive and corrupt policies and
practices.

In the domain of economic development and
regional integration, the main issue is, first and
foremost, that the Great Lakes region needs to be
considered as an economically integrated region with
clearly developed strategies for transport,
telecommunications, agriculture and electrical power
supply. There is also a need to promote food self-
sufficiency. Finally, the Great Lakes region should be
designated as a special reconstruction zone so that the
international community can establish an economic and
social development fund for the region; this is
reminiscent of what was done in Europe following the
Second World War.
Turning to social and humanitarian matters, the
main areas of concern are: demining; refugees; natural
disasters; pandemic and epidemic AIDS, malaria and
tuberculosis; and education for peace and tolerance.

The Dar es Salaam summit is to conclude with
the adoption of a declaration which will also
incorporate a follow-up mechanism. An inter-
ministerial committee will be set up tasked - in the
interim between summits - with creating a
programme of action and a protocol to implement the
Dar es Salaam declaration. Finally, in the light of that
protocol and programme of action the stage will be set
for the Nairobi summit to be held in 2005.

