Ms. Amos: As this is my last briefing to the Council,
it is many ways fitting that it is on Syria, as during my
time as Emergency Relief Coordinator it is this crisis
that has taken more of my time and attention, and those
of this Council, than any other crisis in the world. It
is the Syria crisis and its consequences that have led
me to the belief that the Council and the international
community more broadly, needs to do more to protect
civilians and ensure greater accountability for violations
of international humanitarian law.

I have been proud to serve in the United Nations as
I have a strong belief in the values of the Organization
and the principles underpinning the Charter, and feel
that in today's unpredictable and deeply troubled
world, we need the United Nations more than ever.
As I have watched the huge rise in the number of
people around the world affected by conflict and
natural disasters - an estimated 70 million in 2010,
when I started, and 114 million today - it is clear
that there needs to be a major rethink of humanitarian
response efforts - who does what, who pays for it
and greater investment in conflict prevention, disaster
preparedness, peace and State-building.

In my time in this role, I have seen the very worst
of what people are capable of and also the very best
of humanity - the countless Syrians who, despite
the gravity of their situation, have not given up hope
and refuse to buy into the rhetoric that the country's
problems can be solved through violence. It is found in
the bonds forged between strangers who do everything
they can to help their fellow countrymen and women
survive. It is reflected in the generosity of families in
Syria and neighbouring countries sheltering, feeding
and clothing the displaced without asking anything in
return.

It is embodied in the staff and volunteers of the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), the first responders and the staff
of hospitals and clinics throughout the country who do
not let narrow political interest cloud their commitment
to doing everything they can to safeguard the well-
being of ordinary Syrians. And it is demonstrated in the
thousands of staff of the United Nations on the ground
who carry out their duties day in and day out, despite
petty political pressure and, in some cases, violence
and intimidation from the parties to the conflict.

For more than four years, we have watched Syria
descend into deeper depths of despair, surpassing
what even the most pessimistic observers thought
possible. The situation throughout the country is by
any measure extremely grave and deteriorating by the
day. In the past weeks, we have seen more and more
heinous acts, and innocent men, women and children
killed, maimed, displaced and subjected to a savagery
that no human should have to endure. For example, at
the end of April, a market in Darkoush, in rural Idlib,
was subjected to aerial bombing that killed between
40 and 50 people and wounding over 100 civilians. The
same market was again hit last week, with reports of
20 more people being killed. Reports have emerged
of the killing of civilians by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) following its capture of Palmyra
in the past week. Such blatant disregard for the most
basic rules of international humanitarian law - the
distinction between civilians and combatants - must
be condemned in the strongest terms.

In February of last year, the Council came
together to adopt resolution 2139 (2014). It was clear
in what it demanded of the parties - that they end the
violence, comply with international law, and ensure
that obligations to facilitate humanitarian access to
people in need were met. Yet, for the past 15 months,
the Secretary-General has systematically reported
on the continued non-compliance with the Council's
demands. While the cross-border deliveries enabled
by resolutions 2165 (2014) (2014) and 2191 (2014) have
allowed the United Nations to extend its reach and
complement the enormous efforts of our NGO partners,
the parties to the conflict have ignored practically all
aspects of the resolution.

The use ofchlorine continues to be reported, killing,
injuring and terrorizing civilians. Indiscriminate attacks,
although prohibited by international humanitarian
law, continue with no regard for the protection of
civilians. Schools and hospitals continue to be attacked.
Physicians for Human Rights recorded more attacks
on medical facilities in April than it had in any month
since the adoption of resolution 2139 (2014). Some
422,000 people - nearly twice the number as when
resolution 2139 (2014) was adopted - are under siege.
IfI had reported this at the beginning of the conflict, I
am sure that Council members would not have believed
it possible; today, we take it for granted. The United
Nations and our partners were not able to reach any
besieged locations in April.

People are trying to survive day by day without the
basic necessities of life, such as water and electricity,
and parties to the conflict continue to cut services,
collectively punishing entire villages and cities in the
process. Restrictions on the delivery of aid continue.
The Government's introduction of new rules and
regulations, which result in delays and distractions,
are preventing us from delivering assistance, including
surgical supplies, to people in desperate need. Of the
48 inter-agency convoys requests submitted since
December, 5 have been completed, 9 have been
approved in principle by the Government of Syria and
are at various stages of preparations, and a further
11 have been put on hold due to insecurity. Nineteen
more are awaiting a reply.

ISIL's advance brings with it new depths of depravity
to Syria, with indiscriminate killing and maiming,
raping and destroying. It has forcibly recruited children
and made the delivery of humanitarian assistance more
and more difficult in areas under its control. In addition
to the restriction of operations to deliver food and
other supplies, aid workers have been prevented from
vaccinating children in areas of the country under their
control.

Today, more than 12.2 million people are in urgent
need of humanitarian assistance in Syria - an increase
of almost one third compared to when resolution
2139 (2014) was adopted. Many of those who were
previously able to care for themselves are now in need
of help. Fewer than half of the country's hospitals are
fully functioning. Two million children in Syria are
out of school. The social, economic and human costs
of this tragedy are profound. It may take generations
for Syria to recover. An additional 540,000 people have
been displaced this year alone, adding to the 7.6 million
already displaced. Another nearly 4 million people have
sought refuge in neighbouring countries, placing host
countries and communities under unbearable pressure.
I thank Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey for their significant
efforts in this regard. Desperation means that more and
more people are prepared to make the perilous journey
to Europe by sea.

The Security Council can demonstrate its leadership
and uphold its responsibility for international peace and
security by taking the following measures.

First, it should ensure the protection of civilians.
Secondly, it should ensure that the parties to the conflict
abide by their international legal obligations and
Security Council resolutions to facilitate humanitarian
access to all people in need throughout the country,
without discrimination. Thirdly, it should bring an
end to the sieges, which collectively punish people.
Fourthly, it should consider all possible avenues to
ensure accountability, thereby sending a clear message
to those responsible for violations of international
law, as well as their victims, that the international
community will not tolerate such action in Syria or
elsewhere. Fifthly, it should step up financial support
for the humanitarian response effort; and, sixthly, it
should respect the non-political nature of humanitarian
aid and give aid workers the space they need to carry
out their work free of political pressure.

I know that there are no easy answers or quick
fixes. But I also know that we cannot let the difficulties
prevent us from upholding our responsibility to act on
behalf of the people of Syria. We cannot leave Syrians
abandoned to hopelessness and further despair. The
Security Council is entrusted with considerable power
and responsibility. For the sake of Syria and its future
generations, the Council must set aside its political
differences and come together to find a solution to
what appear to be intractable problems. We saw in the
adoption of resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014)
what can be done when the Council acts together and
speaks with one voice. I very much hope it happens
again.

