Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic ofKorea): I would like
to thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for presenting the
90-day report of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). I also appreciate his leadership
of that important Committee.

The Republic of Korea calls upon Iran to
immediately comply with all the relevant Security
Council resolutions in which the Council decided
that Iran shall halt all proliferation-sensitive nuclear
activities. My Government remains deeply concerned
about Iran's nuclear programme as described in the
latest report (see S/2013/103) of the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
It is regrettable that progress has not been made in
resolving the outstanding issues, including the possible
military dimensions of Iran's nuclear programme.
It is disappointing that Iran continues to expand its
enrichment capacity by installing more advanced
centrifuges in Natanz. Extensive activities and resultant
changes at the Parchin site undermine the IAEA's
capacity for effective verification. We urge the Iranian
Government to engage with the IAEA and provide it
with the necessary cooperation without further delay.

In the recent meeting between the five permanent
members of the Security Council and Germany (P5+1)
and Iran, in Almaty, they agreed to further meetings
in the future. We look forward to Iran responding
constructively to the proposal of the P5+1.

As a State Member of the United Nations, Iran
must comply with all the relevant Security Council
resolutions. In that context, some incidents described
in the 90-day report of the 1737 Committee are indeed
troubling. First of all, we have serious concerns about
the report from the Government of Yemen regarding
the alleged transfer of arms from Iran. Such illicit arms
transfers would destabilize Yemen's political transition
and undermine regional stability. With the help of the
Panel, the Committee must conduct a thorough and
comprehensive investigation and act on its findings.

Secondly, we also express concern with regard to
the Panel's compilation of public statements that admit
Iran's military assistance to Gaza. That case requires
further investigation by the Committee.

Thirdly, the Panel of Experts clearly concluded in
its recent report that Iran's ballistic missile launches
during its military exercise in July 2012 constituted
a violation of resolution 1929 (2010). The Committee
should take appropriate action, including the
designation for sanctions of individuals and entities
responsible for that violation. The repeated violation of
resolutions with impunity will undermine the authority
and credibility of the Security Council. The role of
the Committee and the Panel of Experts is crucial to
ensuring that sanctions are implemented effectively
and efficiently.

Lastly, once again, we urge Iran to address the
serious concerns regarding its nuclear programme
and to comply immediately and fully with the relevant
Security Council and IAEA resolutions. We stress that
extraordinary efforts will be required to regain the lost
confidence of the international community.

