Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I wish at the outset to apologize to my friend Nicolas; he will understand that in four months of absence I have forgotten my French. In addition, as we were entering the Chamber, Jerry asked me to speak in English, so I have no choice but to continue my journey into the English language. (spoke in English) I am delivering this statement on behalf of Belgium, Estonia, Germany, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom, Viet Nam and the Niger. We congratulate the co-penholders, the Dominican Republic and France, on today's adoption of resolution 2535 (2020) on youth, peace and security. Five years after the Security Council recognized, for the first time, the specific situation of youth in armed conflict, today one in four young people is still affected by violence and conflict. Young people lack educational and economic opportunities, and their human rights are violated and curtailed, even more so in this time of the global coronavirus disease pandemic. It is crucial that the Council not only recognize the specific situation of young people but also leverage their role in and potential for preventing conflicts, for building peaceful and inclusive societies and for effectively addressing humanitarian needs by strengthening the role of young peacebuilders, especially women; by engaging youth in humanitarian response; by inviting youth organizations to brief the Council; and by taking into account the specific situation of youth in its deliberations and actions. We welcome the fact that the resolution sets the basis for a continued engagement of the Security Council with the issue of youth, peace and security. Only last week, Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim, Coordinator of the Association for Indigenous Women and Peoples of Chad, briefed the Security Council on the effects of climate change on the lives of people in the Sahel (see S/2020/706). She described how climate change is a matter of urgency that has become a nightmare for millions. Fifty-five per cent of the population of the Sahel can be defined as youth. Ms. Ibrahim urged the Security Council to envision the region 10 years down the road if their opportunities are bleak. The consequences of climate change entail serious security risks that are tangible all over the world. Notably, the adverse effects of climate change on the availability of resources and the preservation of livelihoods can exacerbate conflicts. Young people will have to deal with those issues for most of their lives. That is why it is young people who are most active in fighting climate change, taking their grievances to the street and transforming them into concrete action, including in situations of conflict.We regret the fact that the Security Council did not find consensus on recognizing more explicitly the reality that young people in conflict are affected by climate change. They will feel the consequences of climate change most acutely. In conflict situations and elsewhere, we need them to be part of the solution.
