Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mariano Fernandez for his very insightful briefing. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2012/l28). From the opinions we have heard
around the table today, it is clear that there is a shared
objective among the United Nations, the people of
Haiti and the international community.
Until 2010, Haiti had made important strides
towards stability, development and a better future. The
devastating earthquake of 2010 reversed those positive
gains made incrementally over many years. Those
gains area now lost to Haiti, and it will be difficult to
move back to that period of recovery where the country
was emerging from the shadows.

As noted by the representative of Haiti in the
Security Council in 2011, the country had virtually
collapsed after the earthquake. Rising from such
devastation is no ordinary task. Most earthquake
recovery is challenging in the best of circumstances,
but becomes almost impossible in a post-conflict
country. We therefore urge the Security Council and
the international community to demonstrate patience
towards, and solidarity with, the Government and the
people of Haiti.

Pakistan is proud to stand with the people of
Haiti, not only before but also during and after the
devastation of 2010. Our support has been in the form
of men on the ground, materiel and our strong personal
belief in and commitment to Haiti and its future.

The biannual report of the Secretary-General is a
useful tool for measuring progress and reversals in
Haiti. It is satisfying to note that the report under
consider lists important progress in the area of security.
Improvement in the security situation, with a
diminishing trend of politically motivated violence, is a
propitious development that can lead to long-term
stability and economic recovery. This can be attributed
to the positive efforts of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
especially with regard to the protection of vulnerable
groups, including women and children, through
community-based policing strategies.

The contribution of the Haitian National Police to
improving the security situation can neither be denied
nor denigrated, but Haiti will need a more robust
judicial system in the future. As an evolving institution
of significant promise, the Haitian Police has also
improved its work and capacity, and works alongside
MINUSTAH contingents in the form of joint patrols
and anti-crime operations.

Our delegation has taken serious note of
allegations of misconduct in MINUSTAH, as reported
in the Secretary-General's report. Such allegations are
taken with utmost seriousness. As a contributor to
MINUSTAH and other United Nations missions,
Pakistan is elaborate in its arrangements and legal
provisions to investigate, prosecute and sentence
anyone guilty of misconduct, with actions ranging from
dismissal without benefits to imprisonment. These are
serious matters that cannot be the subject of
compromise. Let my voice ring out loud and clear in
this Chamber. The zero tolerance policy for misconduct
is also our policy. There will be no stepping down or
away from it. The high operational standards of our
peacekeepers must match a similar level of excellence
conduct and discipline on the part of its administrators.

The Secretary-General's report mentions slow
progress in regard to the humanitarian and recovery
situations. The ongoing cholera epidemic, food
insecurity and extreme vulnerability to natural disasters
augment the humanitarian challenge. To an extent,
slow progress in the humanitarian and recovery
situations is understandable given the natural trajectory
of post-disaster recovery, where the initial period of
high performance usually tapers off into a steady phase
and a decline after some time. We are seeing this
happen in Haiti.

However, we must not be complacent and try to
build further on positive achievements. That is why I
do not hesitate to say that the cholera epidemic has
severely tested Haiti and we must, in every way
possible, not only apologize but try to help alleviate
this problem with not only more materiel but with
whatever we have available to set this situation right.
We will urge greater coordination and cohesion among
different actors engaged in humanitarian work. We will
also caution against the donor fatigue that can result
from such protracted crises.

Political uncertainty and lack of national
consensus can erode the nascent gains in the security
and humanitarian sectors. Fissures and divisions
among stakeholders are the usual ingredients of
political discourse. A modicum of national consensus
on the future course is essential. Such consensus has
been eroded in Haiti following recent political events.
Our delegation supports the call for a genuine and
inclusive dialogue in order to achieve political
agreement and reconciliation based on mutual
tolerance, and we must allow Haitians to proceed on
deciding their future by their own thinking and
mechanisms. I would suggest that we listen more
closely to them and to what they visualize, and help
them in any way we can to proceed towards the future
they envisage.
Pakistan has been a participant in United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Haiti since 1993. As a part of

MINUSTAH, two formed police units from Pakistan
have been deployed since 2010. Not just the Pakistani
contingent but all components of MINUSTAH are
implementing a challenging mandate under difficult
circumstances.

From a surge of strength in 2010, the military and
police capabilities of MINUSTAH are set to be drawn
down to the pre-earthquake phase by the middle of this
year, and that is what I believe is also wanted by the
people of Haiti. MINUSTAH's drawdown must be the
result of tangible improvements in the ground
situation, which I am sure will happen. We hope that
the Secretariat, in conjunction with the Haitian
authorities, has conducted a national assessment of the
ground situation in the present and future scenarios.
We hope that any achievements of MINUSTAH will
also be duly acknowledged, here and by the Haitians.

Pakistan supports the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of Haiti. It will
be important that a similar message of support be
communicated to the brave and resilient people of
Haiti from our collective deliberations in the Security
Council today.

