Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his report.

Iran's illicit nuclear programme presents a grave
threat to international peace and security. Today we are
confronted with an unsustainable and dangerous status
quo. Without swift and serious progress to resolve the
international community's doubts about Iran's nuclear
programme, there will be further instability in an
already tense region.

Since our last meeting (see S/PV.6607), the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) has released yet another report that
once again affirms that Iran is not complying with its
international nuclear obligations and is not cooperating
fully with the IAEA. The Director General reports that
Iran is continuing to make progress on its nuclear
programme. Iran has begun to enrich uranium to the
near 20 per cent level at the previously covert Fordo
fuel-enrichment plant, which is buried in a hardened
bunker underground near Qom. Iran has tripled its
capacity to produce such uranium, which is much
closer to being weapons-grade.

In spite of good-faith outreach by the IAEA, Iran
has chosen to stonewall it, rather than to offer any real
cooperation. Iran twice denied IAEA requests to visit a
nuclear facility at Parchin, where the Director General
reported that Iran may have conducted high-explosive
tests related to the development of a nuclear weapon.
We all know what full cooperation with the IAEA
looks like. This is not even minimal cooperation.

The Director General's latest report illustrates
Iran's continued disregard for the Council's clear
demands, most notably that it suspend all enrichment-
related and reprocessing activities and heavy-water
related activities. The Security Council must therefore
take the necessary steps to hold Iran accountable.
3
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006) and its Panel of Experts are critically
important to this effort. Both the Committee and the
Panel must fully and robustly carry out their mandates,
including by implementing the Panel's
recommendations and responding to reported sanctions
violations. Better implementation of existing sanctions
can help to slow down Iran's nuclear progress,
affording the world more time to resolve our concerns.

We therefore welcome the 1737 Committee's
meeting last month to discuss sanctions violations and
to receive a briefing on certain Iranian ballistic missile-
related activities that are being conducted in violation
of resolution 1929 (2010).

We are pleased to see that there has been some
progress on the Committee's response to reported
sanctions Violations over the past 90 days, although
more needs to be done. We are alarmed that a majority
of the Violations reported to the Committee involved
illicit transfers of arms and related material from Iran
to Syria, where the Al-Assad regime is using them to
violently repress the Syrian people. We urge the
Committee to impose targeted sanctions on individuals
and entities found to be involved in sanctions
violations.

We appreciate the Panel's ongoing efforts and
look forward to its upcoming final report and
recommendations. My Government remains seriously
concerned that the Panel's 2011 final report has not yet
been released to the full membership of the United
Nations. Ten months have passed since the report was
submitted. There is simply no excuse for members to
continue to delay and obstruct its release. We strongly
urge that this issue be resolved before our next
meeting.

The United States remains determined to prevent
Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon, and we remain
committed to doing so through a comprehensive
diplomatic approach that includes substantive
engagement and unprecedented pressure. As part of
that strategy, on 6 March the European Union High
Representative, on behalf of the P5+1, offered to
resume talks with Iran as part of a sustained process
that leads to real progress in resolving our longstanding
concerns with Iran's nuclear programme. Political
directors of the P5+l held a preparatory meeting in
Brussels yesterday, and efforts are under way to
schedule the next round soon.
It is our firm view that resolving this issue will
require Iran to come to the table quickly and seriously
to discuss, in a forthright way, how to establish that the
intentions of its nuclear programme are, as it claims,
peaceful. There are verifiable steps that Iran can take to
be in compliance with its obligations. Such steps would
provide the world assurance that Iran is not pursuing a
nuclear weapon. The question is whether, in the
upcoming negotiations, Iran shows itself to be moving
clearly and credibly in that direction.

We and our partners remain ready to engage with
Iran on the basis of the framework proposed by the
P5+1. We will continue to work closely with our
partners in the international community, including on
the Council and the 1737 Committee, on this critical
issue.

