Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Staffan de Mistura for his comprehensive briefing.

The Syrian conflict has entered its eighth year
of continuing widespread violence and persistent
violations of international law, including abuses of
human rights and international humanitarian law, by
all parties. Now we are at a critical juncture. On the
one hand, we strongly believe that the Idlib ceasefire
agreement could be an opportunity to build on the de
facto ceasefires in place. On the other, unfortunately,
we are still seeing a growing escalation of violence in
some parts of Syria, especially the north-west.
Keeping that in mind, it is necessary to emphasize
that the political process has continued to fail to
gain traction, including over the establishment of the
constitutional committee. That is why we have already
expressed on several occasions our strong support for
maintaining the Idlib de-escalation zone. We urge the
parties to the conflict to respect the agreement on the
ceasefire. We strongly believe that a political solution is
key. We share the assessment made by Mr. De Mistura
that the alternative would be territorial gains and not
sustainable peace.

We also call on the Astana guarantors to follow
through on their commitment and protect civilians as a
matter of priority. As there is no military solution to the
conflict that could bring sustainable peace to Syrians,
we should aim at reaching an intra-Syrian framework
political agreement. It is also important to note that a
cessation of hostilities may give the peace talks under
the auspices of the United Nations in Geneva a chance
to gain momentum, so that a political solution might be
finally reached.

Let me also underline that a political solution must
be brokered in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). The
United Nations, and specifically Special Envoy De
Mistura, have a special role in that process. That is why
we express our full support for all the efforts of the
Special Envoy to establish a constitutional committee
as soon as possible.

In a broader context, we also welcome the Istanbul
joint statement's commitment made on 27 October
to launch the constitutional committee by the end of
the year. It should be implemented now, as a priority,
and further steps should swiftly follow to enable a
negotiated political transition process. That requires
the full and constructive engagement of all the parties
to the conflict. A special role has to be played by the
Syrian authorities, which should participate in the
negotiations in good faith and without preconditions.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Poland
will be ready to assist in the reconstruction of Syria
only when a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive
political transition, negotiated by the Syrian parties to
the conflict within the United Nations framework, is
firmly under way.

