Mr. Cunningham (United States): I want to join
others in thanking you for joining us today. Your
presence here helps us emphasize the importance of the
work being done on this important subject. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General, the Director-
General of the International Committee of the Red
Cross and Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Relief Coordinator Oshima for their
statements and their comments and, more than that,
their commitment.

I want to commend the Secretary-General, Under-
Secretary-General Oshima and their colleagues. The
report of 26 November is very helpful in organizing
our ongoing efforts in pulling together a lot of
information in a very good format.

My Government has long believed that the
safeguarding of civilians from the devastating effects
of armed conflict is at the very heart of the United
Nations Charter. Our fondest wish would be that this
Council could protect from harm all those who are
subject to aggression, insurgencies and Governments
that prey on their own people. And while it cannot,
there is much we can do to achieve that goal.

The Secretary-General and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs have given us
some good direction for the way ahead. I think they
have been quite successful in promoting a more
consistent and systematic consideration of the many
issues involved and of the steps this Council can take
to promote the protection of civilians.

The general principles of providing humanitarian
access to vulnerable populations, the separation of
civilians and armed elements and the restoration of the
rule of law, justice and reconciliation are all
fundamental to the protection of civilians and are fully
supported by the United States. These are important
issues that we need to continue to discuss in the future.
We support the idea of further developing a road map
and the implementation of many of the objectives it
calls for. Member States need to be involved in this
process and help make such considerations part of the
fabric of our work. Many of us, as we have seen in
today's discussion, want to carry this work forward.

The United States reiterates its support for the
Secretary-General's efforts to protect civilians in armed
conflict. We encourage the Secretary-General and other
key actors in the United Nations system to continue the
dialogue on how United Nations organs can better
work together to promote protection and to present
country-specific recommendations for the Council's
consideration.
