Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank you for organizing this meeting, Mr. President.

The Islamic Republic of Iran is continuing
its consultations with the other guarantors of the
Astana format on a range of issues, including Idlib's
de-escalation area, which we consider extremely
important. In line with international law, Iran supports
the inherent right of the Syrian Government to fight
terrorists designated as such by the Security Council.
While international humanitarian law must be fully
observed by all without exception, that cannot and
should not be used as a pretext to call for an end to the
fight against terrorism.

Fighting the most dangerous terrorist groups,
which have taken a large number of civilians hostage,
is a must. It is in fact the protection of civilians,
practically speaking, and should result in the release
of all civilians trapped in terrorist-held areas. It is also
obvious that those internationally designated terrorist
groups cannot and should not be allowed to maintain
their control over a large part of a sovereign State's
territory. Otherwise, Idlib will certainly turn into a safe
haven from which the worst terrorists will continue
conducting their operations and killing more civilians
both inside and outside Idlib. We must not forget that
the Idlib de-escalation area was created to protect
civilians from terrorists, not to provide a safe zone for
terrorists. It was on the basis of that principle that the
importance of the continued fight against terrorists
was also stressed when the de-escalation area was
established. The Syrian Government has an inherent
right to restore its control over the whole of its territory
and a responsibility to ensure the safety and security of
all ofits citizens from terrorists.

The current situation in Idlib, which is enabling
terrorists to conduct their operations and use more
than 2 million civilians as human shields, cannot and
must not continue indefinitely. Among other things,
it will prevent the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons, delay the country's reconstruction
and hamper the efforts to reach a political solution. I
must also stress how important it is that all concerned
fully respect international humanitarian law, as well as
Syria's sovereignty, political independence, unity and
territorial integrity.

In conclusion, I should underline that the Islamic
Republic of Iran is continuing its consultations with
the other guarantors of the Astana format to work with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Pedersen, in finding a political solution to the
current crisis in Syria. The right to determine the future
of Syria belongs exclusively to the Syrians themselves.
We must genuinely support a Syrian-led and Syrian-
owned political process.

