Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
the High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Baroness Catherine
Ashton, for her statement, insights and analysis on a
number of contemporary challenges to global peace
and security.

The establishment of international peace and security
is an important task that cannot be accomplished by a
single entity acting alone. Cooperation, communication
and assistance among the responsible actors are vital.
That spirit unites the United Nations and the European
Union and leads them to merge their efforts for the
preservation of global peace and security.

There is an established pattern of cooperation
between the two entities in a variety of areas, including,
in particular, peacekeeping and conflict prevention, the
protection of human rights, sustainable development
and the environment, development assistance, and
combating terrorism and other criminal activities.
Strengthening that cooperation and the continued
contribution of the European Union to the efforts of
the Security Council and the United Nations more
broadly are indispensable in addressing challenges to
international peace and security.
I would like to speak more specifically about some
geographical and thematic issues. The situation in the
Middle East with regard to both the Middle East peace
process and the Syrian Arab Republic still occupies the
top position on the list of international security issues.
While it has been exposed to conflicts and insecurity
for many decades, the region has also gone through
major transformation processes over the past two years.
The international community must be more united
and consistent in its efforts to help the regional States
through these difficult times and find a peaceful and
lasting solution to ongoing conflicts.

Another challenging issue is the situation in Mali,
where decisive action has enabled significant advances
in the restoration of Malian territorial integrity. It is
essential that the international community stand ready
to undertake efforts for peacebuilding, governance,
security sector reform, reconstruction and regional
cooperation.

At the same time, Mali is not the only country
facing terrorism and violent separatism. It is therefore
important to maintain consistency in deciding
on responses to such situations, especially those
aggravated by external political, military and economic
support in violation of international law and Security
Council resolutions.

Issues relating to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and the rule of law have become
some of the major topics on the international agenda.
However, despite increasing attention to those topics,
issues of accountability in certain conflict or post-
conflict situations have often been overlooked. As
a result, erroneous policies and behaviours that
contradict international law and its basic norms and
principles have often been allowed to remain, under
the cloak of impunity, and garner the potential of
further destabilizing the situation by thwarting the
achievement of peace and fomenting future conflicts
and related crimes. We believe that the international
community cannot approach selectively, or remain
indifferent to, situations involving the use of military
force against civilians and massive expulsions. If there
are reasonable grounds to believe that such violations
and other serious wrongdoings have indeed occurred
during armed conflicts and have given rise to valid
international concerns, an obligation to investigate and
prosecute alleged offences, as an important safeguard
and tool for prevention, will definitely serve the
principles of justice and the rule of law. We encourage
the European Union to continue to assist the affected
countries and support national and international efforts
to that end.

It is essential, when dealing with conflict and post-
conflict situations, that the relevant organizations and
entities ensure that peace and justice are both present
in a mutually reinforcing manner. Such an approach
ensures that no peace settlement is reached that is
inconsistent with international law. That understanding
is particularly important, as it would provide guidance
not only for the parties to the conflict but also for
the international community as a whole and, when
appropriate, mediation efforts.

In situations of unresolved conflict, the lack of
agreement on political issues cannot be used as a pretext
for marginalizing problems caused by continued and
deliberate disrespect for international law, including
international humanitarian and human rights law. It
is therefore crucial to insist on the importance, with
respect to such situations, of reaffirming the continued
applicability of all relevant international legal norms
and standards. We encourage the European Union to
consistently address concerns in that regard and support
relevant national initiatives to that end within the
United Nations. At the same time, it is also important
to carefully approach ideas having the initially declared
purpose of fostering confidence-building measures but
that in reality carry the danger of sustaining the status
quo created as a result of the unlawful use of force and
the commission of other serious crimes of concern to
the international community.

In conclusion, let us express the hope that increased
efforts and more intensified cooperation between the
United Nations and the European Union will yield better
results in dealing with the many existing challenges to
international peace and security.

