Mr. Lavalle-Valdes (Guatemala) (interpretation from Spanish): On behalf of the Government of
Guatemala, I wish to express my gratitude for this
opportunity to participate in this important meeting of the
Council. I wish also to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency and on your outstanding and
skilled leadership. We also express our appreciation to
your predecessor for the exemplary way in which he
discharged his mandate.

The issue now before us, so eminently humanitarian
in nature, is the legitimate source of deepest concern to
the international community. There are ample grounds for
any non-member of the Council to speak today in order
to associate its concerns with those so well expressed in
the two meetings that the Council has devoted to this
issue this year and in this meeting as well.

Unfortunately, however, Guatemala also has
powerful additional reasons to express today the profound
concern of its people and Government over the tragic
issues being discussed at this meeting.

As you know full well, Sir, and as I am certain all
of those present are also aware, it was only in late 1996
that we saw the definitive end to a 36-year period in
which Guatemala and its people suffered the horrors of a
fratricidal internal conflict. That year, our President,
Alvaro Arzu Irigoyen, described that confrontation to the
General Assembly as "a dirty war that crushed entire
villages and compelled many people to flee". (A/5I/PV. 8,  p- 4)

The conclusion of that traumatic conflict, which was
as savage as it was unnecessary and futile, was brought
about through the painstaking efforts made, with the

 

inestimable assistance of the United Nations, by the parties
to the conflict. Those efforts led to a series of specific
agreements that concluded with the signing, in December
1996, of the Agreement on a Firm and Lasting Peace. My
country, with the assistance of the United Nations and the
rest of the international community, is now involved in the
process of implementing the accords.

One misfortune that we particularly deplore is the fact
that our long internal armed struggle was not an exception,
but rather a confirmation of a tragic characteristic of current
armed conflicts - in other words, a conflict in which the
number of civilian victims is much higher than that of
combatants. It is true that, to a great extent, we have
achieved the return to their homes of those who were
internally displaced by the armed conflict, as well as the
resettlement of those uprooted. Measures have also been
taken to stabilize and improve the situation of all civilians
affected by the confrontation. However, even if these and
the other problems afflicting the country are resolved, it
will of course be impossible to heal all the physical and
psychological wounds left by so many years of atrocious
violence. Nor will it be possible to erase from the collective
national memory the painful recollection of so much
suffering.

Guatemala therefore fully shares the concern expressed
by the Council, in its presidential statement of 12 February
1999, on "the widening gap between the rules of
international humanitarian law and their application".
(S/PRST/I999/6, p. 2) We support the appeal made in that
statement for strict compliance with the norms of
international law by the countries affected by armed
conflicts. We are also pleased that the statement
underscored the importance of the historic Hague
Conventions, in which the relevant customary law is
reflected, as well as the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
their Additional Protocols of 1977, treaties to which
Guatemala is a party, as it is to the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the importance of
which is also emphasized in the statement.

The statement also stresses the harmful impact of the
proliferation of weapons, especially small arms, on the
security of civilians. This prompts me to mention with
satisfaction the cooperation between Guatemala and the
Department of Disarmament Affairs of the United Nations
Secretariat on the convening in our country of a seminar in
November last year on this important issue and a related a
problem.

We are all aware that there are differing opinions on
the perfectibility of human nature. The spread of a
phenomenon that has been commented on of late by the
media and in this meeting makes us believe not only that
human nature cannot be perfected, but that humankind
may in fact be in a state of clear moral degeneration. I
am referring to the recruitment of children to the ranks of
combatants, including in conflicts characterized by the
commission of atrocities. We hope that the report
requested of the Secretary-General in the statement to
which I have referred will give due and thorough
attention to the question of the participation of children in
armed conflicts.

Guatemala eagerly awaits that report and hopes that,
if it is not possible to bring about a definitive end to
armed conflicts of all types, there will at least be strict
respect for the international humanitarian law applicable
to them. We hope that the report will make an important
contribution to the achievement of that intermediate goal.

