Mr. Mauget (spoke in French): At the outset, I
want to commend the Council's devoted attention to the
reality on the ground, as evidenced by having given me
the floor.

The French Red Cross has been involved alongside
the Guinean Red Cross since April in combating the
Ebola crisis through community-based activities. I
now have the heavy responsibility of sharing our daily
struggle with Ebola and the difficult reality, as well as
the hope that coordinated global action will, as swiftly
as possible, contain the epidemic.

On 18 November, the French Red Cross welcomed
the first patients in the first Ebola treatment unit.
Although the unit was built in record time, it became
operational due to the remarkable mobilization efforts
undertaken by Doctors Without Borders in Macenta, in
the Guinea forest region, and the commitments from all
levels of the French and Guinean authorities. The region
is the original epicentre of the Ebola epidemic, where
it has now been raging for nine months without stop.
The epidemic has affected all sectors of the population
without distinction. In Macenta, those who are ill are
referred to the centre or arrive on their own to receive
medical care. Given the high hopes of the response
community in the Macenta centre, it has provided an
additional asset in the form of hope for survival for
those who are ill. Nevertheless, the centre alone will
not be able to curb this formidable epidemic.

Ebola is raging in Macenta as we speak. Our teams
are overcoming the challenges one by one in order
to increase our capacity as quickly as possible, but
they are not able to address the totality of the needs.
Establishing access channels to essential provisions
and mobilizing Guinean and international medical
and non-medical personnel are essential conditions
in strengthening our response capacity as soon as
possible. Biosecurity for the operation's staff is also a
central part of the intervention.

The epidemic in Guinea is not yet under control.
In recent weeks, there has been an upsurge of cases in
the infection zones, new cases in new provinces and
re-emergence in areas once considered cured. The
effects of the international mobilization efforts have
started to materialize on the ground. We therefore
welcome the commitments made by Governments, the
United Nations and humanitarian actors. Despite that,
Ebola is always one step ahead. The epidemic is ahead
of us, forcing us to react in view of the humanitarian
imperative, without the ability to anticipate or to limit its
development. Strengthened international mobilization
efforts are necessary to generate concrete action to
respond to the needs on the ground. Moreover, diverse
efforts are needed to ensure the proper implementation
of all required elements in this struggle.

The action of the Red Cross is based on the five
pillars of its response strategy: medical care; funerals
carried out safely and with dignity, and disinfection;
awareness-raising and communication; the monitoring
of contacts; and psychosocial support for people and
staffon the ground. Coordination ofthose factors around
the areas of outbreak will one day make it possible to
contain the epidemic. On the ground, daily coordination
meetings, hosted by the prefect coordination unit in the
fight against Ebola, play a fundamental role in ensuring
such efforts, especially related synergies.

Among the essential non-medical activities
in this fight, we must highlight those carried out,
courageously, since the start of the epidemic by the
volunteers of the Guinean Red Cross: transporting the
ill, disinfection and ensuring safe burials. Since March
they have responded to warnings about suspected cases
and deaths in communities. They are the ones who
have been exposed both ethically and physically. They
risk exposure to the epidemic by working in the most
affected communities and dealing with people who are
suffering. They fetch the sick and bring the bodies back
in body bags. It is a terrible task that the volunteers of
the Guinean Red Cross carry out with determination.
Their commitment will lead to breaking the chains of
transmission and recurrence both today and tomorrow.

Again I would highlight to the Council my
admiration for those volunteers who have been daily
stigmatized by their families and neighbours. In
Macenta, some have been made to move regularly, some
have been abandoned by their spouses and children,
without a word, and some have lost their loved ones.

Today, our role and that of the international
community remains, above all, to assist those who
help - those whose translate national and global
strategies in each community and outbreak area of the
epidemic, down to the affected households.

The task of the Guinean workers, whether from the
Guinean Red Cross, the military or civilian society,
continues to be undermined by the people's mistrust.
As such, awareness-raising remains essential to an
effective reference base. That work must be carried out
daily.

During the morning coordination meeting in
Macenta, new outbreaks are identified. Outreach teams
leave to open the doors of the communities to volunteers
from the Guinean Red Cross, who are responsible for
monitoring case contacts.

Sometimes we fail, faced with overwhelming
cultural resistance and the terrible feeling that the
struggle will never end. If we do not gain access to the
community, the transmission paths will not be stopped
in time. The epidemic moves from here, to there,
depending on the movements of the people who have
been in this border region. To succeed, we must move
beyond traditional awareness-raising messages and
win the confidence and the ear ofthe people where they
live. We cannot defeat Ebola without the participation
and contributions of the affected populations.

As a national member of the International
Federation ofRed Cross and Red Crescent Societies, and
as our colleagues in non-governmental organizations
on the front line of the Ebola crisis have noted, the
implementation of our work is a new challenge. The
Council recognizes the difficulties we face in mobilizing
competent human resources that are ready to deploy
in the field to face a complex epidemic. Aside from
the medical personnel, we need water and sanitation
specialists, field coordinators, administrators,
logisticians and many other talents. The global media
coverage and some decisions on managing the return of
personnel exposed in the field can affect the recruiting
of international talent. States' commitments to ensure
safe medical evacuation is essential to providing the
best guarantees to all participants, without regard to
nationality.

Finally, let us not forget our Guinean colleagues,
who in case of contamination must also be able to
receive optimal care and psychosocial support. The
other great challenge is the logistics of supplying
essential products to areas that may be very remote.
The production, purchase and transport of those critical
materials are undertaken along a precarious chain of
supply, and any disruption of the process could cause a
slowdown or even a halt in these activities.
In this tense and uncertain situation, we can still
find a few "happy" endings: the cured patient who
leads community outreach meetings; the nursery that
welcomes the children of patients and strives to support
them; and the joy that overcomes our teams when a
community is opened to response and a transmission
chain is broken. Those small victories belong to the
workers on the ground and are are often due to solidarity
among the people in the field, whatever their institutional
affiliation: Red Cross, international non-governmental
organizations or United Nations agencies. The World
Food Programme, which is shouldering tasks in Guinea
that are not traditionally part of its mandate, has been
most helpful with its construction of care centres and
air transportation of people and freight.

To conclude, I also wish to say that Guinea is a
wonderful country, with genuine positives, and that
Guineans are charming and welcoming. Despite Ebola,
life there goes on and must go on. The indirect impact of
the epidemic remains to be tallied, but we already know
that health services have been significantly affected,
that food security could become a real concern, and
that the overall pace of development has slowed. As
humanitarian actors, our primary objective is to help
contain the epidemic, not only for reasons of health, but
also so that the pace of development will resume.

I thank the Council for its attention and I hope
it will contribute to the overall consideration of the
Security Council.

