Mr. Ragaglini (Italy) I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2013/350) and Special Representative Jan Kubis for
his briefing.

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would like to
add a few remarks in my national capacity.

As we are all aware, Afghanistan is experiencing a
very important moment. The beginning of the fifth and
last phase of the transition process has been announced.
The Afghan Government and security forces are
preparing to take over responsibility for security
operations throughout the country. The Afghan people
will increasingly assume ownership of its future. Thus,
we are at a very delicate moment, characterized by a
particularly intense fighting season that forces us to
remain vigilant. We know that the handover process
for security responsibilities to the national authorities
could involve some critical factors, but we are also
confident of the Afghan armed forces' determination to
tackle this important challenge.

Italy will continue to assist Afghanistan and to
encourage a greater commitment from the international
community as a whole. Starting in 2015, during the so-
called transformation decade, a new partnership will be
formed that will lead our presence in the field to shift
its focus mainly to training activities.

Afghanistan is about to face another crucial
challenge - the presidential elections. We expect the
Afghan authorities to take all the necessary steps to
guarantee an inclusive, transparent and credible process,
and to enact clear, shared rules that will guarantee the
participation of the many components of civil society
and the various political parties in the country.

Let us not forget the more general mutual
commitments made at the Tokyo Conference in July
2012, which should guide our future cooperation. In
confirming our presence in Afghanistan, we encourage
the Government of Kabul to honour its commitments
in the field of governance, the fight against corruption,
and the protection of human rights in a framework of
conditionality and measurable results.

Italy attaches great importance to the protection
of women's rights and the promotion of the status of
women in Afghanistan, to which the Government of
Kabul made specific commitments in Tokyo, including
effective and uniform enforcement of the Law on the
Elimination of Violence against Women.

Internal reconciliation is also an unavoidable
crossroads on the path to the lasting stabilization
of the country. Italy supports the peace process and
recognizes Afghanistan's full ownership. We look
forward to concrete follow-up soon. We do not expect it
to reverse the gains made in civil rights and democracy,
or to concessions to terrorism. Equally important
is the contribution of regional actors, who are called
upon to help lay the groundwork for the success of the
inter-Afghan dialogue.

At the regional level we also expect to see greater
cooperation and a more intense political dialogue.
The developments in the Istanbul process, which Italy
supports, are promising. Now we have to move forward
with the practical implementation of the plans of
actions approved at the ministerial meeting in Almaty
last April.

I take this opportunity to express Italy's deep
appreciation for the role being played by the United
Nations in Afghanistan, starting with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). In the
run-up to the elections, the United Nations support for
the Afghan authorities will be crucial in consolidating
the legitimacy and integrity of the process. UNAMA's
contribution will be just as important during this
delicate transition to the transformation decade, by
supporting the Afghan Government institutions as they
assume a greater share of the responsibility for the
socio-economic development of their country.
