Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Madam President, for convening this debate. I
also thank you for your kind words of welcome. It is
an immense honour to represent France in this body
and to begin with a debate on such a crucial subject.
I would also like to thank the other speakers for their
analysis and their poignant, moving testimony, I take
this opportunity to congratulate Luxembourg once
again for its outstanding work on children in armed
conflict. The presence here today of Foreign Minister
Asselborn is further proof ofhis country's commitment
to that cause.
Our efforts on behalf of children in areas of
armed conflict have not flagged. The United Nations
mechanism has already produced concrete results. Since
its implementation, it has enabled tens of thousands
of child soldiers to be demobilized each year. The
Children, Not Soldiers campaign allows us to glimpse,
a few years down the road, the possibility of a world in
which no national army will be recruiting children.

The core of the mechanism is its action plans. This
year, thanks to the implementation of one such plan,
the national army of Chad was removed from the list
for child recruitment. All told, the 20 or so action plans
signed in agreement with Governments or armed groups
represent a certain degree of progress in the efforts to
protect children in conflicts. Those action plans should
be implemented with all possible speed to insure the
credibility of our actions. With that in mind, the United
Nations should deploy all its available material and
human resources.

The credibility of our efforts to liberate child
soldiers also depends on our collective example. That is
why France supports clarification of the rules governing
participation in peacekeeping operations by national
armies on the list for child recruitment. Moreover,
the Secretary-General's human-rights screening
policy and his zero-tolerance policy with regard to
sexual exploitation and sexual violence must be fully
implemented. Of course, the limitation on contact with
individuals wanted by the International Criminal Court
must be rigorously applied at all levels.

In too many armed conflicts, children are the first
victims. In Iraq and Syria, the Islamic State has proven
guilty of the worst types of attacks on children. That
terrorist organization recruits children by the hundreds
and trains them in training camps. The steps taken
by the international community to put an end to the
actions ofthat group should be continued and bolstered.
It is for that reason that France will soon organize an
international conference on security in Iraq.

In Syria, for more than three years now, the
regime and its militias have not spared children. More
than 10,000 children have been killed - a number
that is probably well below what it really is. Schools
are relentlessly bombarded; 3,000 of them have been
destroyed. That denies an entire generation its right to
education.

We commend the commitment of the coalition and
the Supreme Military Council of the Free Syrian Army
to prevent and put an end to the recruitment of children.
We encourage Ms. Zerrougui to continue dialogue with
a view towards the signing of an action plan.

In the Central African Republic, children are also
victims of armed groups. Ex-Seleka and anti-Balaka
still have among their ranks more than 6,000 children.
The deployment of United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, as of 15 September, will allow for a more
effective fight against those groups and their attacks
on civilians. The operation has a strong mandate for
the protection of children, and it must act quickly to
implement it.

In its fight for the protection of children, the
International Criminal Court (ICC) plays an important
and essential role. The sentencing in 2012 of Thomas
Lubanga and the transfer to the ICC last year of
Mr. Bosco Ntaganda served to send a clear and
strong signal as to the criminal consequences of child
recruitment, which is considered to be a war crime. We
are in favour of strengthening dialogue with the Court.
Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda spoke before the Working
Group, and we could now invite her to speak before the
Council on this issue.

I should conclude by renewing our call upon all
States to endorse the Paris Principles and commitments,
which are complementary to the actions of the Security
Council. They provide a robust framework for the
international community in its efforts to protect
children in armed conflict. France will be firmly
committed to that fight. It is part of our moral and
political responsibility to do so. It is at the centre of
the universal conscience that we share in the United
Nations.

