The Deputy Secretary-General: Preventive
diplomacy is an old art, but it faces new and evolving
challenges. There is a pressing need to re-evaluate how
we can use our limited resources and capabilities to
maximize the impact of preventive action. I therefore
thank the Nigerian presidency of the Security Council
for its initiative in convening this debate. I would like
to welcome in particular His Excellency the Foreign
Minister of Nigeria. I thank you, Mr. Minister, for
taking time out of your business schedule to be with us
this morning for this important debate.

I am pleased to speak to the Council today on
behalf of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.

The term "preventive diplomacy" was first coined
by former Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold. Since
his time, the good offices of successive Secretaries-
General have helped in the peaceful resolution of
inter-State wars, civil conflicts, electoral disputes,
5
border disputes, questions of autonomy and
independence and a range of other problems.

In today's fluid geopolitical landscape, we have
new challenges to address. Preventive diplomacy must
evolve to deal with increasingly complex civil wars,
organized crime and drug trafficking and other
transnational threats.

In recent years, we have witnessed the very
welcome emergence of stronger policy frameworks in
favour of conflict prevention, particularly in Africa,
with a growing capacity for operational response.
Preventive diplomacy today is being conducted by a
broader array of actors than ever before, using a wide
range of tools. This makes it possible to consider
multifaceted preventive strategies of a kind that were
previously not an option.

Over the past three years, we have sought to
strengthen the Department of Political Affairs so that it
would be capable of effectively carrying out its lead
role in this area. In the past year alone, the United
Nations has supported, often in partnership with others,
more than 20 peace processes, and responded to many
more disputes that did not reach that level.

We have improved our response capacity at
Headquarters; we have regional diplomacy and
peacemaking offices on the ground; we cooperate more
effectively within the United Nations system and with
regional and subregional organizations.

With the support of Member States, we are
continuing to professionalize our mediation support
capacity, which is seen as an increasingly valuable
resource within the United Nations system and by our
partners. We have also attempted to develop new tools,
including the use of investigative mandates to help
defuse tensions in judicial cases with political
implications.

We are helping national authorities to build their
capacity for dispute resolution, in addition to
development programmes that can help address some
of the structural causes of conflict. Most missions
mandated by the Security Council today include an
important mediatory role, typically carried out by the
head of mission, in recognition of the fact that the need
for diplomacy persists throughout the conflict cycle.

All of this holds promise for our preventive
diplomacy in Africa. We see a need to focus, in
particular, on four fronts.

First, we must continue to strengthen our
partnerships. Successful peace processes require the
contributions of a range of actors, at both the regional
and the international levels. Our Dakar-based Office
for West Africa has forged innovative working
relations with the African Union and ECOWAS to
address political crises throughout the subregion, a
model that could be usefully replicated elsewhere.
Other noteworthy developments include the increasing
use of international contact groups and elders
structures. Recent engagements in Guinea, Niger, the
Comoros and Kenya have shown what we can achieve
through partnerships that yield a combination of
influence, impartiality, capacity and capability.

Secondly, we must be prepared to persuade.
Effective preventive action depends critically on the
will of the parties to the conflict. The better we
understand motives, calculations and incentives to use
violence, the better we can target our response. We
must be willing to use all available leverage to
persuade the key actors that it is in their own interest to
accept diplomatic assistance to avert conflict.
Neighbouring countries and subregional organizations
that are closest to events on the ground and may have
unique influence can be key allies here.

Thirdly, the international community should
continue to invest in prevention. The global economic
crisis has put new pressures on resources, and there is
an overall trend towards doing more with less.
Diplomatic approaches and responses, when
successful, are highly cost-effective.

Fourthly, we must do more to support and
encourage the role of women in prevention. Time and
again, women in Africa and elsewhere have
demonstrated a strong commitment to working to
achieve sustainable peace. Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) reaffirmed the important role of women in
the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding. Yet women are still underrepresented in
the formal stages of conflict prevention. We can and
must do better.

According to recent studies, 15 years' worth of
development aid to Africa has been effectively
cancelled out by the cost of war on the continent. The
case for preventive diplomacy is compelling on moral,
political and financial grounds.
We have improved our ability to detect warning
signs of impending crises, and we have at our disposal
a growing range of tools and instruments to address
them. We must now set our sights on building our
capacity for international preventive diplomacy, so that
when called upon we can respond reliably and
promptly.

