Mr. Duale (Somalia): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October. I also wish
to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe and Mr. Boyd
from the Department of Field Support, and express my
appreciation for their briefings. We also appreciate the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/503) and thank
all those who contributed to it. In particular, we thank

the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia and head of the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah; the
United Nations Support Office for the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM); and all the international
and other organizations that contributed, in very
difficult circumstances, to the drafting of the report.

We have passed through a long and painful
struggle in Somalia over the past 18 years. It is very
heartening now to note the conviction, expressed both
in the report of the Secretary-General and in the
statements made by most Security Council members,
that progress has indeed been achieved through the
Djibouti peace process, and that the Government,
despite all the problems - especially with the security
situation - has done a lot. We therefore hope and pray
that the United Nations, the international community
and especially the Security Council will now really try
to take the necessary steps as quickly as possible to
ensure that the security situation is further improved.
That is the only way it can be done.

Our President, in his statement at the general
debate of the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth
session, mentioned the problems that face the
Government and our priorities. He stated that the
priorities are strengthening sufficiently the Somali
national security and police forces and other security
and law enforcement organs; adequately strengthening
AMISOM. in all aspects and achieving the agreed
strength of 8,000 peacekeepers; and the deployment of
an adequate United Nations peace operation in
Somalia, the sooner the better. It is also very
heartening to note that a number of Security Council
members seem to agree that it is now time to look into
the issue of how fast an adequate peacekeeping force
can be deployed in Somalia.

I shall try to address the question raised by my
colleague from Uganda. As we know, Uganda and
Burundi are also suffering alongside the Somalis. In
fact, they have lost a number of their soldiers in trying
to help Somalia. I therefore stress the need as soon as
possible to accelerate the incremental process, as stated
in the report, to establish a security situation that will
allow all United Nations and international agencies to
operate in Somalia and open the door to the adequate
and timely supply of assistance to the 3.7 million
people who need it now.
I do not wish to make a long speech because all
the points that I could have raised have been raised
either in the report itself or by the members of the
Security Council.

I turn now to the issue of piracy. It has been
mentioned and underlined by a number of Security
Council members that the root causes of piracy are the
problems on land in Somalia, and not on the high seas.
We therefore also need support for the struggling
security forces that have already been created if we are
to be able to stop the pirates from embarking from
Somalia's ports.

As has been noted by some members, the
Security Council may apply and enforce sanctions
against all spoilers, be they individuals, entities, a
country or countries. That, too, is needed now.
Furthermore, our Government and the African Union
have requested the blockade, if possible, of the ports
through which A1-Shabaab and its associate, Al-Qaida,
receive not only supplies but personnel to train
operatives and to ensure that their training camps are
well equipped and supplied. The purpose of these
training camps is not only to destabilize the Somali
Government, but also and mainly to serve as stepping
stones to neighbouring countries and to produce
09-54835
international terrorists. We also seek to monitor
overflights of some airports that are now controlled by
Al-Shabaab and its allies.

Finally, I wish wholeheartedly to thank Uganda
and Burundi and other countries that have promised to
supply personnel and training. We also thank the
international community and the countries that have
already given us assistance in training our security
forces. We are glad that, as has been mentioned by
many, pledges have been made for support to
AMISOM. and the Somali security forces. The
disbursement of these pledges, however, has to be
made as quickly as possible, and we are very glad that
there will be a meeting on this issue tomorrow.

I wish to reiterate once more the urgency of the
security situation in Somalia, which also involves the
humanitarian situation and all other human rights
aspects, and the urgent need for the Security Council to
take action in the security sector.

