Ms. Loj (Denmark): I would like to fully
associate Denmark with the statement of the European
Union to be delivered later by the representative of
Austria.

First of all, let me thank Assistant Secretary-
General Kalomoh for his comprehensive briefing and
comments.

Times are changing in the Middle East. New
Governments will be emerging in both Israel and the
Palestinian Authority. It is our strong hope that both
Governments will live up to their commitments,
including the road map, and will thus help ensure that
Israelis and Palestinians may live together peacefully,
side by side.

We hope that the new Government that has been
formed in the Palestinian territories will address the
Palestinian people's aspirations for peace and
statehood that have been so strongly articulated by
President Abbas. We thus expect the Palestinian
Government to fulfil the obligations entered into by the
Palestinian Authority. Violence and terror are
incompatible with democratic processes. In accordance
with the Quartet's statement of 30 January, "all
members of [the] Palestinian Government must be
committed to non-violence, recognition of Israel and
acceptance of previous agreements and obligations,
including the road map". Clearly, those conditions
remain unchanged.

We have noted that Prime Minister Haniyeh has
expressed his wish to enter into a dialogue with the
Middle East Quartet. Although Hamas has clearly
undergone some change, as evidenced by its de facto
observance of a ceasefire and its participation in the
elections, it does, however, remain to be seen whether
this transformation is irreversible and continues in the
right direction. Moreover, we expect the new
Government to be committed to the rule of law, reform
and sound fiscal management, and to prevent terrorist
attacks and dismantle the infrastructure of terror.

Ways must be found to continue to support the
Palestinian people. Modalities for provision of
international assistance are currently being analysed. It
would not be fair, or indeed in accordance with the
ideals that we want to take hold in the Middle East, to
punish the Palestinian people for exercising their
democratic rights. A functioning Palestinian Authority,
including stable Palestinian institutions, is essential
both for the well-being of the Palestinian people and
for the creation of a viable Palestinian State.

In February 2006, the European Union decided to
provide around $143 million in emergency assistance
to the Palestinians. The provision of future assistance
is now being analysed.

Denmark stands ready to continue to support
Palestinian economic development and democratic
State-building. An economic collapse of the Palestinian
Authority is in nobody's interest.

Election results in Israel are just in. We would
like to use this opportunity to remind Israel, and the
new Government to be formed after the elections, that
in the light of the continued creation of facts on the
ground peace cannot be imposed unilaterally and that
durable peace cannot be achieved outside the regional
framework of the Middle East peace process.

Both Israel and the Palestinians should adhere to
their obligations under the road map and avoid
unilateral actions, which prejudice final status issues.
Construction of settlement outposts constitutes such
action. Moreover, impediments to Palestinian
economic life must be removed. The separation barrier
cuts off the movement of people and goods. The
Movement and Access Agreement must be respected
and the border crossings, including Karni, must be
remain open.

The final aim of the Middle East peace process
remains unchanged, that is, in accordance with the road
map, a negotiated two-State solution with Israel and
Palestinians living side by side in peaceful coexistence.

As regards the situation in Lebanon, Denmark
welcomes the launching of a national dialogue. We
hope this dialogue will continue and will contribute to
stability in the country. As also underlined by the
Security Council on numerous occasions, we support
Lebanon's unity, stability and independence and
remind Lebanon's neighbours of their obligation to
respect Lebanon's sovereignty. We are encouraged by
the fact that the situation along the Blue Line has
remained quiet recently.

Denmark also welcomes the progress achieved so
far by the special International Independent
Investigation Commission into the murder of former
Prime Minister Rafik Hariri in February 2005. As
Mr. Brammertz said to the Council two weeks ago (see S/PV.5388), the investigation is making progress. In
order to complete the investigation and to ensure that
justice is served, the full and unconditional cooperation
of all relevant parties is needed.

Resolution 1664 (2006), adopted yesterday,
requests the Secretary-General to negotiate an
agreement with the Government of Lebanon aimed at
establishing a tribunal of an international character to
try those eventually charged with involvement in that
terrorist attack. We welcome that process.

