Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his briefing on recent developments
regarding the political and military situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We would also like
to thank Mr. Bertrand Ramcharan, Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights, for his
comprehensive briefing on the human rights situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially in
Drodro and Ituri.

On 13 February 2003 the Security Council heard
a briefing by Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, who came to
discuss the situation in Mambasa in particular. The
information he gave us evoked great feeling and
profound indignation. The information contained in the
two reports provided to the Council this morning
regarding atrocities - some of which were
premeditated - is revolting, repugnant and shocking to
the human conscience. How can we fail to be moved by
the perpetuation into this century of organized
massacres and torture on such a scale? Those acts
included systematic and massive rape, sexual slavery,
mutilation with sharp weapons and other inhumane and
degrading punishment. I shall spare the Council a
detailed description.

The conduct of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo since 1998 has been
characterized by particularly large-scale violations of
human rights and humanitarian law. Beyond the
frightening figure of some 3 million victims of such
crimes, it seems that this conflict has caused the largest
number of deaths since the Second World War. I would
like to emphasize that, as we heard earlier from Mr.
Guehenno and Mr. Ramcharan, civilians comprise the
largest number of victims. This conflict clearly has
stripped some actors of all humanity and fundamental
human values. No interest at stake, no military goal, no
strategy for reaching any objective can justify the
inhumanity and barbarity that these two reports depict.
My delegation firmly condemns such actions and calls
upon all Congolese parties to return to sanity in order
that, with help from the international community, they
can finally turn this sad page of their history and begin
a new chapter of reason and hope.

In that regard, we welcome the establishment of a
Government in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
on 30 June, following the signing of a memorandum
pertaining the army. That was a significant step
forward that opens up new prospects for reconciliation,
peace and justice in the country. All Congolese parties
should now work together to restore trust, security and
stability and to restart economic activity in the country.
Those who are well acquainted with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo know that this represents a
major challenge whose success can be guaranteed only
if three conditions are met: real political determination
among the Congolese themselves, a significant and
decisive commitment on the part of the United Nations,
and a central role in the transition process for the
principles of peace and justice.

It seems to us that all those guilty of flagrant
violations human rights, criminal law and crimes
against humanity during the conflict must necessarily
be brought to justice before the appropriate judicial
authorities in order that they may be held accountable
for their crimes. Impunity must be steadfastly and
firmly combated. In that regard, the Security Council
may perhaps wish to consider urgently establishing a
judicial mechanism capable of taking up the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. For its part,
Cameroon would favour setting up a national
jurisdiction as part of the transitional institutions to
which the international community would lend its full
support in order to ensure its full effectiveness and
complete adherence to the law. Such a jurisdiction
would fall within the current dynamic of reconstituting
a sovereign space for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and would contribute to the Congolese people's
once again taking hold of their own destiny.

Last February, Mr. Vieira de Mello suggested to
the Security Council the establishment of a truth and
reconciliation mechanism in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo that could serve to help the Congolese
people to deal with the horrors and tragedies of the
past, the memory of which continues to haunt them. I
therefore welcome the imminent establishment of a
truth and reconciliation commission. I likewise
welcome the support of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) in the establishment and
operation of the commission.
All of these initiatives should be pursued in the
context of an effective overall framework that includes
a specific approach to the rights of the most vulnerable
members of the population - women and children -
who have been reduced to mere instruments of a
savage war. I am also thinking of the consequences of
collective rape vis-a-vis the spread of HIV/AIDS.
Moreover, the existence of large numbers of displaced
persons in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
clearly indicates that specific measures are needed to
improve access for humanitarian assistance to such
persons. In that regard, it is up to the Congolese parties
to assume the obligation to provide access to United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) participating in the humanitarian effort.
MONUC should assist them insofar as its mandate
permits.

Turning to another subject, the programme for the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement (DDRR) of combatants - the pace of
which has not yet risen to the expectations and goals of
the peace process - should be pursued with renewed
vigour in order that it may contribute to the
pacification of the Congolese political scene. We are
aware of the complexity of the programme, but, as Mr.
Kenzo Oshima noted during the meeting of the
Security Council held on 20 June 2003, the programme
is fundamental to protecting civilians, in particular
during the transition to peace.

Speaking about the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mr. Oshima called upon the Council to take
measures towards voluntary disarmament in order to
stop the violence against civilians and to thus stabilize
the peace process in this war-torn country. We share
that analysis. In that regard, we should consider the
"Bunia without Weapons" operation established by the
Emergency Multinational Force as part of its mandate
under Chapter VII as a new approach to disarming
armed militias. We would like to have Mr. Guehenno's
opinion in that regard.

My delegation welcomes the fact that the gender-
specific component has been taken into account in the
work of MONUC, whose personnel have been provided
with training and advice about integrating the gender
perspective into all aspects of their work.
With regard to children - traumatized victims of
this conflict who will bear psychological, and perhaps
even physical, scars for the rest of their lives - I wish
to express the hope that the report of the Secretary-
General incriminating virtually every Congolese
movement will be viewed by the movements as a call
to abide by international law. We also hope that United
Nations agencies and the competent NGOs will address
the state of these children, most of whom are orphans
and/or combatants, with their traditional know-how.
Cameroon reiterates its full support to them.

There is already cause for hope, namely, the
participation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in several international instruments pertaining to the
protection of children. The demobilization of child
soldiers and their reintegration into civilian life are
thus key priority tasks that must be urgently taken up
by the new transitional Government of national unity.
That Government should be able to count on the
support of the international community through
MONUC, the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the International Committee of the Red Cross and other
non-governmental organizations involved in the
situation, which must provide it with all the assistance
necessary for achieving its goals.

The Congolese people has suffered too much in
its quest for peace. The international community is
duty-bound decisively to demonstrate its solidarity
with that people at this crucial moment, as the search
for national reconciliation is beginning to bear fruit.
Mr. Ramcharan has even spoken of international
responsibilities and supervision.

Cameroon wishes urgently to appeal to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's neighbours to
support the peace process in that country, to refrain
from any act likely to undermine the transition, and to
work to convince the rebel movements - over which
they clearly have influence - to become part of the
effort to rebuild the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Finally, I address my delegation's encouragement
to the Secretary-General, his Special Envoy to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUC for
their courageous work under sometimes extremely
difficult circumstances. I also wish to congratulate Mr.
Amos Namanga Ngongi, who has spared no effort at
the head of MONUC, as he completes his mission. I
further warmly welcome Ambassador Swing to his new
post and wish him every success in the performance of
his duties.

