Mr. Al-Khalifa (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to express my thanks and appreciation to
His Excellency President Frederick Chiluba for his valuable
and detailed briefing on the situation in Africa, a topic of
great concern for the Security Council. I would also like to
thank the Gabonese Republic for its part in the invitation to
His Excellency to participate in this meeting.

Bahrain fully appreciates the efforts and the good
mediation efforts of President Chiluba to restore peace and
security to different regions of the African continent. I
would like to mention in particular the recent mediation
efforts that he made to settle the problem of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which was crowned with the
Lusaka agreement. Signed by the parties to the conflict, it
aims at consolidating national reconciliation. In this respect,
we hope that all parties to the conflict will be committed
to the agreement, since there is no alternative to it. We
hope that the parties will implement it in full without
delay so that peace and stability can be restored to that
region.

We look forward to the Council's focusing its
attention in the coming days on alleviating tensions in
Africa. We hope that the Council will redouble its efforts
to implement practical measures to settle disputes and to
restore stability to this continent, which has long been
torn by political and military strife. The time has come
for the international community to find suitable solutions
to the strife in Africa. The international community must
put an end to all new crises. It must also work to allow
the African States to focus on developing their economies
and exploiting their national and human resources so that
they can face the challenges of the coming century.

We also call upon the international community to
redouble its support for humanitarian efforts aimed at
providing the assistance necessary to alleviate the
suffering of the displaced and the refugees among the
civilians who were the victims of the military conflict.
This must take place in the context of the valuable
proposals made by the President in his important
statement to the Council.

