I would like to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary- General for Syria, for his briefing today. My delegation notes with encouragement the recent political and security developments in Syria, including the agreement between the co-Chairs of the Constitutional Committee on the agenda for the next session, as well as the relatively calm situation on the ground over the past few weeks. It is crucial that the parties concerned be able to translate it into further encouraging progress, which would subsequently bring a peaceful end to the decade-long unrest in Syria. However, we remain concerned about the fragility of the situation in the Syria, in general, and in north-west Syria, in particular. The ceasefire in place in Idlib since 6 March is a good opportunity for intensifying efforts for a peaceful solution, and that should not be squandered. We would also like to voice our deep concern about the continuing dire humanitarian situation in Syria, which is now compounded by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, especially in the north-west, after months of intense hostilities. In the current context, my delegation would like to stress the following points. First, we urge all parties in Syria to heed the call of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire and translate it into a permanent nationwide ceasefire, thus creating an environment conducive to dialogue and negotiations. We also urge all parties in Syria to refrain from any action that could trap Syrian people in the ongoing vicious circle of conflict and instability, and to continue to build trust and confidence among themselves in an effort to promote peace and reconciliation. The COVID-19 pandemic is the common enemy. It not only targets people, especially the most vulnerable, but also hampers peace efforts and undermines consolidated gains. The role of the international community in helping to support the Syrian people in that regard is therefore essential for both humanitarian reasons and to bring about the overall conditions that could enable progress. Furthermore, we call on all members of the Constitutional Committee to continue to make every effort - through all channels - to cooperate in good faith during this difficult time. Secondly, we fully support the continuation of any viable diplomatic and political engagement that could bring hope for a peaceful resolution of the conflict. We would also like to take this opportunity to express our appreciation for the tireless efforts of the Special Envoy in revitalizing the work of the Constitutional Committee after months of postponement. We reiterate once again our full support for the facilitation role played by the United Nations. In this regard, we welcome the proposals that the Special Envoy mentioned in his briefing and urge all parties in Syria to consider them seriously. Last but not least, our consistent belief is that the one and only viable path towards peace and security for the people of Syria is through an inclusive political solution, led and owned by the Syrian people, in conformity with international law, the Charter of the United Nations and relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2254 (2015).
