Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank all
of our briefers who spoke with us today.

First, the United States condemns in the strongest
terms the cowardly terrorist attack last week in
Jerusalem. This stabbing attack left one Israeli border
guard dead and wounded several others. We express our
deepest sympathies to the victims and their families.
The United States reiterates its commitment to stand
with Israel against these forces of terror.

Hamas is one of those forces of terror, which yet
again showed its true colours to the world earlier this
month. It is a terrorist organization so ruthless that it
will not hesitate to put the lives of innocent children
on the line. A few weeks ago, United Nations officials
discovered a tunnel underneath two schools run by the
United Nations in Gaza. It was the exact type of tunnel
that Hamas has used for years. Those tunnels are what
Hamas uses to smuggle in the materials they need to
make rockets or to sneak into Israel to attack civilians
or kidnap them in the dead of night. Imagine children
playing in their schoolyard while Hamas moves
explosives underneath their feet. Imagine children
trying to learn while a few feet below terrorists might
have been crawling towards Israel. All of this was
happening under a building flying a flag of the United
Nations. It is an outrage.

But when we consider Hamas and the other terrorist
organizations that operate in Gaza, the existence of
that tunnel should not be a surprise. This is the way
Hamas does business. Tunnels in heavily populated
civilian areas are its signature. Hamas hides military
infrastructure in and around apartment buildings,
hospitals and, as we saw again this month, United
Nations compounds. In this way, Hamas consciously
plots and plans to attack civilians and it uses the cover
of civilian buildings to launch those attacks. It is a sick
and cynical strategy.

There is a terrible humanitarian crisis in Gaza.
We remain a strong supporter of Gaza's recovery and
reconstruction. I myself was at the Gaza border earlier
this month, where Special Coordinator Mladenov
briefed me on the latest chilling developments. What
is happening to the people of Gaza is heartbreaking,
and it is so preventable. Gaza is prime real estate on
the Mediterranean Sea. It has enormous potential, but
the potential is being squandered by the terrorists who
govern it.

Make no mistake: Israel did not cause the problems
in Gaza, even though it is often the usual suspect around
here. Ten years ago every Israeli soldier was withdrawn
from Gaza, and for the past 10 years, there has not been
a single Israeli settler in Gaza. Other outside countries
and political factions are also not the cause of Gaza's
problems. We all would like to see Palestinians in Gaza
receive the aid they so desperately need, and we will
continue to work to find avenues to get aid safely to
them. But we should never forget that the responsibility
for this humanitarian crisis rests squarely with the one
group that actually controls Gaza: Hamas.

Hamas has exercised control over Gaza since 2007.
After 10 years of Hamas rule, life for the people of Gaza
is worse than ever before. Rather than govern, Hamas
chooses to devote its resources to building a terrorist
arsenal. Rather than pursuing peace, Hamas chooses to
provoke destructive wars. Rather than allowing help to
reach the Palestinian people, Hamas chooses to divert
untold amounts of aid to feed its military enterprise.

I saw how this works firsthand. I walked through
one of the terrorist tunnels coming out of the Gaza
Strip, which Israel discovered and has since secured.
The top and sides of the tunnel were lined with solid,
sturdy concrete. We know how badly Palestinians in
Gaza need concrete to rebuild their homes. But there,
in that tunnel, we see how Hamas uses the concrete
Gaza receives - not to help the people, but to fortify
its terrorist infrastructure. Hamas remains a terrorist
organization bent on Israel's destruction. Its goal is to
defeat Israel by force. It will use all the resources it can
to continue the fight.
The Security Council must stand up to condemn
Hamas' terror. Hamas represents yet another regional
threat that the Council far too often ignores. While
United Nations agencies and Member States dissect
Israel's actions, few speak out against the terror that
Hamas continues to plot. Some States Members of the
Organization even maintain ties to Hamas and other
terrorist groups that flourish in Gaza.

The Security Council must unite to say that enough
is enough. We need to pressure Hamas to end its tyranny
over the people of Gaza. We should condemn Hamas
in the Council's resolutions and statements. We should
name Hamas as the group responsible when rockets are
fired from Gaza or when fresh tunnels are discovered.
And we should designate Hamas as a terrorist
organization in a resolution, with consequences for
anyone who continues to support it. That is how we can
help build a more peaceful Middle East, and how we
can fulfil our responsibility on the Council to actually
maintain international peace and security. And while
we must do whatever we can to ease the suffering of
the people in Gaza, we must also recognize that the
suffering will not be fully addressed until the terrorists
lose their grip on power.

All States have a role to play here. We must do
much more to show Hamas that we will never tolerate
terrorism. We must show that when Hamas uses homes
and schools to hide its terrorist infrastructure, there
will be consequences. Those who give Hamas the arms,
money and political support to operate must cease. And
if they do not, Member States of the United Nations
need to come together to put real pressure on supporters
of Hamas to stop. Together, we can show Hamas that
their terrorist tactics will lead only to more isolation.
Together, we can show Hamas that their terrorist tactics
will fail. We should act now, before Hamas puts the
people of Gaza at risk again by building more tunnels
under their feet.

I want to conclude by saying that I spent a lot of
time in Israel and also in Palestinian areas. I spoke
with Israeli and Palestinian leaders. I went to schools
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East. I went to every
border of Israel. I saw the threats. There are threats that
completely surround Israel from every single side.

The Council can go and do what it always
does - pick a side, bashing either Israel or the
Palestinian Authority. That will get us nowhere. But
anyone who has seen what I saw - the current terrorist
activity in that area - would understand that every
ounce of what we say in the Council, pitting the two
sides against each other, is only strengthening the
terrorists. Every ounce of what we do should combat
Hamas. They are a dangerous actor that has no care
for the Palestinians, no care for the Israelis, and is
determined to destroy everything in their path.

Once again, we are having this meeting, and once
again we will hear speeches on whether a country is
for Israel, against Israel, for Palestinians or against
Palestinians. But I would ask that each country address
the real threat that is causing so many people harm - the
threat of Hamas.

