Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening in this formal
Chamber, for the information of the larger membership of
the Organization, today's consideration of the third report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). This report - which comes one
month after the adoption of resolution 1289 (2000), which
authorized the expansion of UNAMSIL, making it the
largest current United Nations mission - is particularly
important in the light of the disturbing reports that continue
to filter out of Sierra Leone.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his report
and, of course, Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for the
update. My delegation is also agreeable to the modification
in the reporting cycle that has been proposed by Mr.
Annabi, as long as there is regularity in the reporting to
the Council. We are also grateful to Ambassador
Greenstock, the representative of the United Kingdom, for
his own very insightful briefing on the situation in Sierra
Leone, based on his recent visit to that country, and also
for the very pertinent remarks he has just made.

The Secretary-General's report highlights the
developments and shortcomings thus far in the
implementation of the Lorne Peace Agreement. We share
the concerns expressed therein regarding, among other
things, the slow pace of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme, given that only 17,191 ex-
combatants have been registered as of 1 March 2000.

The hostile and conflicting public statements that
Mr. Foday Sankoh has made against UNAMSIL are
indeed regrettable. These and subsequent obstructions
placed in the way of the forces deployed to several rebel-
held areas serve only to further diminish confidence and
raise questions as to Mr. Sankoh's commitment to the
peace process. More disturbing is the continued
deterioration of the human rights situation in the country,
where looting, the burning of houses, harassment and
abduction of civilians, rape and sexual abuse continue
unabated in rebel-held areas. We cannot but underline that
such acts are unacceptable and should cease immediately.
The parties to these acts should be told, and told bluntly,
that there is no amnesty for crimes committed after the
signing of the Lome Peace Agreement.

While noting the general improvements in the human
rights situation in areas where UNAMSIL is deployed, the
report states clearly that elsewhere in the country the
situation remains tense and volatile. It is therefore
particularly important that the number of military
personnel be quickly brought up to the authorized strength
of 11,100.

Further, in the light of the continued attacks on
civilians, as well as the refusal by the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) to cooperate with UNAMSIL, as
evidenced by the blocking of main roads and the seizure
of weapons by well-armed RUF fighters, it is imperative
that UNAMSIL begin responding in a more assertive
manner, in accordance with the robust rules of
engagement provided for under the limited Chapter VII
mandate the Mission has been granted. We express full
support for Mr. Adeniji to continue to take a firm line
with former rebel leaders regarding the continuing human
rights abuses and non-compliance with the Peace
Agreement.

 

Malaysia appreciates the forthcoming views expressed
by the Secretary-General in his report, including those
contained in paragraphs 41 to 56, which highlight what still
needs to be done in order not to lose the momentum of the
peace process. We concur with him on the need for the
early disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of all
ex-combatants; the extension of State authority, including
law enforcement, throughout the country; national
reconciliation and democratization; and the improvement of
Sierra Leone's capacity to ensure its own security through
the restructuring of its own professional armed forces.

All these factors are pertinent to the successful
outcome of the peace process. We call on the parties to
honour their solemn pledges and on the international
community to continue to assist the Government of Sierra
Leone through the provision of much-needed material and
financial resources.

In this regard, my delegation notes the shortfall in
funding that the Secretary-General has referred to in his
report and his appeal for contributions during the upcoming
donor conference in London. We express our appreciation
to those countries that have contributed generously. In
particular, the United Kingdom and the United States of
America are among those that have made substantial
contributions.
Finally, my delegation will support the proposed
statement to the media that has been suggested by
Ambassador Greenstock and on the basis of the elements
that he has outlined.

