Colombia warmly congratulates Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on this, its first presidency of the Security Council. We welcome the organization of this debate against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the third review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. The COVID-19 pandemic is not only a public health emergency. It also impacts the global economy, affecting the most vulnerable. Solidarity, inclusivity and human rights must therefore be at the heart of our response. In Colombia's view, we must tackle all possible triggers of new cycles of violence. In recent years, we have seen the adverse impact of climate change and its consequences in terms of security in various regions of the world. We welcome the holding of this debate during a crucial year, which marks the fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, amid the immense efforts our Governments are devoting to ensure that the pandemic recovery is sustainable and inclusive. This decade is crucial for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and for taking the urgent action we need to tackle climate change in a decisive and coordinated manner. Otherwise, it will be impossible the achieve the goals we have set ourselves in the multilateral arena for 2030. The science is clear and confirms that nationally determined contributions, pursuant to the Paris Agreement, are not enough to limit temperature rise to 1.5°C by 2030, and that countries located in the tropics and the subtropics of the southern hemisphere will be hit hardest by the consequences of climate change in terms of economic growth. Colombia is a country of astounding diversity, home to 50 per cent of the planet's heathlands, which are vital for generating fresh water and maintaining balance in the high-mountain ecosystem. These spaces are under threat from the horrific impacts of climate change, which have global, if varying, consequences around the world. The region of Latin America, including Colombia, is highly vulnerable to the adverse effects of this harsh reality. Adaptation is the only way to reduce vulnerability to climate change. Nature- based solutions are our priority. It is essential that we strengthen implementation in developing countries with a view to boosting mitigation and adaptation responses and solutions. My country take this opportunity to reiterate the importance of the work of the Security Council for the maintenance of international peace and security. In our view, the General Assembly, as a universal body providing for a comprehensive and inclusive approach that takes into account the intrinsic links between climate change and social and economic issues, is the proper context for debating and taking decisions relating to the causes and impacts of climate change. In conclusion, we would like to underscore the threat posed to climate change in Colombia by unlawful armed groups involved in trafficking drugs and illegal mining. These criminal actors include unreintegrated members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia, the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional terrorist group and other groups linked to transnational organized crime. International cooperation and collective responsibility are more important today than ever and crucial for tackling this problem comprehensively.
