With regard to the transition in Khartoum and international support, it is very timely that the Security Council is discussing the situation in the Sudan in the month of the first anniversary of the peaceful revolution in the country that led to the ouster of the Al-Bashir regime. It is thanks to the civilian protest movement that the Sudan experienced that turning point in its history. By protesting peacefully and unremittingly, the country's civil society, including a large number of women who held key roles in the protest, ushered in a civilian-led Government. The role of the region and the strong political involvement of the African Union were also of crucial importance. Under the courageous leadership of Prime Minister Hamdok, the new Sudanese Government has taken on the challenging task of opening up the Sudan and carrying out reforms. These tasks have become only more difficult with the onset of the coronavirus disease pandemic crisis in the country. Along with its international partners, Germany has supported and will continue to support the democratic transition in the Sudan and the transitional Government's quest to fulfil the ambitions of the Sudanese people. Together with the transitional Government, we are closely coordinating within the Group of Friends of the Sudan on how we can best help to move fundamental economic reforms forward while protecting the most vulnerable. We acknowledge the steps that have been undertaken by the transitional Government in this regard. Furthermore, within the Security Council, Germany and the United Kingdom, together with all other members gathering at this virtual table, will make every effort to help open a new chapter in the cooperation between the United Nations and the Sudan. Our joint goal should be to provide the Sudan with a support mission that helps to consolidate the political transition in Khartoum, supports the ongoing peace process and prevents a relapse into conflict in Darfur. We are encouraged by the fact that the Sudan has explicitly asked for United Nations support, and Germany, as a penholder together with the United Kingdom, is carefully studying the Sudan's requests. With regard to the transformation of the United Nations engagement in the Sudan, we are not only at a historical juncture in the relationship between Security Council and the Sudan, but also in the middle of a complex transformation of the international presence itself in the Sudan. There is broad agreement that the current mission, the African Union-United Nations Mission Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), will be coming to an end, which means that the Security Council has the responsibility to manage UNAMID's transition in a way that takes into account the needs of the country and its Government as well as the people of Darfur. It should also set an example for peacekeeping-operation transition processes in future. As members of the Security Council, we have to take into account the ongoing volatility of the situation in Darfur and the continuing challenges with regard to security and protection of civilians in parts of the region when designing the envisaged follow-on mission to UNAMID. Working in close partnership with the Sudanese Government, we must find the best mechanism for addressing the remaining challenges in protecting civilians in parts of Darfur. Given that we have taken on this responsibility, we must continue to live up to it. To that end, we must be clear: any violence in the periphery, such as what we saw in west Darfur at the beginning of the year, has the potential to negatively impact the transition in Khartoum.
