Mr. Jallow: I am deeply honoured to have been
given this opportunity to report once again to the
Security Council on the progress of the implementation
of the completion strategy of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).

Since our last report to the Council, in June 2005,
a number of significant developments have occurred in
the implementation of the completion strategy. Those
have been set out in the revised completion strategy
document which His Honour Judge Erik Mose,
President of the ICTR, submitted to the Security
Council on 5 December 2005 following consultations
with the Office of the Prosecutor and the Registry.
Those developments were also highlighted in his
address today to the Council.

During that period, we were able to commence
new trials, conclude the prosecution of some cases
after full trial or on a negotiated guilty plea, apprehend
some indictees and register steady progress in the
ongoing trials of what is now the largest number of
accused ever to be put on trial simultaneously at the
ICTR.

Six months ago, I informed the Security Council
that the focus of the Office of the Prosecutor in the
coming months would be to ensure that the ongoing
cases proceeded efficiently, to prepare the cases of the
remaining detainees to ensure their trial readiness, to
undertake the effective tracking and arrest of the
indicted fugitives and to commence referral
proceedings under rule 11 bis of the ICTR rules of
procedure and evidence in respect of indictees to
national jurisdictions for prosecution. That focus
remains the same.

In addition to those areas, the allegations made
against the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) have also
been under consideration. Following the evaluation of
the results of earlier investigations, it has become
necessary to carry out additional inquiries into the
allegations. Those inquiries are already in progress. I
have also been holding discussions with
representatives of the Rwandan Government
concerning the options that are available for the
prosecution of any such cases which may arise as a
result of such further inquiries.

In the past six months, substantial efforts have
been deployed by the staff of the Office of the
Prosecutor to ensure the trial readiness of the
remaining cases. This has resulted in increased
missions by staff to locate and reconfirm witness
availability. Such case preparation will continue to be a
major activity of my Office. At present, our focus is to
ensure in this respect that the cases of six more accused
are ready to commence trial in 2006, subject to
readiness of the defence and the availability of
courtroom space.

The ongoing trials are proceeding satisfactorily,
and, barring unforeseen delays which may arise, we
expect hearings of the major multi-accused cases of at
least the Military 1, Government 11 and Butare cases -
which involve the prosecution of, respectively, four,
four and six accused - to be concluded by the end of
2006. Their conclusion should leave considerable room
for the remaining cases to be dealt with and concluded
by 2008.

Following the conclusion of new investigations at
the end of 2004, the strength of the investigation
division in Kigali will be reduced considerably in the
context of the 2006-2007 budgets and again in 2008.
As I reported to the Council in June, it is necessary to
retain some capacity in the division, although in
declining numbers up to closure in 2010, to meet the
needs of trial support, appeal support and the tracking
of fugitives, as well as witness and confidential sources
management.

The negotiation of guilty pleas with accused
persons remains an important element of the
completion strategy. Since the last report to the
Council, my Office has successfully negotiated a guilty
plea with Paul Bisengimana, former bourgmestre of
Gikoro. On Wednesday 7 December, he appeared
before the Trial Chamber, which accepted the guilty
plea agreement. That brings to two the number of
guilty pleas concluded in the course of this year.
Negotiations are in progress with several other accused
persons, and I remain optimistic that some other guilty
plea accords will be concluded shortly.

Soon after the most recent report to the Council
in June this year, I handed over 10 case files to the
Rwandan Prosecutor General to consider prosecuting
before the Rwandan courts. At the end of November -
just last month - I handed over an additional five files
to the Prosecutor General. This brings the number of
cases that I have now handed over to Rwanda to 30
case files. They are files of targets who had been under
investigation but who have not been indicted or
arrested. The 30 files form part of the total of at least
45 files that I will seek to refer to national jurisdictions
either under rule 11 bis relating to indictees or by
handing over dossiers to national prosecution
authorities in relation to non-indictees.

I have also referred two cases to a European
jurisdiction which has agreed to consider the targets for
prosecution. This is in addition to one case which has
already been referred to a European jurisdiction and
whose prosecution has commenced. Three other case
files are under review for referral to other national
jurisdictions.

The cases which now remain for transfer relate to
persons who have been indicted, five of whom are in
custody and eight of whom are at large. Those figures
may change in due course.
The referral of indictees under rule 11 bis of the
rules is based on the order of a Trial Chamber to a
State that is able and willing to take on the cases with
guarantees of a fair trial and of the non-application of
the death penalty. The success of that strategy therefore
depends essentially on State cooperation.

My Office has not been able so far to submit any
applications under rule 11 bis for transfer of indictees,
as we had hoped this year, as no State is as yet both
able and willing to take these cases. We continue to
await responses from two European countries to which
I have sent requests for consent to prosecute a number
of cases falling within that category.

I have also been reassured that Rwanda remains
ready to receive cases of indictees on transfer from the
ICTR under rule 11 bis and that it will be taking the
necessary measures relating to guarantees of fair trial
procedures and the abolition of the death penalty in
order to clear the way for this process to begin.

In addition to taking these measures, of course,
Rwanda would require substantial resources to help
develop the capacity of its legal system effectively to
prosecute such cases. My consultations with European
Union representatives in Kigali, Rwanda, as well as
with representatives of other countries, indicate a
commitment from them to assist Rwanda in that
respect. That is very welcome. Efforts should be
deployed urgently to ensure that all the legislative and
other obstacles to the referral of cases to Rwanda are
removed in order to enable that policy be implemented
early in the coming year.

A reinvigorated tracking programme has yielded
dividends in the last six months. Of the eight new
indictees, three have been arrested and are now in the
custody of the Tribunal. Joseph Serugendo, former
technical director and founding member of the
notorious Radio Television Libre des Mille Collines
(RTLM), was arrested in Gabon with the assistance of
the Gabonese law enforcement authorities. I would like
to place on record our appreciation to the Government
of the Republic of Gabon for its strong collaboration
with the Tribunal in the apprehension and transfer of
this fugitive.

Michel Bagaragaza, a former director of the
National Tea Industry and a member of the shadowy
Akazu power group behind the former Government,
and Callixte Kalimanzira, the former Acting Minister
of the Interior during the genocide, also surrendered to,
and were taken into custody by, the Tribunal following
their location by my Office's tracking team.

The tracking and apprehension of fugitives
nonetheless continues to be a major challenge for the
ICTR. There are now 19 indictees at large, many of
whom, according to our sources, continue to hide in
inaccessible areas of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Among those still at large is Felicien Kabuga, a
businessman who devoted his considerable resources to
funding the genocide. He has been indicted for his role
in the creation, funding and management of the RTLM
"hate" radio, and in the funding, arming and provision
of logistical support to the interahamwe for the
declared purpose of extermination of the Tutsis and
moderate Hutus. It should be recalled that, by operative
paragraph 3 of its resolution 1503 (2003) of 28 August
2003, the Security Council called on all States,
especially Kenya, among others,

"to intensify cooperation with and render all
necessary assistance to the ICTR, including
efforts to bring Felicien Kabuga and all other
such indictees to the ICTR".

That call by the Council was undoubtedly based
on the close connections that Kabuga had had with
Kenya since 2002, when he was reported to be residing
in that country. It will be recalled that efforts to arrest
him in that country in 2002 failed.

The intelligence available to my Office since then
has confirmed that, at least since January 2005,
Felicien Kabuga has been residing in Kenya and
carrying on business there as well. His presence at
various locations in the country has been confirmed by
our tracking team and by other sources. As a matter of
fact, efforts to arrest him on the outskirts of Nairobi in
June 2005 failed because the operation appeared to
have been compromised by leaks. Our investigators
have shared their information and intelligence with the
law enforcement authorities of Kenya. I have travelled
to Nairobi twice - in February and September
2005 - and held meetings with senior Government
officials, during which I briefed them fully on the
situation.

I have had assurances from the Kenyan
authorities of their full cooperation and commitment
with respect to the arrest and transfer of Felicien
Kabuga. Nonetheless, according to our intelligence, he
remains in Kenya. The Government of Kenya should
therefore be encouraged to make more intensive efforts
to track, arrest and hand over F elicien Kabuga to the
ICTR, as well as to track and seize all his known assets
in Kenya.

With regard to the other fugitives, the tracking
team will continue to intensify its efforts, and, with the
requisite cooperation from States, we anticipate more
arrests in 2006.

My office has had significant assistance from
certain Member States in the past six months in the
matter of relocation and protection of witnesses as well
as of family members of high-level insider witnesses.
Such assistance has been crucial in enabling us to
access crucial but hitherto unavailable evidence on the
role played by those in power at that time in Rwanda in
planning and implementing the genocide. I should like
to record our appreciation to those countries for their
support in this respect.

At the ICTR, we remain confident of our ability
to complete the trials as well as the appeals of all those
persons who are currently in our custody within the
completion strategy deadlines. Our commitment to the
strategy deadlines remains constant, but meeting those
deadlines depends on the continued provision of the
necessary resources and on the continued support of
Member States.

The challenges we face remain twofold: the arrest
of the remaining 19 fugitives, and the referral to
national jurisdictions of the cases that have been so
earmarked, including the cases of some of the 19
fugitives. All Member States should be urged to fulfil
their legal obligations by arresting and transferring
fugitives who are in their territory to the Tribunal. It is
important for the struggle against impunity that all the
indictees be prosecuted, whether at the ICTR or
elsewhere. Member States should share the burden of
prosecution with the ICTR by accepting cases on
referral or by helping to build capacity in those States
that are willing, in order to enable them to accept
cases. These challenges can be effectively handled only
with the fullest State support and cooperation. We
continue to make appeals to that end.

Relations between the ICTR and Rwanda remain
very good. As the President has reported, the
Government continues to cooperate with the Tribunal
in respect of seeing to the availability of witnesses as
well as in regard to documentary evidence.

Finally, Mr. President, I should like to conclude
by thanking you and the members of the Security
Council, the Secretariat and all the organs as well as
Member States of the United Nations for their
cooperation and support of the Tribunal in ways that
continue to facilitate the implementation of the
completion strategy.

