Mr. Pascoe: Since the last monthly briefing to
the Security Council, I regret that the continuing
efforts to advance the political process were once again
overshadowed by violence, high numbers of civilian
casualties and a lack of concrete improvements on the
ground.

The reporting period saw major escalations in
violence, with a heavy Israeli air and land military
assault in Gaza; the firing of rockets and mortars at
Israel - over 390 during the reporting period -
including the use this month of longer-range rockets;
an attack on a Jewish school in West Jerusalem; Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) operations throughout the West
Bank targeting alleged militants; and clashes between
the IDF and protesting Palestinians in West Bank
cities, including in East Jerusalem. In total, 124
Palestinians, including 36 children, were killed in IDF
operations, and 359 were injured. Thirteen Israelis,
including 4 children, were killed by Palestinian
08-28218

militants, and 55 were injured. Tensions remain high,
despite an observable reduction in Violence in and
around Gaza in the past few weeks.

The Council will recall that when it met in
emergency session on 1 March, the violence in and
around Gaza was at its height. IDF operation Hot
Winter lasted five days and caused dozens of civilian
casualties, including the deaths of 31 children, while
Hamas rocket attacks extended as far as the Israeli city
of Ashkelon, bringing nearly a quarter of a million
Israeli civilians within rocket range of Gaza. The
Secretary-General condemned the excessive and
disproportionate use of force and the killing of
civilians and also condemned indiscriminate rocket fire
and called for an immediate cessation of such rocket
attacks. We reiterate that all parties must comply with
international humanitarian law. Regrettably, no party
has conducted law-based, independent, transparent and
accessible investigations into the killings of civilians
and other human rights violations, made the findings
public and held perpetrators accountable, as called for
by the High Commissioner for Human Rights.

Since that briefing, Violence has also spread to
Jerusalem and the West Bank. On 2 March, a
Palestinian child was shot and killed by the IDF during
a protest against the situation in Gaza. On 6 March,
eight Israeli students, including four children, were
killed in a savage shooting attack at a Jewish seminary
in West Jerusalem by a Palestinian from East
Jerusalem. That was the first major attack in Jerusalem
in almost four years and was strongly condemned by
the Secretary-General. On 16 March, dozens of Israelis
rioted in the neighbourhood of the killer's home in East
Jerusalem. The stabbing of an Israeli in the Old City on
18 March further contributed to the tense atmosphere.

During the reporting period, IDF incursions took
place in several West Bank towns, resulting in the
arrests of dozens of Palestinians for alleged militant
activity. In two separate incidents targeting Islamic
Jihad on 12 March, four militants were killed in
Bethlehem and another militant was killed in
Tulkarem. These incidents were followed by a barrage
of rockets fired by Islamic Jihad from Gaza into
southern Israel.

We support Egyptian efforts to bring about a
cessation of Violence, particularly in Gaza, and to
facilitate a gradual reopening of crossings into Gaza in
coordination with the parties. In this regard, we have
3
taken note of the recent reduction in violence in and
around Gaza and the more regular import of supplies
across the crossings. That is a positive but extremely
fragile development. We are acutely conscious of the
potential for even more deadly episodes of violence to
occur very quickly and of the danger that that poses for
the security of the Palestinians, Israel and Egypt and
for the political process. We urge all parties to act with
a sense of responsibility and to cooperate with the
Egyptian efforts. We also welcome Egyptian efforts to
complete construction of a new border boundary. We
encourage intensified cooperation among relevant
parties to ensure that legitimate traffic into and out of
Gaza at all crossing points takes place, and that
concerns regarding alleged smuggling are addressed.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza remains of
grave concern, although there has been an
improvement in the volume of goods entering the Strip.
In the past month, over 1,400 trucks have crossed into
Gaza, 95 per cent of them carrying commercial
supplies of basic items. That is an improvement from
previous months, and we hope for further easing in the
near future. Fuel imports have continued to enter from
Israel, although shortages remain in key sectors such as
health. On any given day between 30 and 50 per cent
of ambulances cannot be used due to lack of fuel.
Sanitation authorities continue to dump 60,000 cubic
metres of raw and partially treated sewage into the sea
each day as a result of fuel, electrical and spare parts
shortages. Fuel shortages have prevented 63 per cent of
Gaza's regular fishing trips, further exacerbating what
is already a dire socio-economic scenario. Food
insecurity is increasing as salaries dry up, and at least
50,000 additional beneficiaries have been added to
food assistance distribution lists.

We also note that the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) has still not gained access to
captured Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, and that one of the
more than 10,000 Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails
died earlier this month, bringing the number of
Palestinian prisoners who have died in Israeli prisons
to seven since the beginning of 2007.

In the West Bank, 580 IDF-imposed obstacles
continue to block Palestinian movement. The levels of
restrictions, in both quantity and character, have
steadily increased each year since 2005, and are at the
root of Palestinian economic decline. The restrictions
have continued despite the security efforts of the
Palestinian Authority since mid-2007. Recent
International Monetary Fund (IMF) projections show
that under current conditions gross domestic product
(GDP) growth in 2008 will not exceed population
growth. Action to ease closure inside the West Bank is
essential if a viable Palestinian economy is to develop
as the basis for a viable Palestinian State.

In addition to restrictions on Palestinian
movement, restrictions of movement of United Nations
staff in the West Bank and between the West Bank and
East Jerusalem also continue to increase, making
delivery of programmes increasingly difficult.

Israeli settlement activity has continued in the
reporting period in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. Tenders and construction permits for
hundreds of housing units were announced this month,
and construction continues in many settlements as well
as on infrastructure such as roads for settler use. The
Israeli Government stated publicly that settlement
expansion in East Jerusalem will continue.

The Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) has
raised concerns about Israeli archaeological
excavations in the Palestinian neighbourhood of Silwan
in East Jerusalem, bordering the Haram Al-Sharif/
Temple Mount. The PLO raised additional concerns
about alleged plans to bring more Israeli settlers to Ras
al-Amud in East Jerusalem while transferring Israeli
police personnel to the police station constructed at the
centre of the proposed E-l settlement area between
Israel and the settlement of Ma'ale Adumim to the east.

All settlement activity in East Jerusalem or
elsewhere in the West Bank is contrary to international
law and Security Council resolutions. Israel's failure to
cease settlement activity including natural growth or to
dismantle the outposts erected after March 2001 is
contrary to the Road Map. The Secretary-General has
made public his concerns that urgent action must be
taken on this issue.

Construction work on the barrier continues within
occupied Palestinian territory, in deviation from the
Green Line and contrary to the International Court of
Justice advisory opinion. Meanwhile, the number of
house demolitions in the West Bank has increased
noticeably. Since the beginning of this year, over 100
structures - at least half of them residential - have
been demolished, displacing nearly 400 Palestinians.

There is little I am able to report about the state
of bilateral negotiations. This is a positive reflection of
08-28218
the confidentiality that is being maintained, enabling
Israeli and Palestinian leaders to be candid in their
discussions. As a result of the significant Palestinian
casualties in Gaza, Palestinian President Abbas
suspended bilateral negotiations with Israel for a
period.

However, meetings between the heads of the two
negotiating teams resumed recently and the work of a
number of technical groups formed between the parties
is being pursued. Palestinian Prime Minister Fayyad
and a senior official in the Israeli Ministry of Defence
also attended the first trilateral meeting on monitoring
of the implementation of Phase 1 Road Map
commitments, hosted by the United States Lieutenant
General Fraser.

We support the continuing reform efforts of the
Government of Prime Minister Fayyad. A recent IMF
mission confirmed that, despite the difficult
environment, impressive financial reform measures
have been taken, including the reestablishment of cash
control procedures and a new accounting system for
fiscal reporting.

The Palestinian Development Plan is still being
finalized and will shortly be shared with the
international community in order to enlist support. The
financing needs for recurrent costs in 2008 stand at
$1.7 billion. So far, $1.2 billion have been pledged,
and about half of the pledges will be disbursed by the
end of March. Hence, there is a shortfall of $500
million for recurrent expenditure.

A meeting of the co-chairs of the Paris donors'
conference, Foreign Minister Kouchner of France,
Commissioner Ferrero Waldner of the European
Commission, Foreign Minister Stohre of Norway and
Quartet Representative Tony Blair, took place today to
assess the situation since the Paris Conference. The
next meeting of the Ad-Hoc Liaison Committee will
take place on 2 May in London hosted by the United
Kingdom and Norway.

Efforts to reform, train and equip the Palestinian
security forces in the West Bank continued during the
reporting period. Some 1000 officers are currently
being trained in Jordan, with the support of the United
States Security Coordinator, for deployment in the
West Bank in April and May. President Abbas issued a
decree aimed at reforming the Palestinian Authority
intelligence apparatus. The Interior Minister has
submitted a comprehensive report about security in the
West Bank. Palestinian security forces have undertaken
operations disarming and arresting militants in the
West Bank.

However, there is more work to do for the
Palestinian Authority to reassert law and order across
the cities of the West Bank and meet its Road Map
obligations to effectively combat terrorism. If these
obligations are to be met, greater Israeli-Palestinian
Authority security cooperation is essential.

The Quartet continues to be in close contact at
the principal and envoy levels. There are ongoing
discussions over the idea of a renewed international
meeting in Moscow in the coming period. We are
supportive of the idea of such a meeting.

We also continue to stress the vital role of Arab
States in support of the peace process, the central
importance of the Arab Peace Initiative and the
ultimate need for a comprehensive regional peace.
Foreign Ministers from the League of Arab States met
in Cairo on 5 March ahead of the annual summit
planned for 29-30 March in Damascus.

We note their support for the seven-point plan
announced by Yemeni President Saleh, calling for a
return of the situation in Gaza to the situation before
the Hamas takeover in last June, the holding of early
elections and a resumption of dialogue on the basis of
previous internal Palestinian agreements.

Fatah and Hamas representatives reportedly held
constructive discussions on the plan in Sana'a. As a
matter of principle, we believe that the unity of the
legitimate Palestinian Authority must be restored
through peaceful means in support of the political
process for a peacefully negotiated two-State solution,
and we believe that Arab countries have a leading role
to play in supporting such efforts.

The situation in the occupied Syrian Golan has
remained quiet over the reporting period, although
settlement activity continues.

Lebanon continues in the grip of a deep political
crisis. Yesterday, the parliamentary session to elect a
President was postponed for the seventeenth time since
24 November 2007.

The Secretary-General firmly supports the Arab
League initiative and encourages the parties to
facilitate its implementation. The longer the stalemate
continues, the greater the chance for the situation to
5
deteriorate further, both politically and in terms of the
security situation.

While the general security atmosphere has
remained relatively calm with no major incidents,
public tension and anxiety increased during the
reporting period. On 16 February, in Beirut, clashes
broke out between supporters of various groups
affiliated with the majority and the opposition, leaving
20 people injured.

Officials from both sides involved have pledged
to cooperate with the Lebanese Armed Forces to avoid
the recurrence of such confrontations. Clashes between
Fatah and Jund al-Sham erupted on 21 March in the
Palestinian refugee camp of Ein el-Hilweh in southern
Lebanon leading to one fatality.

The situation within the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area of operations has
remained quiet, although with increased levels of
tension. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) have been on
a heightened state of alert along the Blue Line since the
assassination of Imad Mughniyah on 12 February, and
the Lebanese Armed Forces have announced the
introduction of specific measures and additional
deployment of forces in the event of an attack.

Over the same time period, there has been a
considerable increase of IDF violations of Lebanese
airspace, with 222 such Violations being reported by
UNIFIL over a one-week period alone, that is, from
11 to 17 March. These violations constitute a serious
breach of Lebanese sovereignty and the Blue Line and
undermine the credibility of Lebanese national
institutions and UNIFIL.

A UNIFIL investigation also is ongoing into an
alleged breach of Lebanese territorial waters. Despite
the general increase in tension, all parties have
reassured UNIFIL that they do not seek a renewal of
hostilities.

With regard to the Palestinian camp of Nahr
el-Bared, United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees (UNRWA), in cooperation with the
Lebanese Army and the office of the Prime Minister,
has finalized the Master Plan for the reconstruction of
the camp. The reconstruction effort will be a long and
complex undertaking that will require the full support
of the international donor community.
The fact that the political process between
Israelis and Palestinians is continuing is extremely
important given the many negative developments that
threaten to derail it. The process can only be sustained
by much more meaningful efforts to implement Phase 1
of the Road Map and to improve economic and security
conditions. The international community and all
regional parties should also give strong support to
efforts to bring about a cessation of violence in and
around Gaza and a reopening of crossings in an
atmosphere in which the security concerns of
Palestinians, Israel and Egypt are addressed.
Otherwise, the potential for further violence is all too
real, with grave consequences for civilians, for
regional peace and security, and for the political
process itself.

The Secretary-General remains committed to
supporting all efforts to secure, through negotiations,
the full implementation of the Security Council
resolutions on the Arab-Israeli conflict.

