Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the very detailed
report (see S/2017/922, annex) he has just presented
to us, and, on behalf of Senegal, to hail the Security
Council's unanimous adoption of resolution 2384
(2017), which extends the mandate of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Althea operation for a
further 12 months. My delegation would also like to
express its appreciation to the Italian presidency for
convening this meeting and giving us an opportunity
to discuss the High Representative's report. We would
like to make some comments on its political, economic
and institutional aspects.

On the political front, despite various ongoing
problems, progress has definitely been made with
the adoption by the presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's of its defence review document and its
integration into NATO, as well as the official signing of
the Protocol on the adaptation of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union, and
the conclusion of a transport community treaty with the
European Union.

Despite those positive steps, it must be said that
the General Framework Agreement for Peace has
been undermined by the activities of the Republika
Srpska in particular, which has attempted to interfere
with the Constitutional Court's ruling that the
results of the referendum of 25 December 2016 were
unconstitutional. My delegation affirms its support
to respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as guaranteed by the
Dayton Agreement, by Bosnia and Herzegovina's
constitution and international law. We believe that such
developments represent a challenge to the constitution
of a country that is in need of the exact opposite - a
calm atmosphere and frank dialogue with the entire
community with strict regard for the Constitution and
the law. In that regard, Senegal also urges all the parties
to engage in political dialogue and make good-faith
efforts to ensure that the 2018 elections are conducted
under good conditions.

With regard to the economy, Senegal commends
Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress, while emphasizing
that it must be consolidated and built on in order to
foster harmonious development, stability and the well-
being of the people. We therefore encourage all three
ethnic groups to work more closely together and to
pursue their shared desire for coexistence, the test of a
stable, strong and peaceful State that participates fully
in the community of nations.

We also affirm our support for the High
Representative and call on all the parties to cooperate
with him. As his report makes abundantly clear, the
presence of the European Union-led military mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, with its executive mandate,
is as important as ever insofar as it enables the High
Representative and other international players to
implement their respective mandates and ensure the
safety and security of every ethnic group in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Turning to the issue of the fight against terrorism,
which is one of the problems facing Bosnia and
Herzegovina, particularly in a situation featuring the
problems of foreign terrorist fighters and complex
flows of migrants, which continue to add to the
challenges to the security of the country and the entire
region. Needless to say, it will be impossible to achieve
concrete results in the fight against terrorism without
strengthening the necessary cooperation at every
level between the authorities of the various area of the
country. In our View, the international community must
continue to support Bosnia and Herzegovina's efforts
in order to help it show greater resilience in dealing
with its ongoing socioeconomic problems. The same
is true with regard to strengthening its defence and
security forces so that they will eventually be able to
overcome their operational and strategic deficiencies in
a situation where the threat of terror continues.

In conclusion, I would like to once again encourage
the international community, and the Security Council
in particular, to continue to engage and cooperate on
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to
ensure that it can continue to move forward, as it has
for more than 20 years.

