Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by expressing
our condolences to the family of Almaas Elman and
to the Somali people. May her soul rest in eternal
peace. I would also like to express our appreciation
to all the briefers for their comprehensive briefings.
My statement today will focus on three issues - the
political, security, and humanitarian situations.

On the first issue, we welcomed the convening ofthe
Somalia Partnership Forum. The Mutual Accountability
Framework agreed in the Forum identified priority
commitments for both Somalia and international
partners between now and December 2020 in the areas
of inclusive politics, security andjustice and economic
and social development. That ambitious agenda requires
not only the continued support of the international
community but also strong cooperation between the
Federal Government and the federal member states. The
two must engage in constructive dialogue to peacefully
resolve all their outstanding differences.

My delegation welcomes the outreach efforts of
the leadership of the Federal Government, including
yesterday's meeting between President Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo and his predecessors.
We also support the critical role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) in promoting
an inclusive political settlement led by the Somali
Government. Ending the political deadlock is essential
in order to accelerate progress on many fronts and to
ensure that the agreed timelines are met, including for
preparations towards inclusive 2020-2021 elections
and for the adoption of an electoral code by the end
of the year. My delegation is heartened by some
encouraging developments, including the signing into
law of bills on an anti-corruption commission and
revenue management.

Secondly, we are very concerned about the ongoing
threat posed by Al-Shabaab, including its enhanced use
ofimprovised explosive devices and the expansion ofits
ability to generate revenue. My delegation condemns all
of Al-Shabaab's recent attacks, including last month's
mortar attacks on the compounds of the United Nations
and African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We
welcome the gains made through the joint operations
of the Somali National Army and AMISOM. in Lower
Shabelle in support of the transition plan, including the
capture of towns previously under Al-Shabaab control.
The importance of enhanced coordination and support
for stabilization efforts in recovered areas cannot be
overstated. The Secretary-General's report (S/2019/ 8 84)
attests to the fact that the Somali National Army has
struggled to meet its force-generation target. AMISOM's
reconfiguration plan must take that challenge and the
joint threat assessment, in line with resolution 2472
(2019), into consideration. My delegation calls for
accelerated and coordinated international assistance to
support force generation and build a well-trained and
-equipped Somali security force that will eventually be
able to take over security responsibilities.

Lastly, we must not forget that the efforts to
promote peace and stability in Somalia are taking
place against the backdrop of a troubling humanitarian
situation. In 2019 alone, more than 300,000 people
have been displaced by drought and conflict, adding
to the 2.6 million internally displaced persons. The
recent flooding also displaced tens of thousands of
people. Overall, 2.1 million people are facing acute
food insecurity. Regrettably, attacks on humanitarian
actors and the creation of obstacles to their work persist
in Somalia, exacerbating the already challenging and
dangerous operating environment. My delegation
stresses the imperative of fully protecting civilians
and respecting human rights and international
humanitarian law, and calls for safe, unhindered access
for humanitarian assistance.

I would like to conclude by commending the
Federal Government for demonstrating leadership and
determination in implementing its reform agenda, some
aspects of which are beginning to bear fruit. I want to
affirm Indonesia's respect for Somalia's sovereignty
and territorial integrity and to pay the highest tribute
to UNSOM, the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia, AMISOM. and all the actors working to bring
peace and stability in Somalia.

