At the outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, as well as the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General and her team for the continued and tireless efforts of all those working in the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)to end the conflict in Libya. Let me also thank you, Sir, for chairing this timely meeting. Six months ago, the Berlin Conference participants represented here today unequivocally and fully committed to respecting and implementing the United Nations arms embargo, and called on all actors to refrain from activities that could exacerbate the conflict, including the financing of military capabilities and the recruitment of mercenaries. Sadly, six months later, it is clear that some of those same countries have continued to arm and supply their proxies, in flagrant violation of the arms embargo. We condemn that disregard for the commitments made in Berlin, the relevant Council resolutions and their obligations under international law. The United Kingdom is deeply concerned about the ongoing conflict, fuelled by reckless international interventions, and the unacceptable humanitarian and human rights cost, all at the time of a worsening coronavirus outbreak. There are continued reports of numerous civilian casualties. It is shocking that the World Health Organization ranked Libya first - ahead of Afghanistan and Syria - in numbers of attacks on health facilities and staff from January to May 2020. The United Kingdom is particularly concerned about unacceptable civilian and mine-clearance personnel casualties as a result of mines, booby traps, and improvised explosive devices left by the withdrawing forces aligned with the Libyan National Army. The United Kingdom continues to fund specialist non-governmental organizations to map explosive hazards, share expertise with the mine-action community and conduct demining on the ground. We are shocked by the disturbing reports of the discovery of mass graves in Tarhouna. The Libyan authorities must secure those sites until a proper investigations can be conducted. We condemn all human rights violations and abuses, as well as violations of international humanitarian law, including indiscriminate attacks, unlawful killings, sexual and gender-based violence and the silencing of journalists, activists and human rights defenders. The persistent climate of impunity in Libya must be addressed. This is why the United Kingdom co-sponsored the resolution adopted during the forty-third session of the Human Rights Council, which established an international, independent fact- finding mission to investigate violations and abuses in Libya. We call on all parties to allow the Mission access to the whole country. In the economic sphere, the independent audit of the two branches of the Central Bank of Libya is a vital step towards improved transparency and reunification. We encourage all parties to cooperate fully with that process. We continue to condemn unequivocally the blockade of oil facilities and welcome the United Nations-led efforts to end the blockade. Libya's legitimate National Oil Corporation should be allowed to operate unimpeded for the benefit of all Libyans. We are particularly concerned about reports of Wagner Group and other foreign mercenaries entering Libyan oil fields. Wagner Group activities exacerbate the conflict, as does all external military support, including the provision of mercenaries and arms, as well as the deployment of combat aircraft. But what have the external backers of the parties gained from their continued disregard of the commitments they made in Berlin? Despite the rapid developments on the ground, it is clearer than ever that there can be no military solution. Only a political process will be able to provide a sustainable, inclusive settlement for the people of Libya. Despite such setbacks, there is now a window of opportunity to make real progress and change Libya's troubled trajectory. We welcome the engagement of the parties in the United Nations-led 5+5 military talks, which we support as co-chairs of the security working group. This is especially important now given the high risk of further escalation around Sirte. Only by engaging in the 5+5 dialogue in good faith can the parties avoid further bloodshed and put Libya back on the road to a political agreement. We fully support UNSMIL's efforts to de-escalate the situation around Sirte. Instead of emphasizing maximalist goals and red lines, the parties should engage constructively in the military talks in order to agree a viable ceasefire. Instead of further fuelling the conflict, the international backers must recognize that their interests lie in meeting their Berlin commitments and supporting the parties' efforts to achieve a ceasefire, a return to a United Nations-led political process and an inclusive political solution for the people of Libya.
