Mr. Johnson (United Kingdom): I would like to say
to Secretary Kerry that I do not think that the people of
the world are remotely fooled by what is going on in
Syria. They know that this is not just a civil war; it
is a barbaric proxy war, a conflict that is being fed,
nourished, armed, abetted, protracted and made more
hideous by the actions and inactions of Governments
represented in this Chamber. They are looking
to us - grown-ups, people with families, people
who know about the world, people with university
degrees - to set aside our differences and any selfish
sense of strategic national interest and to put the people
of Syria first. That means recognizing that there can be
no political process unless there is a genuine ceasefire,
and that there can be no genuine ceasefire unless there
is a genuine political agreement that we can have a
transition away from the Al-Assad Government.

It is the Al-Assad Government that is responsible
for the vast majority of the 400,000 deaths in Syria,
and that continues to drop barrel bombs on its own
citizens, including two incidents, documented by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
of the dropping of chlorine gas. How can we sit by and
let burning, blistering, barbaric chlorine gas be dropped
on innocent people? As for the monstrous bombing of
aid convoys and medical facilities that we have seen
just in the last day or so, as Mr. Kerry rightly said, there
are only two possible culprits. I hope very much that the
truth will soon emerge about what exactly happened.
However, more importantly, laying aside
recrimination, I hope that we will learn that the court of
international opinion will not continue to tolerate this
slaughter. Ithink the world is looking to us to do more now
than just mouth the empty platitudes of resolution 2254
(2015), but to actually put it into practical effect and get
that peace process and those conversations going again
in Geneva. I think there is scope to build on the vision
for a future for Syria, as laid out by the negotiations
committee, of an open, pluralistic, democratic Syria,
with respect for all minorities. And there is space, as
the President rightly said, to compromise, and there
should not be too many red lines. But above all, we
must use this moment - in particular, the general
debate of the General Assembly - to keep whatever
impetus is left for this precious forward momentum in
the Kerry-Lavrov process. Once again, I pay tribute to
both Mr. Kerry and Mr. Lavrov for their efforts to get
this done and move it forward.

We can do it. The people here in this Chamber can
do it. They can help to produce a ceasefire; they have
proved that before. They can get talks going, and we
can approach these issues in a spirit of compromise.
But we cannot have that spirit of compromise, talks
or ceasefire without the will - as Foreign Minister
Garcia Margallo rightly said in his statement - and the
good will of the people in the Chamber. I believe that it
is possible and that there is the scope for compromise.
I think that it is pretty gloomy now. Let us face it.
Sometimes, the hour is darkest before dawn.

What I really want everybody to think about today
is this. If in a year's time we are here again in anger
and there are still bombings, killings, slaughter and
massacres going on in Syria, then I am afraid that the
responsibility for that will lie overwhelmingly with the
people broadly represented in this place and above all
with the Al-Assad regime and its sponsors.

