Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I,
too, want to thank the representatives of the agencies
here, all of their colleagues, the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), the United
Nations local staff in Iraq and all the others for their
tremendous dedicated efforts to ensure a humanitarian
response in Iraq at a time when it is very important to
support the Iraqi people.

This morning, the Security Council adopted a
really historic resolution that confirms the vital role of
the United Nations and the international community in
the future of Iraq. We find from the presentations we
heard this morning - and we know first hand, of
course, from our experience on the ground - that the
needs are great, but we have common objectives and a
sense of purpose. I am also struck by the thread that ran
throughout the presentations we heard this morning:
the great amount of experience, resources and political
will in this Council that we can bring to bear to help
the people of Iraq and to create a better Iraq. I hope and
I trust that we will continue to work well together,
especially on the ground, in bringing relief to people
who have suffered for too long.

The resolution we adopted this morning also calls
on Member States to make contributions to the United
Nations appeal and to provide food, medicine and other
resources necessary for the rehabilitation of Iraq's
infrastructure. We encourage all Member States and
international organizations to respond as best and as
soon as they can.

The United States is supporting relief and
reconstruction projects in Iraq from the macro to the
micro level, ranging from reinforcing the Mosul dam
and repairing ports and bridges to funding clean-up
projects in four Baghdad neighbourhoods containing
16,000 people. One cannot really get the sense from the
press, or even from looking at one part of the picture,
of the amount of work that is going on throughout the
country even as we speak, notwithstanding all the
problems that exist. I should like to give Council
members an idea of the range of the effort that is
already under way, with more progress and new results
coming about every day.

Everybody who has spoken, I think, has
emphasized that security is the key problem and the top
priority, as Mr. Morris said. We are making every effort
to ensure that the security situation is brought under
control and stabilized as soon as possible. We are
deploying additional United States military police. The
coalition is taking steps to decrease the availability of
weapons. There is a team in Iraq reviewing security,
law enforcement, the justice system and prison issues
so that it can come up with urgent and specific
recommendations for action. The State Department is
recruiting 1,000 United States police advisers and
trainers and other countries are contributing as well.
Over 5,000 Baghdad police officers are back on duty.
We are approaching our coalition partners for
international police advisers. The resolution just
adopted invites international cooperation in restoring
stability and security and we hope to have many more
partners in this endeavour. In addition, the payment of
salaries will contribute greatly to stabilization,
particularly as police officers realize that they will be
paid upon returning to work.

The United States Agency for International
Development (USAID) is providing micro-grants
designed to build confidence among Iraq's diverse
ethnic groups at the local level, strengthening the
involvement and capacity of local and community
institutions to respond rapidly to local needs, such as
small-scale infrastructure repair. What we are trying to
do here is to stimulate increased Iraqi participation in
the restoration of public services, community security,
conflict prevention, information and communications
support and short-term employment opportunities. In
Umm Qasr, for one example, grants based on
community priorities established by the new town
council will establish a fully functional office for the
council, create a telephone and Internet centre, increase
sports and recreational facilities for youth and
rehabilitate a secondary school.

We have begun implementation of a rapid
programme to restore the essential functions of priority
ministries. This is providing national and local-level
ministry offices with minor repairs, furniture,
equipment and supplies so that they can begin
operations. USAID is working to provide essential
communications links among ministries in the country
by installing satellite or high-frequency radio-based
connections at central ministries and commissions to
permit voice, fax and data transmissions between
Baghdad and operational units in governance
throughout the country.

In an important step, the ministries are ready to
start paying salaries in Baghdad on 24 May - that is,
in two days - and in the meantime the United States
Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance
has made emergency cash payments to 1.1 million civil
servants in Northern, Central and Southern Iraq in
order to start providing income for people who are
coming back to work and to produce more cash in the
economy. I should also note that, for all the difficulties
that exist, there is economic activity resuming in all
kinds of ways, including both cash and barter. Markets
are up and running in many places, including in
Baghdad itself, and while no one would pretend it is
normal life, activity is resuming.

On human rights, the USAID Abuse Prevention
Unit, which is part of our disaster assistance response
team, is working to identify, track and report acts of
retribution and other abuses. It has investigated several
mass graves, as well as property issues, and the Abuse
Prevention Unit's officers are coordinating closely with
ICRC and United Nations agencies in helping to
develop public information campaigns to promote
tolerance, justice and respect for the rule of law. We
trained hundreds of United States civil affairs
officers -that is, military officers who work on
civilian affairs - in protection principles prior to their
deployment to the Gulf. We have developed and
distributed field guides on preventing and mitigating
abuses.

We are also working with others to address health
and nutrition issues. For example, in response to
nutrient deficiencies in the Iraqi population, a USAID
private-sector partner named ABT Associates will
provide four grain mills in Baghdad with food-
fortification equipment and technical assistance to
enable flour to be fortified with vitamins and minerals,
including iron, which has been missing in parts of the
Iraqi diet. ABT Associates will continue discussions
with Iraqis in hopes of installing equipment in other
mills in Iraq and is establishing a medical supplies and
equipment management systems database for tracking
all international medical donations.

We applaud the monitoring by the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) of the nutritional status in
response to nutritional needs in Iraq and welcome
recommendations from UNICEF on further specific
actions needed. We encouraged and welcomed the
proposal of the World Food Programme to procure
grain locally in Iraq and hope that all practical
arrangements necessary for this will be worked out
with utmost speed, given that the harvest is already
standing in the fields and that farmers will have to be
paid immediately.

We have under way many, many projects to begin
to restore normalcy. Just to mention a couple more, we
are working with Bechtel to restore the 400-kilovolt
power lines into the Baghdad ring - an essential
source of power for the entire country - and to supply
equipment to Iraqi power authorities for necessary
repairs. In addition, 50,000 cylinders of liquid
petroleum gas were to be delivered to 18 sites in
Baghdad today.

The Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian
Assistance has begun three demining missions in
Al Hillah. In an important contribution to social
stabilization, a USAID contractor is helping the
Ministry of Education to administer tests for sixth-,
ninth- and twelfth-grade students so that they can
advance to the next grade level. We are gathering
hydraulic and economic information in support of the
restoration initiative in the southern marshes, where the
Marsh Arabs have traditionally lived. In conclusion, I
would like to inform the Council that USAID
contractors are working closely with the International
Civil Aviation Organization to ensure that Iraq's
airports and civil aviation systems are rehabilitated so
that we can facilitate the rapid re-entry of Iraq into
international aviation systems of commerce. All of
these activities are illustrative of our efforts and
commitment to meet reconstruction needs throughout
Iraq. We welcome Mr. Malloch Brown's comments this
morning about getting the needs assessment process
moving. That is an important part of the future effort.

