The Secretary-General: Mr. President, let me
thank you and all your ministerial colleagues who have
made the effort to come to New York at such short
notice for this meeting. That the Council is meeting at
this level, and so promptly, shows that you all realize
what a historic opportunity we now have to bring peace
to Darfur, and how urgently we need to act if that
opportunity is not to be lost.

Let me start by congratulating the Government of
the Sudan and the faction of the Sudanese Liberation
Movement that signed the Abuja peace agreement last
Friday. It is they who have created this opportunity. We
must also commend the African Union mediator, Salim
Ahmed Salim, for his tireless efforts throughout the
many rounds of negotiations; and Presidents Sassou
Nguesso and Obasanjo, as well as their international
partners - Bob Zoellick, Hilary Benn and many
others- who deserve special mention for their
decisive role in the final stages of the process.

But this is not a moment for anyone to bask in
congratulations or rest on their laurels. Darfur is still
far from being at peace, as the events of yesterday have
so tragically reminded us. There is a vast amount to be
done, and no time to lose.

First, there are significant rebel leaders who have
not yet signed the agreement. We must all do what we
can to convince them to choose peace over conflict for
the sake of their people. If this tragedy continues
because of what they did, or failed to do, history will
judge them severely.

Next, we must do everything in our power to
ensure that those who have signed the agreement
actually implement it on the ground, and that the
people of Darfur can survive the next few months. For
that, they need both protection and sustenance, since,
driven from their homes and farms, they cannot feed
themselves. Sustenance for them also means protection
for those who are bringing them relief.

Right now, there is only one force on the ground
that can even begin to provide protection: the African
Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS). Therefore, our
immediate priority must be to strengthen that force so
that it can move ahead with implementing essential
elements of the agreement and providing real security
for the displaced people.

I believe, however, that we all now agree that this
can only be a stopgap measure, and that, as soon as
possible, AMIS must be transformed into a larger and
more mobile United Nations operation, better equipped
and with a stronger mandate. We are now mobilizing
all our energies to make that happen.

The Department of Peacekeeping Operations is
working closely with the African Union and AMIS to
help meet its immediate needs. We have already
dispatched staff to the region to work on this, and more
will be going in the next few days.

We aim to agree as fast as possible, with our
partners in the African Union, on what additional
resources AMIS will require to implement key points
in the Abuja agreement, and then to hold a pledging
conference, possibly in Brussels, in early June. But I
appeal to donors not to wait for that conference. They
need to be very generous, starting right now. We cannot
afford to lose a single day. I appeal to everyone in
Darfur itself to help AMIS do its job. Attacks like
yesterday's, in which an AMIS interpreter was brutally
killed, must not be encouraged, condoned or tolerated
by any of the parties.

No less urgent is the need to raise more money
for emergency relief. Right now, the region is facing
the world's worst humanitarian crisis. Without massive
and immediate support, the humanitarian agencies will
be unable to continue their work, which means that
hundreds of thousands more will die from hunger,
malnutrition and disease.

Meanwhile, we must and will speed up our
planning for the transition to a United Nations
operation in Darfur - which was already requested by
the Peace and Security Council of the AU as long ago
as 10 March and authorized by the Security Council on
24 March in resolution 1663 (2006).

Let us not underestimate the challenge that this
implies. Helping to protect the people of Darfur and to
implement the Abuja agreement will be one of the
biggest tests this Organization bas ever faced -
perhaps the biggest since those in Somalia, Rwanda
and Bosnia in the early 1990s. But it is a challenge we
cannot refuse and, having accepted it, we cannot delay.

It is clear from the work we have already done
that a follow-on United Nations force will have to be
much larger than the current AMIS and will need major
logistical support from Member States that are in a
position to provide it. The next step is a technical
assessment mission to Darfur itself. During that
mission, the United Nations and the AU will undertake
a first-hand assessment of the situation on the ground
and will consult with the Sudan's Government of
National Unity and with the other parties on what is
required to implement the peace agreement. No
peacekeeping mission can succeed without the support
and cooperation of the parties at the highest level.

Accordingly, I have written to President Bashir to
seek his support for the assessment and I hope very
soon to be able to discuss it with him directly. His
support for that vital mission is essential. Meanwhile, I
appeal once again to all parties, and to the Government
in particular, to show immediate respect for the
ceasefire in Darfur and to prove by their actions their
determination to honour the agreement they have
signed.

For its part, the United Nations - by which I
mean the Secretariat, but I count on the support of this
Council - will do everything in its power to help the
Sudanese people close this tragic chapter in their
history.
