Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
May I begin by thanking Mr. Le Roy for his latest
briefing on the situation in the Sudan and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). I welcome the presence among us of
Mr. Margelov, Special Representative of the President
of the Russian Federation on the Sudan.

Costa Rica believes that it is essential to move
ahead on four major issues, all of equal importance,
that hinder a political settlement of the conflict in the
Sudan, directly affect the living conditions of the
civilian population, and jeopardize the fulfilment of
UNAMID's mandate.

First, relations between the Sudan and Chad
cannot remain a source of instability and endless
anguish for the civilian population, refugees and
internally displaced persons on both sides of the
border. It is time for maturity to prevail. The illegal
raids, unauthorized flights and bombardment of
neighbouring territories must cease. It is time to ensure
the full implementation of the Dakar and Doha
Agreements and for both countries to end their support
for the rebel groups that they harbour, sustain and
allow to take refuge in their territories. It is illegal, it is
done openly, and it cannot continue.

Secondly, Costa Rica hopes that by the end of the
month the Justice and Equality Movement and the
Government of the Sudan will have made progress in
their negotiations in the context of the peace process
and the implementation of the Agreement of Goodwill
and Confidence-building for the Settlement of the
Problem in Darfur. In that regard, we recognize the
work of Joint Chief Mediator Bassole and support his
initiatives to ensure a broadly inclusive process that
brings other rebel groups into the peace process and, to
that end, establishes a consultative forum in Darfur.

We appreciate the initiatives undertaken by Qatar
and Libya, by Mr. Gration and Mr. Margelov, and by
the African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur. My
delegation looks forward to reading the report of the
Panel, led by President Mbeki, to be issued in August,
and welcomes its proposals on accountability for
serious crimes, accelerating the peace process in
Darfur and achieving reconciliation among the parties
in the region.

Thirdly, disarming civilians who were involved in
tribal clashes in the southern Sudan is a priority for the
international community. Costa Rica is disturbed by the
high number of victims and its potentially negative
impact on the peace processes.

Last but certainly not least, we believe that
attention must be focused on the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation caused by the action of the
Government of the Sudan against non-governmental
organizations that were responsible for providing more
than half the assistance to Darfur. We commend the
efforts of the Government of the Sudan, the non-
governmental organizations, the international
community and agencies of the United Nations system
to mitigate the consequences of that regrettable
decision, but we are concerned about the sustainability
of those efforts and about their quality, which is
undoubtedly inferior to that provided before the
Government took its decision. It is essential that the
2007 joint communique on the facilitation of
humanitarian activities in Darfur, the main framework
for cooperation, continue to be implemented, and that
we support the work of the expanded High-Level
Committee.

We must remember that the affected humanitarian
organizations not only provided services, but also
generated an atmosphere beneficial to the safety of the
populations they served. Their expulsion created a
vacuum in civilian protection in the areas where they
were deployed. The alleviation of suffering and
protection against abuse are essential elements of
humanitarian assistance. Such concerns prompted us to
call for the preparation of a report on developments in
the humanitarian situation in the Sudan.

In the current circumstances, it is essential that
international humanitarian law, in particular with
regard to humanitarian access to victims and to the
protection of humanitarian personnel, be respected. We
regret that humanitarian personnel continue to be
robbed and kidnapped, and condemn acts of banditry
and sexual violence against the civilian population.
Costa Rica appreciates the contribution of the
African Union to the peaceful settlement of the conflict
in Darfur, but regrets its recent decision to block the
cooperation of its members with the International
Criminal Court. Like most representatives seated at
this table, we know that this decision enjoys limited
and half-hearted support, and we trust that the African
Union, which has acted in an exemplary manner in
many areas, will remedy a decision that taints its
history and achievements.

Finally, we thank the United Kingdom for
preparing a draft resolution extending the mandate of
UNAMID, which the Security Council will shortly
adopt. We reiterate our call upon the Sudanese
authorities to cooperate fully with UNAMID and the
work of the United Nations system throughout the
Sudan. The Secretary-General's report notes that 92 per
cent of UNAMID's total authorized strength will soon
be in place. That will certainly improve the physical
protection of civilians. We thank those countries that
have contributed personnel to strengthen the mission at
a decisive moment. We urge the Government of the
Sudan to eliminate all obstacles to UNAMID's
movement and patrol activities, to end all detention and
improper treatment of its national personnel, and to
remove all hindrances to the issuance of visas, as
mentioned by Mr. Le Roy. In connection with all these
issues, we acknowledge the work of the Tripartite
Mechanism of the United Nations, the African Union
and the Government of the Sudan to improve
UNAMID's effective deployment.

The situation in the Sudan still requires the
Council's tireless attention and a broader approach that
takes into account all the manifestations of conflict in
the Sudan. I therefore conclude by expressing our
satisfaction with the recent definitive decision taken on
the issue of the Abyei borders, and call on the parties
to respect that decision, as they have pledged to do.

