Mr. Trautwein (Germany): I should like first of
all to express the deep shock of my Government at this
morning's attack on the metro in Moscow, and to
extend the condolences of the German Government to
the Russian people, and especially to the families that
have been affected by that insidious terrorist attack.

We would like to welcome you, Sir, to the
presidency of the Council for this month and assure
you of the full cooperation of the German delegation in
your work. At the same time, we would like to thank
the Chilean delegation for their work during their
presidency in the month of January.

Our special thanks go to the Special
Representative, Mr. Holkeri, for his comprehensive
briefing to the Council.

Germany fully subscribes to the statement that
Ireland will make later on behalf of the European
Union.

I would like to begin by expressing our full
support for the Special Representative and for all the
efforts he has undertaken in Pristina. The Secretary-
General's report to the Security Council last month
(S/2004/71) painted an accurate picture of the progress
that has been made and the many tasks that remain to
be addressed in Kosovo. We share, in particular, the
Secretary-General's hope that positive engagement by
officials of the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government on returns will translate this year into a
more welcoming environment for displaced persons in
all municipalities. Nothing would better demonstrate
progress in achieving the standards than a significant
increase in the number of returns in 2004.

The Secretary-General also notes the progress
made by the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) towards
becoming an effective civilian emergency response
organization. We note with satisfaction that the KPC
accepted the need to investigate allegations of criminal
involvement on the part of a few members of the
Corps. The KPC must free itself from any taint of
criminal connections and confirm its identity as a
civilian organization with no military role in Kosovo.
We are confident that other donor countries will join
Germany in funding the civilian training of the KPC
this year so that it can continue to make progress along
that path. We also urge the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government to consider granting some additional
funding to the KPC from the Kosovo Consolidated
Budget.

On the negative side, we share the Secretary-
General's criticism of Pristina and Belgrade for failing
to effectively launch a direct dialogue. In View of the
urgent need for progress on such practical issues as
energy, missing persons and returns, it is shameful that
talks on those issues have not yet begun. The Special
Representative has issued invitations to direct dialogue
sessions on missing persons and energy to take place in
Pristina on 18 February. This is an excellent
opportunity to get the dialogue under way, and we urge
Pristina and Belgrade to send to those sessions teams
that are prepared to make concrete progress.

We also believe it would be extremely helpful if
Belgrade took a more positive stance on the "Standards
for Kosovo" document, which was presented to the
Security Council in December. We are deeply disturbed
that Belgrade appears to be actively discouraging
Kosovo Serbs from participating in the working groups
that are currently elaborating the implementation plan
for the standards. The way forward this year for
Kosovo will be defined by the joint standards
implementation plan, which is to be presented soon.
All communities must be fully engaged in this
important project.

I should like to focus particularly on the economy
standard. Economic growth is essential to Kosovo's
future, and putting socially owned enterprises in
private hands should give an important and necessary
boost to the Kosovo economy. We are surprised and
disappointed that officials of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government and their
representatives on the board of the Kosovo Trust
Agency are not taking a more constructive approach to
the privatization process. Kosovo Trust Agency
managers - despite some risk that they might expose
themselves to personal legal liability - are prepared to
move ahead with the privatization of a considerable
number of enterprises and to put additional firms up for
sale in a third privatization tender. It does no one any
good - least of all the unemployed workers of
Kosovo - to stand by watching while such
transactions are delayed by disagreements within the
board of the Kosovo Trust Agency. We also hope that
United Nations officials and representatives of the
economic pillar of UNMIK can soon work out an
effective mechanism for eliminating the personal
liability risks now being borne by staff involved in
privatization.

Finally, let me close by again praising the efforts
of the Council of Europe to create a decentralization
plan for Kosovo. If properly handled, decentralization
should increase the spirit of cooperation among the
various communities in Kosovo by enhancing the sense
of security and empowerment that comes from having
greater control over essential local decisions.
Decentralization would also provide an effective
mechanism for eliminating the illegal parallel Kosovo
Serb institutions that are such a blight on the local
administrative structure of Kosovo. We very much
hope that UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government can take full advantage of the
Council of Europe proposal and that it can make
significant progress in decentralization over the next
year

