Mr. Apapkan (Turkey): At the outset, Mr. President,
I would like to thank you for organizing this important
debate. We appreciate the Secretary-General's briefing
today, which is further testament to his dedicated
efforts on the Somalia issue. We also welcome the
participation of the Permanent Representative of
Somalia, Ambassador Duale. We support the elements
contained in the presidential statement read out earlier.

Piracy and armed robbery off the coast of
Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden continue to be a threat
to international maritime safety as well as to the
security of the regional countries. Turkey not only
deplores these illegal acts, but also has resolved to
repress them by joining multinational counter-piracy
operations in the region. Turkey has contributed to
Combined Task Force 151 (CTF 151) by allocating
frigates since the inception of the Force, and Turkish
naval forces have prevented several pirate attacks. The
Turkish navy will once again assume command of
CTF 151 starting on 1 September 2010.

We have always advocated effective coordination
and close cooperation in efforts aimed at the
suppression of armed robbery at sea and piracy.
Therefore, we fully support the work of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. As one of
the founding members of the Group, Turkey actively
participates in its work and deliberations.

As regards redressing the problem, more needs to
be done. Piracy and armed robbery incidents in the
region are still widespread. It has been striking to see
that these unlawful acts are committed far away from
the Somali coast. The effective detention and
prosecution of suspected pirates and armed robbers is
certainly one of the most necessary components of
deterring future attacks and securing freedom and
safety of navigation on the high seas.

We welcome the Secretary-General's
comprehensive report on possible options to further the
aim of prosecuting and imprisoning persons
responsible for acts of piracy (S/2010/394), on which
Under-Secretary-General O'Brien kindly elaborated
today. The report is balanced and constitutes a good
basis for further study of this matter. Each and every
option deserves thorough consideration. We believe
that today's debate will also provide useful inputs for
future deliberations in this regard.

We also welcome the Secretary-General's
decision to appoint a special adviser on legal issues
related to piracy off the coast of Somalia. Working
Group 2 of the Contact Group will also continue to
play an important role in devising ways to bring piracy
suspects to justice.
It is indeed important to find long-term solutions
to the problem of prosecuting suspected pirates as well
as imprisoning them. The ideal solution, undoubtedly,
is to enable the Somali authorities to progressively take
on more responsibilities in prosecuting pirates, with the
prospect of rebuilding prisons and supporting the
judicial process. Yet we all know that this is not the
case under current circumstances. Therefore, we should
urge the countries in the region to assume collective
responsibility for combating piracy. As a matter of fact,
the ongoing efforts of States in the region, in particular
Kenya and Seychelles, are commendable.

Irrespective of which option will be generally
supported and chosen to take forward, the international
community should continue to help enhance the
capacity of the judicial and corrections systems in
Somalia and other States in the region to prosecute
suspected, and imprison convicted, pirates, consistent
with applicable international human rights law, as also
envisaged in the Djibouti Code of Conduct. We believe
that the United Nations has a leading role to play in
capacity-building and welcome in that regard the
programmes implemented by United Nations
institutions including the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
and the International Maritime Organization.

When establishing new judicial mechanisms, one
of the key aspects is to secure sufficient and sustained
financial commitment by States. The International
Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States Countering
Piracy is a useful tool as far as financing is concerned.
Yet there is still a need for sustainable and reliable
sources of funding, especially when we take
completion and residual issues into consideration. We
have to bear in mind that we cannot expect any willing
host State to shoulder an additional unreasonable
financial burden. In that regard, funding from United
Nations assessed contributions might be an option.
Contributions by the shipping industry to the costs
could be another possibility.

Another point that I want to raise is that not all
patrolling naval States have bilateral arrangements for
transfer of suspects to regional States. The
establishment of a new judicial mechanism under any
of the options may necessitate patrolling naval States
to enter into bilateral arrangements for the transfer of
suspects for prosecution. In order to standardize this
practice, the United Nations might lead the way by
preparing a draft multilateral agreement which, inter
alia, sets out the crimes, the geographic limits on
jurisdiction as well as the individual obligations of the
host and patrolling States with respect to the transfer of
suspects.

Like others, we also recognize the fact that naval
operations and the subsequent prosecution and
detention of captured pirates represent only one aspect
of the fight against piracy. More attention needs to be
paid to comprehensive solutions dealing with the root
causes of piracy within Somalia. A lasting solution to
the problem can only be found if it is sought in the
broader context of the political, security and economic
situation in Somalia. Anti-piracy efforts need to be
supported and complemented by concrete policies and
measures that will contribute to the establishment of
law and order in Somalia.

Yesterday's attack in Mogadishu, which we strongly
condemn, showed once again the fragile security situation
in Somalia. We extend our condolences to the
Transitional Federal Government and the Somali people.
We believe that peace and stability within Somalia
depend on the strengthening of State institutions.
Likewise, economic and social development and respect
for human rights and the rule of law are necessary to
create the conditions for the durable eradication of
piracy and armed robbery at sea off the Somali coast.

