Ms. Mogherini (spoke in French): It would be
difficult for me to find the most appropriate words
to describe the scope, depth and importance of the
cooperation partnership between the European Union
(EU) and the United Nations following what you,
Mr. President, have just said.

(spoke in English)

I will take a few minutes first to thank all members
for having underlined from different perspectives and
angles the quality and relevance of the cooperation
between the European Union and the United Nations.
I will also not overlook the questions that were raised
very briefly.

First, with regard to women and peace and security,
it is an essential element of the EU-United Nations
cooperation. It is also an essential element of our own
European Union security agenda. I fully agree with our
South African colleague that it is not a soft issue but a
security one that is at the core of not only our military
activities, first and foremost, but also our mediation
and diplomatic work. We have a common initiative
on regional acceleration of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The EU and United Nations
promote together the elimination of sexual abuse in our
peacekeeping operations. That is a part of the work in
which we are engaged.

The EU and United Nations jointly promote the
priorities of the United Nations global networks of
national focal points on women and peace and security.
Most importantly and most practically, we have started
the first pilot engagement in the Central African
Republic, which is currently under way with a joint EU-
United Nations engagement in crisis management with
women and peace and security as a key element.

1 would like to add that beyond the concrete work
that is ongoing, we have a common EU-United Nations
effort to promote the role of women in mediation and
negotiation processes. In particular, I would mention the
support that we give to women in Syria and Yemen in
their respective negotiation processes. I will be pleased
to be together with the United Nations Special Envoy for
Syria tomorrow in Brussels, together with some women
from Syria, in support of their views and to work for
peace and reconciliation in their country. Those are
just a few examples of our common engagement on that
very important agenda.

The same is true when it comes to crisis prevention
and mediation. That was a question raised by the
Permanent Representative of Germany. The European
Union and the United Nations already do a great deal
together. First and foremost, we took a recent decision to
establish a high-level dialogue on conflict prevention,
as both organizations have upgraded that to be our top
political priority. We are looking at conducting joint
conflict analysis, which is the basis for early warning
systems and early action that can be coordinated on the
ground. As the European Union, we already provide
expertise and capacity to the United Nations mediation
teams. Every time I travel and meet the United Nations
teams involved in mediation on the ground - I am
thinking of Tripoli or elsewhere, from Yemen to Syria
and other places - I also meet experts and people from
the European Union institutions to which we contribute
United Nations teams to strengthen capacity as well as
to create a link between us.

The next step that I believe could be of interest
is the issue of the EU-African Union-United Nations
triangular cooperation agenda. I think that the three
organizations could benefit from discussing the idea
of undertaking conflict prevention activities together.
As we know, Africa is a continent that offers many
different fields of conflict-prevention activities. But
as you, Mr. President, rightly mentioned, our conflict-
prevention work goes beyond that because whenever
we act in the Balkans, Latin America, Asia, Africa
or Europe itself in support of political processes and
multilateralism we undertake conflict prevention. I
think we do that even when we do not realize it. The
most successful conflict-prevention activity is the one
that never gets to finding out that there was a conflict
to de-escalate.

Let me underline a few other points that were
raised by some members. I should like to underline the
shared importance we attach to the issues raised by the
Permanent Representative of care d'Ivoire - investing
in young people and our common efforts to offer them
not only educational opportunities but also high-quality
jobs. This is not only an effort that is being carried out
by our African friends but is really the basic DNA of
our common agenda for the truly equal partnership we
have established with all our partners in Africa through
the African Union as well as through subregional
organizations and bilaterally with various countries.

I would also underline the importance, as
mentioned by the representative of Kuwait, of the EU-
League of Arab States coordination. The summit we
held in Egypt was indeed a historic moment. We have
a common history and agenda in our region, starting
from the two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, the need to preserve Jerusalem as the future
capital of the two States and also our common efforts
to stabilize Iraq and to work on the reconstruction and
stabilization of the country.

I could never thank Kuwait enough for the role
that it is playing in the region - in particular, as its
representative mentioned, as the co-Chair of the various
conferences to which we have contributed. Kuwait can
always count on us not only to pledge but also to deliver
on our pledges, be it in the case of Iraq, Syria or with
respect to the Rohingya issue.

Let me close by making two last points.

The representative of Belgium asked me ifI saw
any opportunities to develop triangular cooperation
similar to that which we have with the United Nations
and the African Union and other regions. I believe
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations could
be an excellent candidate for the next experiment in
this respect, because the European Union is already
cooperating very closely with it. I wish also to thank
Indonesia for all the investments that it is making in
this respect. As the Council is aware, the European
Union will always invest all its political and financial
capital, which is not insignificant, in supporting
the strengthening of regional and subregional
organizations. We look forward to developing a similar
kind of partnership with regional and subregional
Latin American organizations, because also across
the Atlantic, let us say, from New York on south, we
have a very deep, comprehensive and strategically
important cooperation that I am sure could be very
valuable in strengthening multilateral frameworks in
the United Nations.

Last but not least, I would underline what the
representative of Peru said and thank him for that.
It is true that the European Union has been first and
foremost an example of perseverance and a symbol
of multilateralism and cooperation. We have learned
from our own mistakes that cooperation is the way
forward, and I think that sometimes perseverance,
even stubbornness, is what we need in these times.
The European Union will always be a solid and
reliable partner for the United Nations and for its
Security Council.

Let me conclude on a personal note. This will be
my last briefing to the Security Council, as our mandate
expires at the end of this year. It has been a pleasure for
me to work with the Council and its members over these
past five years. I can assure the Council that whatever
happens in and around the European Union, it will
always find in our Union the strongest and most reliable
partner ever for the United Nations system.

