Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
congratulating the French presidency on placing
peacekeeping operations at the core of this open
debate. I also take this opportunity to thank Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Ms. Susana Malcorra and especially you,
Mr. President, for inviting my delegation to participate
in this important event. I hope your able leadership will
guide our deliberations to meaningful and effective
transition and exit strategies for peacekeeping
operations.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Morocco on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

Article 43 of the Charter of the United Nations
stipulates that:

"All Members of the United Nations, in
order to contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security, undertake to
make available to the Security Council, on its call
and in accordance with a special agreement or
agreements, armed forces, assistance, and
facilities".

Bangladesh has been and is always ready respond
to this call with whatever means and capacity it has. In
this context, I reiterate the views of the Honourable
Prime Minister of Bangladesh, which she expressed
during the meeting between the United States President

and peacekeeper-contributing countries in New York
on 23 September 2009:

"Bangladesh takes pride in contributing to the
United Nations effort in the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is our
constitutional obligation as well."

We remain committed to United Nations
peacekeeping as one of the most universal tools for
helping societies in conflict and post-conflict situations
and helping people to rebuild their lives. We subscribe
to the view of the Non-Aligned Movement that:

"United Nations peacekeeping operations
should be provided from the outset with political
support, full and optimal human, financial and
logistical resources and clearly defined and
achievable mandates and exit strategies".

In this regard, the often stretched peacekeeping
mandates deserve special attention. As we all know,
peacekeeping is no longer simply standing between
conflicting parties to end hostilities. Peacekeeping has
evolved into a complex of activities involving military,
police and civilian elements to preserve peace, assist in
humanitarian and development activities and thus
construct the foundation of sustainable peace through
the peacebuilding process. It is therefore critically
important to ensure that the countries providing
peacekeepers become an integral part of the decision-
making process while drawing up the mandate of a
particular peacekeeping mission by the Security
Council.

They should also be engaged at the decision-
making level in the peacekeeping missions. This will
allow the United Nations to ensure that the mandate is
achievable, manageable and truly effective. At the
same time, mandates should be accompanied by
sufficient resources, including human, logistical and
financial resources, at the disposal of the peacekeepers.

We agree with the Chairman of the Peacebuilding
Commission when he says that "peacekeepers are early
peacebuilders". We emphasize, however, that
peacekeepers' role should not be ended abruptly at any
exit point. In terms of the comparative advantages in
particular areas, my delegation firmly believes that
peacekeepers are uniquely positioned to assist in
identifying and drawing on the most relevant capacity
requirements on the ground in post-conflict countries.
For example, disarmament, demobilization,
reorientation and security sector reform are recognized
as two key elements in the peacebuilding process.
However, these two elements are also included in the
mandates of peacekeeping missions. Thus, any
experiences gained and lessons learned in
peacekeeping operations could significantly assist in
and complement the peacebuilding process.

In this regard, we would like to recall the ninth
paragraph of the Security Council's presidential
statement of 5 August 2009 (S/PRST/2009/24), which
underscores the importance of introducing
peacebuilding elements into peacekeeping operations
before a transfer to the Peacebuilding Commission.
This, in reality, has yet to be translated in any country-
specific context. My delegation therefore emphasizes
the need for strong synergy between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding mandates.

Peacekeepers nowadays are entrusted with some
non-conventional tasks, including electoral assistance,
human rights situation monitoring, the resettlement of
refugees and internally displaced persons, the provision
of safe passage to United Nations and other
humanitarian agencies, security sector reform and the
training of security personnel, the disarmament and
demobilization of armed groups, providing medical and
emergency care, women's empowerment, and assisting
in the development of the legal system and community
involvement. Thus, United Nations peacekeeping can
be considered as an important precursor to
peacebuilding missions in many respects.

We need to ensure the proper synergy between
the processes in order to achieve the end goal of
sustainable peace. We also need to ensure unity of
purpose and action for success in the process. The

entire United Nations membership - the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the peacekeeper-
contributing countries - must have a shared and

holistic vision about what we wish to achieve and how.

Now, let me turn to some specific areas in which
Bangladesh can and is ready to contribute to the cause
of sustainable peace and security. Bangladesh has
extensive electoral experience. The Election
Commission of Bangladesh completed electronic voter
registration and national identification for a staggering
80-plus million voters before the most recent general
election in December 2008. We are ready to share this
experience with other countries, particularly in post-
conflict countries.

Microcredit financing has been playing a critical
role in Bangladesh, including in income generation,
poverty alleviation, youth employment and women's
empowerment. This model has been successfully
replicated in many countries as part of their
development planning and in post-conflict situations -
for example, Afghanistan, Liberia and Sierra Leone,
just to name a few.

lO-23924
Microcredit financing, however, must be
supplemented by other essential poverty alleviation
and job creation tools, such as building rural
infrastructure, human capacity build-up, the
development of microenterprise and provision of
primary health care and universal education, including
non-formal adult education, which can create an
environment in which access to financial capital can
add significant value. Microcredit financing can be
useful if it is seen as a means rather than a goal.

Bangladesh also has the expertise of community
involvement in nation-building efforts, and its
non-governmental organizations have proved to be a
successful agent of change. Bangladesh is ready to
share its best practices and experience at any time.

We have also established the Bangladesh Institute
of Peace Support Operations Training as a training
centre for peacekeepers from around the world. It has
state-of-the-art facilities, and Under-Secretary-General
Alain Le Roy has visited and was pleased with it. In
line with the recommendations of the Brahimi panel,
Bangladesh strongly feels that the Institute should be
recognized as a regional peacekeeping training
institute. We would be happy to welcome potential
peacekeepers for training at the Institute and returning
peacekeepers for debriefing.

Before concluding, allow me to stress that the
success of transition from a peacekeeping environment
to an exit phase requires due consideration of the
whole process, from mandate creation to drawdown
and the exit phase. Transition from one phase to
another needs to be planned carefully, with due
emphasis on overlapping activities between phases.
Experience acquired in previous steps must be used in
subsequent steps to ensure the efficient and effective
use of human, financial and logistical resources. The
exit phase must be preceded by work adequate to
fostering sustainable peace and development and the
involvement of the local community to avoid creating a
vacuum in which undesirable elements can take over,
or so that the community feels let down, with no light
at the end of the tunnel. It is imperative that exit
strategies create an environment of hope and a feeling
of stability and empowerment on the part of the local
populace, so that the peacekeepers' exit leaves behind
no vacuum or hopelessness.

