Mr. Guehenno: In the light of the very successful
conference on Afghanistan held last week in Berlin, it
is fitting that the Security Council should take stock of
what was achieved at the conference and what now lies
before us in terms of capitalizing on the momentum
gained in Berlin to complete the Bonn process
successfully.

First, let me reiterate our deep thanks to the
German Government for the outstanding preparation
and organization that went into the holding of the
conference. The leadership of the German Government
in putting the conference together was absolutely
critical to its success. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Jean Arnault,
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and we in the Secretariat are extremely grateful for the
very effective collaboration that we enjoyed with our
co-Chairs - the Afghan Government, Germany and
Japan - at all levels.

The achievements of the conference are
numerous, and I do not want to steal the thunder of the
Permanent Representative of Germany by detailing
them all. However, I believe that the conference
reasserted the unity of purpose and long-term
commitment that have been a hallmark of the
international community's engagement in Afghanistan.
The presence in Berlin of some 25 ministers and
numerous other high-ranking Government officials is a
clear signal of the international community's
continuing resolve to assist the Afghan Government
and see the peace process through to its completion, to
a point when peace and stability are firmly established
and economic development is on track.

The Berlin declaration, adopted by the
participants, provides a clear statement of vision for
this remarkable partnership, and the proof of it was
clearly offered by the very generous pledges that the
Government received. The $4.4 billion committed for
the current fiscal year was over 100 per cent of the
amount that had been sought, and the $8.2 billion
committed for three years represented 69 per cent of
the funds requested for that period by the Ministry of
Finance. Above all, that generosity suggests a level of
continuing donor confidence in Afghanistan that is a
credit to President Karzai's leadership and his
Government's effective handling of the funds
committed so far.

The conference also approved a comprehensive
work plan, annexed to the declaration, providing us all
with a blueprint for international cooperation with the
Afghan Government. The work plan, endorsed by the
Afghan Cabinet, provides clear benchmarks and targets
to be met in the political, security and economic
spheres over the coming months and years.
Also agreed in Berlin was a strong framework for
regional cooperation in countering narcotics by
Afghanistan and its neighbours. That agreement
expresses the resolve of the region to combat the
terrible threat that drug trafficking poses to
Afghanistan, its neighbours and the world beyond.

In the margins of the intergovernmental
conference, two other important meetings were held. A
meeting of Afghan civil society members provided a
set of useful recommendations to the Afghan
Government. A donor meeting for the elections was
also held at which donors provided pledges of some
$68 million, against the needs of some $135 million,
for the presidential and parliamentary elections to be
held in September in Afghanistan and for the refugee
communities in Pakistan and Iran. This result is
significant in that it provides sufficient funds for
critical start-up costs and procurement for electoral
activities. The importance of raising the remaining
funds required should not be underestimated, however.
We hope that this early generosity also implies that
donors recognize that the rest of the funding must be
found soon if the tight electoral time frames are to be
met.

The achievements that I have mentioned are truly
impressive. However, their full impact will be felt only
if we capitalize on the momentum of Berlin to ensure
that the peace process receives the support it needs.

The tasks still facing Afghanistan remain
daunting. I will not elaborate here on the huge
challenges on the reconstruction and development
front, except to stress, as some of my colleagues did in
Berlin, that the ambitious level of growth and
assistance sought by the Afghan Government would
still deliver a per capita income of only $500 by 2015.
That is a clear reminder of how far Afghanistan has to
go, of how important the timely disbursement of
pledges can be, and of the amount of work that the
Afghan Government must do to ensure that even those
very meagre expectations of a peace dividend are met.

The conference also highlighted the challenge of
combating what the Secretary-General has called the
rising tide of the drugs economy. Opium production in
Afghanistan in 2003, estimated at 3,600 tonnes
produced on 80,000 hectares, will represent a further
increase above the already high 2002 figure - a figure
that generated an income equivalent to over half of
Afghanistan's national income. Turning back this tide
will take a concerted effort, as well as patience, but the
immediate efforts of the Afghan Government on the
eradication front must also be supported.

While not downplaying the importance of those
challenges, I would nevertheless like to stress here the
very pressing, short-term demands that now face the
country if Afghanistan is to achieve the next stage of
the Bonn process - that is, national elections. As
Mr. Arnault said in Berlin, the response to the
registration process so far provides evidence of the
Afghans' strong desire to participate in the political
process.

In the work plan annexed to the Berlin
declaration, the Government has agreed to take a
number of steps to help ensure freedom of expression
and political organization, a level playing field for
political parties and their candidates, a neutral civil
service and military, freedom of the press and equal
access to it. At the request of the Government of
Afghanistan, we are prepared, jointly with the Afghan
Human Rights Commission, to monitor closely the
implementation of political rights across the country in
the hope that this will increase opportunities and
incentives to achieve these benchmarks.

However, the vast majority of Afghans remain
convinced, above all, that elections require prior
disarmament. The fighting that broke out in Herat two
weeks ago underscores the threat that factional rivalries
pose to the exercise of credible, free and fair elections.
If factional military forces continue to be a dominating
feature of the political scene, they are bound to curtail
the political liberties necessary for truly civilian
politics and a credible election. They must not be
allowed to do so.

(spoke in French)

Without substantial improvements in the security
situation, the elections will be threatened. The work
plan provides for the intensification of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) efforts to
encompass 40 per cent of current militia and the
cantonment of all heavy weapons by this June. Success
in DDR programmes will depend to a great degree on
the leadership of the Afghan Government. It is now
absolutely vital that that goal be achieved. This has
indeed been a long-standing priority project, and
progress made towards its achievement will boost the
Government's authority and legitimacy and that of all
political leaders who have committed themselves to its
success. This disarmament process will also be in
keeping with the legal requirements of the new
political party law, which mandates the clear separation
of political formations from their military wings as a
precondition for their participation in the electoral
process.

In that context, I would like once again to
underscore the need for adequate international security
assistance to support the efforts of the Afghan
Government in the electoral process and to protect that
process from both factional threats and attempts to
simply terminate it. The Afghan national army will be
able, we all hope, to become actively involved in
deterring all factional violence, as it is doing now in
Herat, and to ensure the monitoring of heavy weapons
cantonment, as it is doing today in Mazar-e-Sharif.

By June the newly trained units of the Ministry of
the Interior could be deployed in larger numbers to
help create an environment that is more conducive to
the free operation of parties and independent
candidates. The provincial reconstruction teams are
also expected to continue to play a positive role in
facilitating DDR operations and deterring interference.

Nevertheless, the Afghan and international
security forces currently deployed in Afghanistan have
limited capacity, and they will be overextended if they
have to assume the immense task of supporting a
credible election process that is acceptable to all.
Therefore, I wish to join the voice of the United
Nations to President Karzai's recent appeal to NATO
and the coalition to increase deployment of
international forces in order to help the Afghan
Government fulfil its commitment to hold free and fair
elections. These elections will demonstrate the
international community's solidarity, which thus far
has been evident in support of Afghanistan. Let us not
forget that we will judged by the quality of the
outcome.

