The situation across the Middle East continues to be a source of grave concern. While terrorism, conflicts and humanitarian crises have engulfed millions of innocent people in the region, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has further exacerbated conditions there by disrupting humanitarian aid flows, restricting peace operations and limiting diplomatic efforts. Unfortunately, in this time of global crisis, the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and in Gaza are among the most vulnerable. Decades of Israeli occupation and blockade have severely damaged the Palestinian economy and its infrastructure and health system. In Gaza, 2 million people have been living under extremely difficult conditions, in widespread poverty and with acute shortages of essential goods and services. The Palestinian Government has implemented several effective public-health restrictions and developed a socioeconomic response plan. We welcome and support all these measures to deal with the spread of the virus and its implications. Yet, as in the rest of the world, the public-health restrictions have had serious effects on the economy of Palestine. With the shutdown of the economy and the decrease in revenues, the Palestinian economy will further contract. It is regrettable that, owing to the Israeli occupation, the Palestine Government does not have access to the conventional monetary and fiscal tools to cope with the crisis. These are times that call for solidarity and cooperation. There are, however, reports of the obstruction of Palestinian efforts to contain the virus, including, but not limited to, the destruction of a health clinic and the seizure of disinfection equipment. It is also very concerning that Israeli operations against civilians continue during the crisis, even within the context of enforced lockdown and evening curfew. These actions by the Israeli authorities could amount to crimes against humanity and will have permanent implications for efforts to find a peaceful solution to the conflict. We are also appalled that, even during this global crisis, Israel is continuing with its illegal settlement activities, the destruction of Palestinian properties and the eviction of Palestinian people from their homes. There are also reports that settlers are attempting to take advantage of the lockdown to take over Palestinian land. We condemn all steps that might inflict more hardship and suffering on the Palestinian people during this pandemic. The stability of Palestine is crucial for the stability of the region. The spread of the virus could lead to wider social and political destabilization, with broader consequences. The current crisis can also be an opportunity to restart the peace process with a view to finding a just and lasting solution to the conflict in line with the resolutions of the Security Council and the established parameters. We therefore urge the Government of Israel to fulfil its responsibilities. It is time to stop the collective punishment of the Palestinian people. First, Israel must ensure that all Palestinians, including those held in prisons and detention centres, have access to the necessary humanitarian assistance and medical equipment needed to mitigate the impact of COVID-19. The illegal blockade of Gaza must end. The Palestine Government must be provided with all the financial support it needs, and all illegal settlement and demolition activities must stop. 93/99 94/99 As the occupying Power, Israel also has an obligation to ensure the safety and security of the Palestinian people and their property. The disproportionate use of force by the security forces and settler violence must come to an end. We expect Israel to respect international law and principles of humanity. The international community also needs to step up its support for the Palestinian people by providing bilateral humanitarian and financial assistance to the Palestinians. We need to support the United Nations COVID-19 response plan for the occupied Palestinian territory and ensure that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East continues to have adequate resources. We must also focus on the long-term socioeconomic implications of the pandemic, as economic contraction, further financial instability and increasing unemployment will have negative repercussions on social cohesion. In the face of the crisis, Turkey has increased its support to Palestine to expand the capacity of the health system, prevent the transmission of the virus and mitigate the worst effects of the pandemic. We are sending more than 15 tons of medical supplies to Palestine. We are also going to provide $5 million in budget assistance to Palestine. As an emergency measure, we have agreed to the use of the Turkish-Palestinian Friendship Hospital in Gaza as a quarantine hospital. The latest developments remind us once again of the urgency of revitalizing the peace process. Unfortunately, the newly formed Government of Israel has already pledged to consider the annexation of parts of the West Bank. The violations of international law committed so far have not brought peace to the region. It is not going to be any different now. Further unilateral steps would end hopes for peace in Israel and Palestine. A two-State solution, with the establishment of an independent State of Palestine within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, is the only way to bring about a just, comprehensive and lasting peace. That requires unity, courage and resilience, particularly on the part of the Security Council.
