Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Permanent Representatives of
Lithuania, Australia and your country, Mr. President,
for their briefings on the work of the respective
Committees. Such activities are an important
contribution to strengthening the central coordinating
role of the United Nations and the Security Council in the
area of international cooperation to counter terrorism.

The events of recent months demonstrate that
terrorism remains a key threat to international peace
and security. At the heart of anti-terror activities is the
conflict in Syria, which is fanning the flames in northern
and western Africa, including the Sahel region, and
continues to destabilize Afghanistan and the Middle East.
Extremists of various affiliations are trying to harness the
turbulence in unstable regions by skilfully feeding off social
problems, the lack of an alternative to criminality and long-
standing sectarian and religious differences. Terrorists are
actively taking advantage of recent information technology
developments, including to recruit extremists remotely.
They move unhindered through porous borders and
exploit loopholes in legislation on criminal activities.

A subject of worry, terrorism continues to weave
itself into the fabric of modern regional and other armed
conflicts. In that context, the most pressing problem
is the participation of citizens of various countries in
such conflicts on the side of terrorist organizations,
above all, Al-Qaida and its affiliates. It is necessary to
address such risks at the early stage, to continue efforts
to improve knowledge-sharing among competent
Government departments, to make terrorist activities
less attractive, and to combat the spread of the ideology
of terrorism and violent extremism, including in the
media and on the Internet.

The Security Council's Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) continues to set the tone in
counter-terrorist cooperation within the Organization.
Increasing attention is being given to a comprehensive
approach in combating terrorism, taking into account
preventive measures for combating that scourge. There
is a growing understanding of a need to involve civil
society, academia and the media in the efforts of
Government structures and international organizations
in that sphere. That was confirmed by the adoption in
December of resolution 2129 (2013), which adapted
the mandate of the CTC and its Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) to the new
realities.

We commend the role of CTED in providing
assistance to the Counter-Terrorism Committee. We
think CTED should focus, in the framework of its
updated mandate, on one of its key elements, which is
supporting the CTC in monitoring the implementation of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) and coordinating
the provision of technical assistance to Member States.
CTED activities that prepare comprehensive counter-
terrorist strategies are of particular significance. We
are in favour of strengthening its role as a key expert
organ in that field, commanding necessary experience
and methodology. It is necessary to maintain the current
rate of successful CTC country visits. We find useful
the initiatives of the new CTED leadership to stimulate
direct contact between prosecutors and judges in
various States directly involved in prosecutions and
trials of cases of a terrorist nature.

It is relevant to update the global review of the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005) and the plan of action for the implementation
of resolution 1624 (2005). We believe it is important to
further strengthen CTC contacts with other structures
and organizations with a view to expanding the
network of counter-terrorist cooperation under the
aegis of the United Nations. In that respect, we note
the interactions of the CTC, the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) at the meeting of heads of special services,
security agencies and law enforcement organizations
on the issue of terrorism, which was organized by the
Russian Federation's Federal Security Services. We
intend to continue the practice of holding briefings by
representatives from that meeting to the CTC.

The Committee on Al-Qaida remains one of the
most effective Security Council mechanisms in the
field of counter-terrorism. Its sanctions list must
adequately reflect the Al-Qaida threat, which, as recent
events in the Arab world and in Africa have shown, has
not faded. We support proposals on inclusion in the list
of new entities by Member States. We think that the
Committee needs to swiftly respond to the changing
nature of the threat and to consider applications without
excessive red tape.

The powers of the Ombudsperson, set out in
resolution 2083 (2012), provide an optimal level of
transparency for the Committee's work. However, the
practical activities of that entity sometimes fall short.
Sadly, at times it suffers from a narrow, short-sighted
approach, ignoring the opinion of interested States.
A top priority should be improving the effectiveness
of the sanctions mechanism, which fully depends on
implementation by States of relevant commitments.
In that context, we are troubled by references to the
opinion of national judicial forums being used as a
pretext for ignoring Security Council decisions. Such
a policy calls into question the prerogatives of the
Council in combating terrorism.

The adoption in 2004 of resolution 1540 (2004),
which Russia initiated, was the result of a general
understanding of the need to prevent weapons of mass
destruction and their delivery systems falling into the
hands of non-State actors, above all, terrorists. The
goals set out in the resolution are more relevant than
ever for all members of the international community.

In recent months, the 1540 Committee's Group of
Experts has continued successful work. We trust that
new members of the Group, given their experience and
qualifications, will be able to join that work smoothly.
The 7 May Security Council high-level open debate
on the theme of non-proliferation (see S/PV.7169) was
a milestone. The main outcome was agreeing on a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/7) that will serve
as a benchmark for the work of the 1540 Committee for
the period up to the comprehensive review in 2016.

All of us, all responsible members of the
international community, have collective, long-term
interests in the sphere of non-proliferation. One of our
priorities should be continued, full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) by all countries. In that
resolution, all three kinds of weapons of mass
destruction - nuclear, chemical and biological - are
treated as a whole, which confirms the equal danger
of any of them falling into the hands of terrorists. In
the last 10 years, much has been done to implement
that binding document. While 172 Member States have
presented their first reports on implementation, there
is still a long way to go. A remaining priority in the
Committee's work is providing technical assistance to
States. It is vital that the 1540 Committee effectively
carries out the functions of the central coordinator of
activities on implementation of the resolution, to define
its goals and priorities and to focus the main efforts on
the work of countries that have yet to present their first
national reports.

