Ms. Sapag Munoz de la Pena (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile is grateful to Kuwait for convening
this debate and its work as a member of the Security
Council. We also underline the role of Kazakhstan
during the previous presidency, in particular the debate
on the maintenance of international peace and security
held on 19 January. We thank Japan for its efforts to
update note S/2010/507. We welcome Mr. Ian Martin
and commend him on the work conducted by Security
Council Report on the Council's working methods. We
agree with the vast majority of the recommendations
that have been put forward today, and those included in
recent and previous reports. A reference was made to
Ambassador Colin Keating earlier today. I would like
to highlight that he was one of the first to draw the
Council's attention to the importance of working with
the Peacebuilding Commission and troop-contributing
countries. Many have addressed that issue today.
Therefore, we will address specific issues, in addition
to those before us for consideration.

We need working methods that ensure that effective
political attention is given to the work of the Council.
We encourage Council members to demonstrate
greater discipline and restraint with regard to the list
of initiatives to be considered or adopted. Many of
them take up precious time and hinder the adoption of
solutions to the most urgent problems. Although the
veto is not a working method per se, it has an adverse
domino effect on the working methods of the Council,
and of its subsidiary bodies, in particular the sanctions
committees, as previous speakers have mentioned.
Elected members are often excluded as a matter of
custom. There should be a more inclusive process when
drafting resolutions and presidential statements, and
recommendations of the subsidiary bodies.

In that regard, we recommend the following
measures. We must strengthen the role of the 10 elected
members (E-lO), as mentioned by the representative
of the Accountability, Coherence, and Transparency
group, of which Chile is a member. They should be
included as co-penholders, preferably in interegional
groups, as was the case with resolution 2286 (2016),
which was adopted in close consultation with civil
society. We must encourage greater use of wrap-up
meetings because they help the broader membership
and the interested public to monitor accountability in
the work of the Council, given the fact that they are
public and broadcast in the six official languages.

A good example was the most recent wrap-up
meeting, convened by Kazakhstan (see S/PV.8173),
during which the African members of the E-lO spoke as
one group to highlight their region's priorities. Speaking
in one voice underscored the role of elected members
in reducing the Council's workload. We also propose
that greater use be made of open debates by selecting
issues that require analysis from all members. In order
to determine points of convergence, the proposal was
made to encourage statements by like-minded groups
and inter-regional groups, such as the Human Security
Network, the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict and groups related to the women and peace
and security agenda, which include non-governmental
organizations, whose chairs can be consulted when
preparing concept notes.

Similarly, we stress the importance of increasing
the number of Arria Formula meetings by circulating
a summary to all Member States on outcomes and
recommendations. We propose that the work of the
various subsidiary bodies be consolidated and that the
reports ofthe groups of experts of sanctions committees
be considered when structuring outcome documents,
in particular, with regard to mission transfers. The
transparency of the subsidiary bodies should be
bolstered by an improved and more timely use of
electronic media available. In that regard, we commend
the sanctions committees on their efforts. We stress the
importance of using press releases to highlight their
work so that they can emerge from the subterranean
universe mentioned by a previous speaker.

In conclusion, we highlight the importance of
strengthening the role of the Office of the Ombudsperson
and the prompt appointment of an ombudsperson to fill
the post that has been vacant for some time.

