Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for having organized this
debate on the situation in Haiti and the activities of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). This debate helps to keep international
attention focused on the situation in that country. The
exceptional number of delegations that will take part in
today's debate - in particular States of the region,
whose role is essential - shows the broad interest
aroused by this item.

Of course, I also wish to thank Mrs. Pierre-Louis,
Prime Minister of the Republic of Haiti, for her
briefing and to assure her that we listened to it with
great attention and, of course, sympathy on the part of
France.

France fully associates itself with the statement to
be made by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union. I should just like to add several
comments in my national capacity.

As others have already stressed, Haiti has made
significant progress in recent years thanks to numerous
efforts made not only by the international community,
but also by the Government and the people of Haiti.
That progress is the result of the ongoing mobilization
of the international community, illustrated by the
Security Council's unanimous support for the activities
of MINUSTAH - support that we shall soon renew. I
wish to commend the continued and unwavering
commitment of the Secretary-General and the excellent
work of his Special Representative, Mr. Annabi.

We all know how difficult it is to keep the
international community's attention on a particular
country as crises are, unfortunately, increasing
throughout the world. As the situation in Haiti is
gradually improving, some might be tempted to let
down their guard. To the contrary, it is during this
virtuous phase that we must step up our efforts.
Mr. Clinton's resolute action on behalf of Haiti
and his generous commitment have already produced
results. They should be supported. The improvement in
security conditions should make it possible to increase
international mobilization, to encourage investors - as
stressed by the Prime Minister of Haiti - and also to
encourage non-governmental organizations to commit
themselves to helping Haitian society take full
responsibility for its future. Today, it is to the
reconstruction of the Haitian State and to economic and
social development that we must devote our efforts.

France thus welcomes the resolute economic and
financial mobilization of the international community.
The Washington conference showed the support of
international donors and made it possible to mobilize
funds as well as budgetary assistance. Haiti's progress
towards the completion point of the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries Debt Initiative in June allowed for
substantial debt cancellation. Last July, the Paris Club
announced a very significant debt cancellation by
bilateral creditors, including France.

In this endeavour, the role of the United Nations
is obviously crucial. MINUSTAH plays a role in the
area of stabilization. United Nations agencies present
on the ground, under the supervision of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, are
contributing to social and economic development. But
the ultimate responsibility for success rests on the
shoulders of the Haitian Government and people. Thus,
it is to the Haitian Government and people that we
must lend our full assistance and support in their
difficult and courageous fight. They can count on us.
Of course, they can count on France, which has
historical, cultural and human ties with Haiti that we
shall not forget. France is participating in MINUSTAH.
We are on the ground and recently increased our
assistance, particularly after last year's devastating
hurricanes.

It is our collective responsibility to continue to
support the efforts of the Haitian authorities with a
view to stabilizing the country, strengthening
democratic institutions and promoting sustainable
development. The United Nations and the Haitian
authorities must continue the work that has begun.
France will continue to lend its support to the United
Nations and to the Haitian Government.

