Mr. Cardi (Italy): I wish to thank the Russian
Federation for requesting this meeting and Under-
Secretary-General O'Brien for his briefing and the hard
work that they and all the humanitarian actors put into
their daily activities.

During his recent visit to Yemen, Secretary-
General Guterres highlighted the interconnection
between today's crises and the importance ofpromoting
an integrated approach to peace and security. We fully
support this vision, particularly in the light of the recent
Security Council trip to the Lake Chad basin, and we
subscribe to the Secretary-General's call for immediate
famine-prevention assistance.

Italy, like others, is of course seriously concerned
about the situation in Yemen and the Violent destruction
of lives that Under-Secretary-General O'Brien has
so eloquently described today and in his briefing of
26 January (see S/PV.7870), which was an eye-opener
in many ways. Italy is already providing help to the
Yemeni people in the areas of nutrition and aid to women
and girls who are the victims of violence. This year, we
plan to make a further contribution, to be announced at
the next donor conference in Geneva, but we have also
taken note of the urgency of today's appeal.

But creating a fund, of course, is not enough. The
assistance must reach those in need. We therefore call
on all the parties to the conflict to guarantee full,
speedy and unimpeded humanitarian access at all times.
Needless to say, there can be no military solution to the
conflict in Yemen. A political agreement is the only
way out, so all parties to the conflict must ultimately
show their commitment to negotiating a solution under
the auspices of the United Nations and the Special
Envoy. The Italian Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
is currently visiting the region to discuss the political
dimensions of the crisis and how Italy can lend political
and humanitarian assistance.

The crisis in Yemen is closely linked to that in
neighbouring Somalia, and we commend the Under-
Secretary-General for the regional perspective
underlining the connections between the two. Somali
refugees in Yemen and returnees from Yemen are also
a matter for concern, since they may be contributing to
the illicit trafficking connections between transnational
organized crime and terrorist groups, whose presence
in the area is growing. Italy will continue to support
Somalia's newly elected President Farmajo and the
Somalian authorities in their efforts to deal with a
difficult situation, with a particular focus on issues
such as the empowerment of women and young people,
nutrition, social protection and resilience, access to
health services, and demining.

But that must be a collective effort, and in that
regard I would like to commend the generosity that
has been shown by Somalia's neighbours, particularly
Ethiopia and Kenya, in hosting Somali refugees from
drought, climate change and security threats, as was
also pointed out by the Secretary-General during his
recent visit. We also welcome the round table convened
by President Farmajo in Mogadishu recently and look
forward to further results from the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development conference held on 25 March
on Somali refugees, and to the conference to be held on
Somalia in London in May.

With regard to South Sudan, Iwould like to comment
briefly on two specific aspects of the crisis that are of
particular concern for us. The first is the limitations
imposed on humanitarian access for the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan and for non-governmental
organizations. The second is the potential role of
South Sudanese churches in alleviating the crisis and
strengthening the population's resilience. Churches are
often the last bastion for humanitarian assistance at the
grassroots level, and yet, as demonstrated in the case of
Kajo Keji two weeks ago, they are increasingly subject
to intimidation, harassment and violence. We firmly
condemn attacks on religious freedom and the safety
of the country's religious places, and reiterate our
firm support to the Council of South Sudan Churches
in its brave efforts to uphold peace, dialogue and
reconciliation in the region.

