Mr. Sambu (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
The Government of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau
welcomes this opportunity to participate in today's
Security Council meeting with a view to reacting to
the report submitted by the Secretary-General on the
prevailing political situation in my country (S/2017/111).

On behalf of the President of the Republic and of the
Government, we would like to thank the international
community for its unwavering support and solidarity
shown to our country and for keeping the political
situation in Guinea-Bissau on the international agenda,
which has led to the promotion of political dialogue
aimed at generating and consolidating interparty
consensus for the sake of political and governing
stability in the country. In this context, we praise the
outstanding efforts of the United Nations, particularly
those of the Security Council, the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative for our country, as well as
the Guinea-Bissau configuration. We thank the Council
for the attention paid to our country and the important
contribution made to stabilization and political and
social normalization processes in our society.

On 16 November 2016, a new Prime Minister was
appointed by presidential decree and a new Government
was set up in accordance with the Bissau and Conakry
road maps, which are the two instruments that at
this time bind political stakeholders in the National
Assembly and civil society and define the ways and
means to end the crisis and foster political dialogue to
shore up stability.

As a product of inclusive dialogue involving all
political stakeholders, the Government chose this
instrument as the key tool for its political action, making
it a priority for the political parties represented in the
National Assembly, in order to build and strengthen the
political framework leading to a form of governance that
would meet the expectations of people for normalizing
political life and improving Government action. In
this respect, the Government takes this opportunity
to reiterate its commitment to the scrupulous
implementation of the Conakry Agreement and to
working for the inclusion of all signatories in order to
broaden the political base supporting the Government.
In spite of varying interpretations of the Agreement by
some of the signatories, which has created difficulties
in its implementation, the Government nonetheless
respected all dialogue mechanisms for cooperation and
defining arrangements for action with respect to the
expected political and State reforms.

I would like to inform the members of the Security
Council that, in order to respect the constitutional
time frame, the Prime Minister visited the Parliament
personally, where he submitted the Government's
programme to the Speaker of the National Assembly
for approval. I would also like to underline that this
act was preceded by a round table with the signatories
of the Conakry Agreement in order to assess the
political priorities and guidelines of the programme.
The Government enjoys a majority in the Parliament
for the approval of its programme. The majority was
a determining factor in the appointment of the current
Government, which now has a parliamentary base for
the Prime Minister to make this Government viable.

(spoke in Spanish)

Withrespectto the meeting oftheAssembly-which
was at an impasse for more than 15 months, in violation
of all the constitutional provisions and internal rules

of the Parliament - the law of Guinea-Bissau says the
following:
"The meeting of the Assembly for the
assessment of the Government programme, in
accordance with article 85, paragraph 1, of the
Constitution, is set by common agreement between
the President and the Prime Minister".

Furthermore, the Government undertakes to continue
an inclusive political dialogue with the parties that have
divergent interpretations of the Political Agreement in
order to achieve a broader understanding, taking into
account the supreme interests of the people of Guinea-
Bissau for political stability and development of
the country. To that end, we hope we can always count
on the active support of the international community.

(spoke in French)

I should like to end my statement on behalf of the
Government by expressing our gratitude to the Economic
Community Of West African States (ECOWAS) for
the important role it played in the mediation process
to resolve the crisis, and to the ECOWAS Mission in
Guinea Bissau for its presence and action in Guinea-
Bissau. We offer our heartfelt thanks to the President
of the ECOWAS Commission and the Heads of State of
the subregion for their role in seeking a resolution to the
crisis in Guinea-Bissau.

We also thank our regional organization, the
African Union, for its careful monitoring of internal
developments in Guinea-Bissau. Allow me to express
the support of the Government for the initiative to
change the size of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau with a
view to adapting it to the current political context and
to promote peacebuilding, the implementation of State
reforms, support for social stabilization and the pursuit
of the objectives of nation building.

