Mr. Amendola (Italy): At the outset, let me thank
Bolivia for bringing this important topic to the attention
of the Council. We look forward to the discussion on
the draft resolution, which will provide a possible
outcome for our debate. As has been mentioned,
the indiscriminate harm caused to civilians as well
as to peace and security by anti-personnel mines
and explosive remnants of war remains a matter of
great concern.

In this regard, I would like to thank Mr. Alexander
Zuev and Ms. Ochoa Nifio for their reports, which
give us a complete and comprehensive overview of the
situation. Indeed, while mine action has been crucial in
helping communities recover from conflicts or receive
humanitarian assistance during conflicts, ongoing
events are generating new areas of contamination that
may deny civilians access to their basic requirements.
In that respect, let me recall that countries affected by
mines are mostly middle- and low-income countries.
Most of the victims are innocent civilians and often
children, which is our primary concern.

We are looking at the expanding range of the threats
to civilian populations. 1 am referring, for instance, to
the increasing use of new devices, such as improvised
explosive devices, particular by non-State armed groups,
as well as to the risks posed by unsecured weapons
and ammunition stockpiles located in populated areas.
As Mr. Zuev mentioned in reference to Iraq, and as I
personally saw with the Carabinieri, there are certain
implications of fighting those new devices in order to
rid the country of threats. Similarly, we are seriously
concerned about the recent indication that the number
of people killed or injured by mines and other explosive
remnants has been on the rise. Unfortunately, that trend
has been accompanied by signs of decreasing funding
devoted to mine action.

Against that background, we shall remain vigilant,
even within and through this Council. In that regard,
we commend the United Nations Mine Action Service
and the other United Nations entities involved in mine
action for their remarkable and professional work in
an increasingly complex environment. Their work is
also open to the involvement of civil society, which, of
course, is creating cooperation between our entities and
the civil mobilization through that process. We value
the coordinating efforts deployed by UNMAS and the
progress made on the Strategy of the United Nations on
Mine Action 2013-2018. Italy will continue to support
such efforts through our current chairmanship of the
Mine Action Support Group.

We will maintain our commitment to mine action
with regard to each of its five pillars - demining and
clearance, risk education, victim assistance, stockpile
destruction and advocacy, inter alia, against the use of
antipersonnel mines and cluster munitions. As party
to all the legally binding instruments relevant to mine
action, including the Oslo Convention, the Ottawa
Convention, the Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons and the Convention on the Rights of People
with Disabilities, Italy strongly encourages all States to

join them. Those instruments set high standards for mine
action and they will universally mark clear progress.

To conclude, I would like to add my voice in
acknowledging that mine action is an essential step for an
effective humanitarian response, a precondition for the
safe return of internally displaced persons and refugees
to their homes and a prerequisite for reconstruction and
development, including for the achievement of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. For the reasons I
just listed, we stand ready to do our part.

