Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): On behalf of the delegation
of Ukraine, I would like to thank India's presidency
for convening an open debate on such a relevant and
pressing issue as maritime piracy.

While aligning itself with the statement made
earlier by the European Union, my delegation would
like to make a statement in its national capacity.

Maritime security and law enforcement at sea
are indispensable factors for maintaining not only
regional but also international peace and security.
Therefore the problem of piracy and armed robbery at
sea requires a most coherent and complex response. In
this light, Ukraine is pleased that the Security Council
is deliberating for the first time on piracy and armed
robbery at sea across the regions. Such an integrated
and comprehensive approach will enable us to better
deal with this scourge by making full use of the
successful experiences thus far at the regional level and
by exploring ways of sharing knowledge on anti-piracy
measures from South-East Asia, the waters offthe coast
of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden. Those lessons can
be applied for the prevention of maritime piracy and
armed robbery in other potentially vulnerable areas.

We commend the recent gains made by the
international community in fighting piracy. In the
waters off the coast of Somalia, our collective measures
have resulted in a sharp decline in pirate attacks and
hijackings, compared to last year. However, according
to the most recent report of the Secretary-General on
this matter (S/2012/783), the current trend of decline
is fully dependent on the naval presence in the
region, the implementation of International Maritime
Organization's guidance and best management
practices and the prosecution of pirates. Ukraine fully
support the Secretary-Generals' concern that this initial
success could always easily be reversed until the root
causes of piracy - namely, instability, lawlessness and
lack of effective governance in Somalia - are properly
addressed.

It should be noted that one of the first steps towards
framing a comprehensive approach to addressing the
root causes of piracy was made during the first-ever
General Assembly thematic debate on the issue at an
informal plenary meeting in May 2010 on the initiative
of Ukraine. We look forward to further efforts to that
end in the framework of the United Nations, including
the Security Council.

As to the emerging challenges of attacks against
merchant ships at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, Ukraine
shares the Security Council's deep concern about the
threat they are posing to international navigation and
especially to the safety of seafarers. We encourage
States in the region and regional organizations to
enhance their efforts to ensure maritime safety and
security in the Gulf of Guinea, including through
developing a legal framework for the prevention and
repression of piracy and armed robbery at sea, as well
as prosecution of persons engaging in those crimes. We
believe that the successful naval and judicial capacity-
building measures applied in other regions should be
taken into due account with respect to the situation in
the Gulf of Guinea.

We must admit that the fight against impunity
for Somali pirates has brought tangible results, with,
to date, 1,186 individuals prosecuted or awaiting
prosecution in 21 States. Much success has been
achieved in addressing piracy and bringing to justice
its perpetrators and facilitators in the Asian region. In
general, a lot of useful recommendations have been
developed with respect to law enforcement, evidence
collection, judicial aspects, post-trial transfers and
imprisonment of convicted pirates.

Ukraine is of the view that those tools merit being
systemized for their better domestic application by
Member States. That is why my delegation came up
with the idea of elaborating, within the United Nations,
model counter-piracy legislation, which would facilitate
the apprehension and prosecution by Member States of
those engaged in piracy and armed robbery. Ukraine
believes that such models would help us efficiently
apply on the national level existing international law
as reflected in the 1982 United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea. We encourage our fellow delegates
to actively discuss this idea at the General Assembly
consultations on the law of the sea currently under way.

Ukraine is greatly affected by the threat of piracy
and armed robbery against ships, as some 38,000
Ukrainian nationals are commercial seafarers currently
employed in the world shipping industry. Being highly
concerned with their welfare, Ukraine welcomes the
current efforts to develop guidance to address care
for seafarers who have suffered from pirate attacks
or hostage situations. We urge flag States and ship
owners to do their utmost to ensure the security of crew
members.

As one of the major States of seafarers' origin,
Ukraine has continuously supported international
efforts to secure the safety of maritime shipping. Most
recently, the Government of Ukraine decided to join
Operation Ocean Shield. A flagship of the Ukrainian
naval forces, the frigate Herman Sahaidachny, with a
deck helicopter and a special forces group on board, is
currently preparing to head for the waters off the Horn
of Africa to patrol areas of pirates' activities as a part
of Operation Ocean Shield.

Ukraine commends the United Nations and its
competent agencies for their active role and engagement
in countering maritime piracy and remains committed
to the international efforts to curb that threat.

