Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for holding this meeting. We were here to
testify not too long ago. This is becoming very nice, and I
am getting used to it.

After listening to what was said yesterday at yet
another important meeting of the Security Council, one is
hard-pressed to recall that 50 years have passed since the
Geneva Conventions, especially the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, were adopted. It would have been far
preferable to participate in a meeting that was called to
celebrate the laudable ideas and intentions that the framers
of those Conventions cherished way back in 1949. The sad
reality, however, is that the international community has
always fallen short of living up to the standards set for all
nations in times of conflict.

It is perhaps with some cruel irony that I recall that,
since February 1999, when the Security Council requested
the Secretary-General to present this report, the world has
watched with fear, fury and foreboding the effects of
tragedy on civilians caught in more than 30 conflicts around
the world. These include the conflicts in Kosovo and East
Timor, which we feel as if we have witnessed with our own
eyes because television broadcast them in living colour
right into our living rooms.

Although many people did not know, or may even
have chosen not to know, where Kosovo or East Timor
were located on the world map, television and newspapers
forced us to watch and read about the anguish of the
civilian victims in these places, albeit with utter
helplessness. Of course, it is and has always been
different when it comes to atrocities that continue to be
perpetrated on civilians in Africa. Places such as Angola,
Sierra Leone and the Congos seldom get mentioned in the
national newscasts. The television cameras have long left
African conflict areas. Even the few objective and brave
reporters have closed their notebooks and long since
stopped writing. The so-called media that is left are hacks
who are nothing but peddlers of hate and propaganda
aimed at whipping up the fury of angry mobs who resort
to nationalistic and ethnocentric bloody campaigns against
innocent civilians.

In the end, the killings that are taking place in Africa
are carried out by those who erroneously believe that they
have been left to do as they please because the world no
longer cares about those who die in Africa. But the
Secretary-General's report before the Council proves
otherwise. In the introduction, the Secretary-General
writes that

"hardly a day goes by where we are not presented
with evidence of the intimidation, brutalization,
torture and killing of helpless civilians in situations
of armed conflict". (S/1999/957, para. 2)

It is for this and other reasons that my delegation wished
to commend the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
and challenging report to the Security Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

At the Twelfth Conference of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM) held in Durban, South Africa, last
September, the heads of State or Government urged
members of the international community present to
reaffirm their determination and commitment to preserve
the fundamental values centred on respect for human
beings, as entrenched in the relevant international
instruments. Convinced that the observance and
application of international humanitarian law address the
erosion of the underlying respect for human beings and
could lead to a reduction in the numbers of victims in
conflicts, the heads of State or Government at the Non-
Aligned Movement Conference urged all members of the
international community to adhere to, promote,
disseminate and assist in the adherence to and promotion
and dissemination of international humanitarian law and

 

human rights conventions. They believed that knowledge of,
respect for and observance of the international instruments
would help relieve the suffering of all victims, provide
them with effective protection and create an atmosphere
conducive to dialogue and the restoration of peace.

Moreover, the heads of State or Government of NAM
underlined the importance of promoting respect for
universally recognized humanitarian principles and for
international humanitarian law, particularly those of the four
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their 1977 Protocols
Additional. They invited those States which have not yet
done so to ratify or accede to the two Protocols Additional
to the Geneva Conventions of 1949. Common article I of
the Geneva Conventions, now ratified by 188 States, which
dictates that the High Contracting Parties to the
Conventions "undertake to respect and ensure respect for
the present Convention in all circumstances", constitutes the
collective responsibility of the United Nations.

In his report, the Secretary-General also makes the
point that respect for the international humanitarian and
human rights laws is essential for the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts. He states that such an international
framework created by these Conventions would serve a
function that is both preventive and remedial. It is
preventive because it constitutes a declaration of intent by
Member States that have acceded to the Conventions, and
it is remedial because it provides punitive measures against
the transgressors. My delegation welcomes the adoption of
the Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
hopes that the establishment of the ICC will constitute a
major step towards providing punitive sanction measures
against transgressors, while serving as a deterrent to
potential and future transgressors.

It is important that the Security Council put extra
emphasis on the strengthening of conflict prevention
measures in order to effectively avert the threat to civilians
in armed conflicts. These preventive measures include the
setting up of early warning systems which will alert the
Security Council to pending conflicts while there is still
time to do something about them. South Africa is already
making a direct contribution in this area. My Government
has, amongst other things, given moral and financial
support to the United Nations Integrated Regional
Information Network which functions as an early warning
mechanism in central and southern Africa.

An issue of critical importance to my Government is
the securing of humanitarian assistance, access to persons
in need and the speedy delivery of basic supplies by
humanitarian workers. In this connection, the safety and
security of international workers are another crucial
element. It is of utmost importance that the safety of
United Nations personnel and the safe passage of relief
supplies for the populations caught in armed conflict be
guaranteed.
In Africa, especially in my region of southern
Africa, the scourge of landmines continues to maim and
kill innocent civilians. The Security Council should
consider including demining in the mandates of
peacekeeping missions. The expedited accession by
Member States to the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-
personnel Mines and on Their Destruction and the rapid
implementation of its provisions will go a long way
towards protecting civilians against these silent killers.
The illicit trafficking in powerful, yet small weapons that
are easy to conceal continues to be a growing problem.
The lucrative trade in and the easy transportation of such
weapons makes them easily and readily transferred and
used in different conflicts in a short period of time.

South Africa believes that future peacekeeping
operations should include, where appropriate, the
collection, disposal and destruction of weapons, including
small arms. Otherwise, a demobilized and still armed
former combatant remains a threat to civilians.

Over the past year, we have devoted considerable
time and energy to resolving conflicts in Africa. We have
joined with other Governments in the region in a
concerted effort to address humanitarian tragedies
resulting from conflict situations. Aside from diplomatic
interaction, our commitment has taken the form of
financial and material contributions to international
humanitarian organizations active on our continent. We
have been particularly concerned about the scourge of
landmines and the plight of refugees and internally
displaced people, especially women and children.

Allow me to conclude by mentioning two issues that
continue to be of concern to the Security Council. One
issue is the plight of internally displaced persons, who are
simply civilians in armed conflict by another name. Many
of them are children and women who are often sexually
abused and/or starved to death as they try to flee from
one conflict area to another, seeking food and shelter for
themselves and their babies. The other issue is that
children caught up in these situations are forced to
become child soldiers long before they even reach
puberty. If, through some hard negotiation, peace is

 

restored in these places, the child soldiers of yesterday are
somehow expected to transform themselves into the
students of tomorrow.

At the 1990 Organization of African Unity conference
on refugees, returnees and internally displaced persons, held
at Khartoum, an appeal was made to the international
community to alleviate the heavy burden on countries
hosting refugees and countries with significant communities
of returnees and internally displaced persons. The Khartoum
Declaration encourages the development of capacity-
building initiatives for member States, and regional and
subregional institutions. An appeal was also made to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and to the International Committee of the Red
Cross to expand their training programmes in international
and regional refugee and humanitarian law.

My delegation knows that the answers to these and
other international questions before the Security Council are
hard to come by. Nonetheless, it is the hope of my
delegation that the Council will find that the report of the
Secretary-General is an important beginning in compiling
information about options the international community may
choose to consider. It is for this reason that we urge the
Council to support the draft resolution on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We welcome the decision to
establish a mechanism to review the Secretary-General's
recommendations and to consider appropriate steps by April
2000.

I wish to end by paraphrasing an old saying: the
international community is better for knowing where it
comes from on the issues of civilians caught in armed
conflict, because that is the only way we will all know
where we wish to go.

