Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his comprehensive briefing. I also thank the
observer of Palestine and the representative of Israel
for their statements.

It is a matter of concern to my delegation that the
situation in the Middle East remains fragile and tense.
It is regrettable that, despite the international and
regional efforts to relaunch direct negotiations between
Israel and Palestine, no tangible progress has been
achieved. We commend, however, the efforts of the
United States Administration and the Quartet.

We encourage Israel and Palestine to take
practical steps to start direct negotiations. It is in doing
so that a comprehensive and lasting peace, based on
the vision of two democratic States - Israel and
Palestine - living side by side in peace and security,
can be realized. Ultimately, lasting peace in the Middle
East will be achieved through the efforts and
agreement of both parties.

We commend the continued efforts of the
Palestinians to fulfil their obligations under the Road
Map, particularly in the security sector, State-building
and economic development. We are concerned,
however, about divisions among the Palestinian
groups, and call on the Palestinians to overcome their
differences and forge unity.

Israel's continued settlement activity in East
Jerusalem is a matter of serious concern. We call on
Israel to freeze all settlement activity, including natural
growth. We are further concerned about recent
incidents in which additional home demolition orders
have been issued in East Jerusalem.

On Gaza, we are concerned about the grave
humanitarian situation caused by the blockade. We
welcome the recent efforts of Israel to ease the
blockade, which have facilitated the onset of a number
of United Nations projects and allowed more goods
into Gaza. However, this is not enough. We call on
Israel to fully open the borders and lift the blockade.

Concerning the flotilla incident, we support an
impartial, credible and transparent investigation
conforming to international standards, as called for by
the Council's presidential statement of 1 June
(S/PRST/2010/9).

In January 2009, this Council expressed its
concern at the ceasefire violations and the deterioration
of the situation in Gaza. We are concerned that the
violations persist today. We reiterate our call on all
parties to exercise maximum restraint and avoid further
escalation. We call for the complete implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009).

The attacks on the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) summer camps in Gaza last month, which
set fire to their recreation facilities, were deplorable.
We are glad to hear that UNRWA will rebuild the
camps to continue with its summer programmes, which
are important for the physical and psychological well-
being of Gaza's citizens.

On Lebanon, we salute the national unity
Government for its efforts in broadening a national
consensus that has translated into internal stability. The
continued violations of resolution 1701 (2006), such as
violations of Lebanese airspace, ground violations of
the Blue Line and the lack of enforcement of the arms
embargo, are matters of serious concern. The territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon should be
respected, and we call on all parties to fully implement
resolution 1701 (2006).

