Mr. Lal (India): As is evident from the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/465), despite
persistent efforts over the past two decades, the
rights of millions of children continue to be violated
in situations of armed conflict in various parts of the
world. Some progress has been made through greater
engagement among the United Nations agencies and
the Governments concerned, as well as through the
integration of children's rights issues in mediation
processes. However, much more remains to be done,
especially in keeping up with the changing nature
of armed conflicts that involve a range of non-State
actors. Terrorist entities, including those designated
by the Security Council, continue to exploit children
as part of their terrorist activities with impunity. The
reintegration of children into society after their release
and following mediation processes remains an area that
needs more focus.

Through its active participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, India continues to contribute
to the implementation of the Security Council mandate
on this subject. Based on our experience as one of the
largest troop-contributing countries, India remains
concerned about the lack of resources to implement the
provisions of the mandate, including the deployment of
more child protection advisers, and to comprehensively
address the connection between conflict prevention
and the protection of children.

In spite of the clear mandate provided under
resolution 1379 (2001), we are disappointed that the
report of the Secretary-General includes situations
that do not meet the definitions of armed conflict or
of threat to the maintenance of international peace and
security. We would like to point out such distraction
from situations under the mandate of the Security
Council needs to be rectified and the mandate strictly
adhered to.

While this is an important thematic debate, there
has been yet another attempt by a delegation to misuse
this forum by referring to situations that are extraneous
to the discussion. It referred to a so-called report
about the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir - a
document reflecting the clear bias of an official who
was acting without any mandate whatsoever and relied
on unverified sources of information. It is a document
that was not even found fit to be considered by the
membership of the forum where it was submitted.
Such deliberate, self-serving attempts by Pakistan
seek to obfuscate the reality of its own use of terror
organizations to undermine State sovereignty. They
also distract from our discussions of the issues at hand.
Such attempts have not succeeded in the past in any
forum and will not do so now.

In conclusion, let me reiterate India's strong support
for the endeavours of the United Nations to protect
children in situation of armed conflict.

