Ms. Citaku: It is an honour to be here today. This
month is very special for me and my fellow citizens.
On 17 February, just 10 days from today, Kosovo
will celebrate its first double-digit birthday. As I sit
at this table and in this revered Chamber, together
with representatives of States with their admirable
centuries-old traditions of statehood i representatives
of nations that have given so much to humankind, from
science and technology, to arts and sports - I cannot
help but reflect on our journey as an independent
republic and wonder what Kosovo will look like in 10,
20 and 100 years from today. I wonder: How well have
we done as a young democracy in meeting the rightful
expectations of the Kosovar people? How well have
our institutions performed? How much has our society
evolved, and, most important, what is the legacy that
we will leave behind?

Ten years later, Kosovo has been recognized by
the overwhelming majority of the free nations of the
world. Today Kosovo is a member of dozens of regional
and international organizations. We are also very much
aware that we would never have made it this far without
States Members" unwavering support. The United
Nations was there for us in our darkest hour of need, and
for that we will be forever grateful. Today I must pay
tribute to one great man in particular - Sergio Vieira
de Mello - who was the first Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Kosovo. When Mr. De Mello
arrived in Kosovo he found a country in ruins, a nation
torn apart and devastated by the pains and horrors of
war. Yet he somehow managed to bring our people
together and establish a United Nations administration
in Kosovo. Sergio may no longer be with us, but he will
always be remembered.

Ten years of statehood have taught us that survival
and independence cannot alone sustain us alone. They
are not our sole concerns. Freedom and food on the table
are not the only things that people require. They require
education, health care, respect and dignity. In Kosovo
we have come to learn that statehood is not only about
building Government and institutions. Civil society, the
free press and the non-governmental sector are equally
as important, and often a driving force for growth.
According to international organizations, Kosovo
enjoys greater freedom of speech today than any other
country in the region. That remarkable achievement is
entirely attributable to those Kosovar journalists, who
never bow to power, surrender to threats or compromise
the truth. In Kosovo we have a vibrant civil society
that, independent of the Government, rallies around
issues ranging from war crimes committed during the
war in Kosovo and special courts, to air pollution and
energy costs.

Although our institutions may have their flaws,
the irrefutable truth is that our society has matured.
All one has to do is observe the manner in which
Kosovar society and media reacted to the unfortunate
assassination of Oliver Ivanovie. Unlike what would
have probably occurred in the past, Mr. Ivanovie's
assassination was a murder that did not incite ethnic
hatred in Kosovo. In fact, local citizens and politicians
and the media - both Albanian and Serbian - agreed
that organized crime in northern Kosovo was to blame
for the murder. Of course, Mr. Ivanovie himself was
a controversial figure. Nonetheless, we will leave no
stone unturned until the perpetrators of that crime
against him are brought to justice.

Allow me to also briefly address the debate
surrounding the Specialist Chambers. First, Kosovo
has an exemplary record with regard to cooperating
with international and local war crimes tribunals. Not
a single Kosovar Albanian indicted for war crimes has
ever attempted to escape justice. However, that is not
the case with any of the former Yugoslav republics.
In fact, if one looks at the numbers, they show that
more Albanians have been prosecuted and convicted
for war crimes in Kosovo than Serbs. Something is
tremendously wrong with that fact.

Secondly, no court can rewrite history or artificially
impose moral parity. The oppressor and the oppressed
are clearly defined in our recent tragic history.

Thirdly, people in Kosovo want justice. They want
justice for all of the victims, regardless of their ethnicity.
The sentiment has been displayed most powerfully in
various forms over the past few weeks. As a point of
reference, 80 members of Parliament voted to establish
the special court. Forty-three signatures to have a
debate about that court in the Parliament cannot, and
will not, undo that.

However, while we are on the topic of war crimes,
let me talk about crimes that the special court will not
be dealing with nor, for that matter, will any other court.
Take the sthk massacre, the trial which completely
fell apart in Serbia, despite the public testimony
of Serbian paramilitary Zoran Raskovic' about the
killing of Albanians by paramilitary units, which was
abundantly reported by the media. Or, consider the
execution of the Bytyqi brothers, for which another
witness came forward to testify just last week. Once
again, no measures were taken by the Serbian justice
system. Until convicted war criminals cease to be
praised and promoted, the feeling of impunity is here
to stay.

We are pleased that INTERPOL has decided to
remove Mr. Ramush Haradinaj and Hashim Thaci from
its warrant list. That is a clear signal that INTERPOL
will no longer allow Serbia to misuse its red notices for
political gains. For the Council's information, I note that
the Serbian justice system has accused and convicted
world leaders such as Bill Clinton, Tony Blair, Jacques
Chirac and most of the European Union Heads of State.

There is no doubt that Kosovo has made progress
and taken major steps forward. We just concluded
a nearly flawless electoral process. Every day, the
Kosovar people are demanding more accountability
from their elected representatives. According to the
World Bank, Kosovo's gross domestic product growth
rate in 2017 was 4.4 per cent - the highest figure
reported in the region.

Needless to say, Kosovo is not a paradise, and many
challenges still linger. Yet for every challenge, for every
single institutional shortcoming, there is a success
story - a role model citizen that defies the odds and
pushes the boundaries. In a country where there is a lot
left to be done to improve the quality of education, where
we still have overcrowded classrooms and overworked
teachers, we also have young girls like Doruntina
Sylejmani, who won medals at the International Math
Olympiad. Today Doruntina is studying at Princeton,
with a full scholarship, and dreams of coming back to
help her country.

At a time of disbelief and doubt over whether the
justice system is worth fighting for, Shyhrete Berisha,
who witnessed the brutal execution of her husband and
her four children during the war in 1999, was exposed
to yet another form of injustice. She had to battle for
18 long years just to get back the keys to her own
house - the house in which she lived with her husband
and children. Throughout those 18 years, Shyhrete did

not lose faith. She never gave up, and neither must we.
We owe it to Shyhrete and to the many others who share
similar experiences to work as hard as we possibly
can to improve our justice system and make sure that
everyone is equal in the eyes of the law.

Today survivors of sexual violence during the war
in Kosovo have a legally regulated status and can benefit
from pensions because of women like Kadire Tahiraj.
For years, this group of survivors of painful wartime
violence was completely neglected by institutions and
stigmatized by society. While the rest of us were either
hiding away from the truth or being both blind and deaf
to it, Kadire was diligently working with the survivors,
offering them all she could ~ care, medicine, shelter,
at times perhaps even just a shoulder to cry on. Kadire
fought tirelessly and kept her resolve even when all the
odds were stacked against her. Finally, 18 years after
the war, the Government has allocated the necessary
funds to implement programmes for these survivors.

It is because of women like Fahrije Hoti, that Krusha,
a village in south-western Kosovo, is no longer known
only for its tragic past. A young widow herself, living
in a village where most of the adult male population
was eradicated during the war, Fahrije resolved that the
best way to honour the fallen was by building a better
life for the ones that remain. She started by working her
patch of land and, with little to no institutional support,
managed to not only sustain herself, but also to help
organize other women to cultivate their fields and open
small farms and businesses. Today their products are
customer favourites in stores across our country.

Although Kosovo remains the only country in
Europe without visa liberalization, our talented youth
transcend borders and inspire their peers throughout
the European continent and beyond. Just last month,
Forbes published its famous 30 Under 30 List. Three
amazing Kosovar women - Blerta, Dafina and
Bilna - made us all proud by appearing on them.
These young ladies are working hard to increase the
transparency and accountability of the Government by
utilizing digital platforms and novel technology. They
understand, better than most, that European integration
is an internal dynamic, that it is, first and foremost,
about building and applying standards of transparency
at home. We are all proud of these young women, and I
am sure that we will be hearing more from them.

Let us not forget the one and only Majlinda
Kelmendi - our golden pride, our golden champion.
While Kosovo was struggling to become a member of
the Olympic Committee, Majlinda often had to practice
in halls without electricity or heat. Nevertheless, she
turned down the millions that were offered to her to
compete under a different flag. She patiently waited for
her chance to represent Kosovo. And when she finally
got the opportunity to compete in Rio de Janeiro,
Majlinda made us all proud by winning a gold medal.
In doing so, she also taught us a lesson, a lesson of
integrity, perseverance and love for one's country.

Although Kosovo has many obstacles to overcome,
it is these women who make me hopeful. Whenever we
come up short, whenever we fail to deliver, courageous
women like them are there to lift us up. Time and again
they empower us by inspiring us. They challenge power
and authority; they fight for justice and social norms.
They encourage us to dream and to dare.

We are meeting today one day after the European
Union published its strategy for the Western Balkans.
While we in Kosovo believe that the language used to
describe Kosovo's path forward should have been more
specific, perhaps more concrete, there is absolutely
no doubt as to where the future lies. Moreover, what
is made very clear by this strategy is that Kosovo
and Serbia must normalize relations and enter into a
legally binding agreement. Now more than ever, it is
crystal-clear that the new status quo and another frozen
conflict do not represent normalization. Normalization
can be achieved only through the recognition ofKosovo,
and the sooner Serbia recognizes Kosovo, the better it
will be for the entire region.

As I have stated numerous times, we in Kosovo
believe that the appropriate platform and venue
for dialogue is in Brussels. I want to reaffirm our
commitment to the dialogue and to the implementation
of every single agreement reached in Brussels.
However, the United Nations has no role in this
process. The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo is neither a peacekeeping mission
nor an administrative mission. The United Nations may
choose to maintain an expensive mission in Kosovo, but
we believe that its taxpayers' money could be put to
much better use.

Women such as Fahrije, Kadire, Doruntina,
Majlinda and many more do not have time for debates
such as this one. While we meet here every three
months to repeat the same old stories, they are out
there changing the world, fighting for a better, brighter
future for their families, their country and the global
community. They do not have time to listen to us argue
over whether the sky is blue. They know that my speech
here today will not change anything, but their actions
will. They are aware that Kosovo's independence
is an irreversible fact, as confirmed by the ruling of
the International Court of Justice. But they also know
that it is in our power to create a more prosperous
Kosovo to leave behind for the next generations, so that
when we celebrate the next decades and centuries of
independence, there will be a lot more to be proud of.

