Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank you
once again, Mr. President, for your leadership of the
Council at this meeting.

We are of course as frustrated as the majority of
the members around this table, given another collective
failure on the part of the Council to work together
to extend the mandate of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism. I come from a country that
has never used chemical weapons and a region that
is in the process of successfully settling its very last
armed conflict, that is free of nuclear weapons and that
I believe has repeatedly demonstrated its respect for
international law and the United Nations.

The representative of the United States has said here
in this Chamber that Bolivia has shown a lack of respect
for the Council and has not acted transparently. We
categorically reject those claims. They are absolutely
unacceptable and untrue. Bolivia will not apologize for
using the provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council. We supported the draft resolution submitted
by Russia at the outset of the meeting (S/2017/933)
and it became clear that we were going to have to have
recourse to the provisional rules of procedure. In doing
so, a delegation that enjoys the same rights as every
other delegation cannot be accused of exhibiting a lack
of transparency or of not showing respect for the other
members of the Security Council. That is unacceptable.

If we are talking about transparency and a lack of
respect for the Security Council, perhaps we should
recall the closed consultations held on 7 April, at which
we all worked to approve a draft resolution on the
situation in Syria. Was it out of a lack of respect for
the Security Council or a lack of transparency that, the
whole time that we were trying to find a way out of that
situation, the United States was planning an air strike
on a military base in Syria, in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations? That was an unacceptable unilateral
action. Bolivia categorically rejects those accusations.
In any case, Bolivia will continue to work to extend
the mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism. We
hope that we can leave behind this media circus where
we resort to finger-pointing at one another for failures
of responsibility. We hope that we can offer a glimmer
of hope to the victims of chemical-weapon attacks, not
just in Syria but all over the world, and I reiterate my
hope that future negotiations will succeed in extending
the mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism.

