Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti: I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely meeting and for inviting me
to brief the Security Council in my capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. I welcome the presence of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation and
Communities of Guinea-Bissau, His Excellency
Mr. Mamadu Saliu Djalo Pires, and of the Minister of
External Relations of Angola and Chair of the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP),
His Excellency Mr. Georges Chikoti. I also welcome
Ms. Salamatu Souleiman, Commissioner for Political
Affairs, Peace and Security of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, for his briefing and for his
valuable work as Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.

From the outset, the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission has strongly
condemned the forcible seizure of power from the
legitimate Government of Guinea-Bissau. It is worth
noting that the international community also
condemned the coup d'etat in unison. The message was
clear - the constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau must
be restored and all those who are illegally detained
must be released as a matter of urgency. We believe
that the unity of all international partners of Guinea-
Bissau behind such a strong message will contribute to
the resumption of the democratic process and to
convincing the perpetrators of the coup d'etat to
withdraw to the barracks, allowing for the return of
civilian rule.

By condemning the coup d'etat, we also made it
clear that all national stakeholders should resolve their
disputes through political dialogue, never by the use of
force. The first step to further national reconciliation in
Guinea-Bissau should be respect for the rule of law and
the restoration of the constitutional order. The active
engagement and coordination of the various international
partners, especially regional organizations, should be
sustained. The recent release of the Interim President
and the Prime Minister is an important development,
and should be seen as an opportunity to maintain the
momentum and lead to the restoration of the rule of
law.

At this juncture, it is of the utmost importance
that we continue to coordinate our efforts and speak
with a single voice, underscoring that the international
community will not, under any circumstances, tolerate
the unconstitutional seizure of power. The United
Nations, the African Union, the CPLP and ECOWAS
should continue to cooperate and mutually reinforce
each other's efforts. We commend the notable role of
regional organizations in discussing solutions to the
crisis and in underlining that the overthrow of a
democratic Government shall not be accepted by those
committed to peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau.
Now it is time to seek convergence and align our
actions with the purpose of rendering them as effective
as possible.

The Peacebuilding Commission is committed to
helping Guinea-Bissau to implement the necessary
reforms to achieve political stability and further its
social and economic development. As I had the
opportunity to stress in my previous statements before
the Council, tangible results were obtained in the fields
of institution-building, economic recovery and
financial management. Let me also reiterate that the

country was in the process of conducting democratic
elections and that the first round had a significant
turnout and was considered credible and transparent by
international observers. The coup d'etat represented a
serious blow to the democratic will of the people of
Guinea-Bissau.

I refer once and again to those gains to emphasize
that the engagement of the United Nations and of the
Peacebuilding Commission with Guinea-Bissau was
paying off. Despite all of the difficulties of a country
affected by years of conflict, Guinea-Bissau had
started, with the cooperation of the international
community, to create a positive trend that would
establish a virtuous cycle of political stability and
economic development.

I therefore echo the call made by Special
Representative Mutaboba that all international
partners - the United Nations, the African Union,
ECOWAS, the CPLP and the European Union - must
stand united in their efforts to assist Guinea-Bissau at
today's critical juncture. To maintain the firm
engagement of the international community with
Guinea-Bissau, it is crucial that the constitutional order
be restored. I reaffirm that the Guinea-Bissau country-
specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission is ready to continue to engage in those
efforts.

