The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Chad, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ahmat
Ibrahim (Chad) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of members to
document S/2006/256, which contains a letter dated
13 April 2006 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council transmitting a letter
of the same date from the Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs and African Integration of Chad.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the
Secretary-General's briefing on 18 April 2006 on
Chad/Sudan relations and endorses his deep
concerns over the political and security situation
and the instability along Chad's borders with the
Sudan, as well as over the possible spillover
effects of these crises on neighbouring countries
and the entire region. The Security Council
encourages the Secretary-General to continue his
consultations with relevant parties, in particular
the African Union, on the matter and requests
him to closely follow the situation and continue
to keep the Security Council informed.

"The Security Council welcomes the fact-
finding mission dispatched by the African Union
in Chad and looks forward to its conclusions.

"The Security Council fully endorses the
statement by the African Union Peace and
Security Council of 13 April 2006 in which it
strongly condemned the rebel attacks against
N'Djamena and the eastern town of Adre and
reiterates that any attempt to seize power by
force, pursuant to the 1999 Algiers Declaration of
the Organization of African Unity, would be
regarded as unacceptable.

"The Security Council calls for political
dialogue and a negotiated solution to the
continuing crisis within Chad.

"The Security Council also reaffirms the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Chad and of the Sudan, as well as of all States
in the region, and calls on all Members to refrain
in their international relations from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State, or in any
other manner inconsistent with the purposes of
the United Nations.

"The Security Council calls upon on States
in the region to cooperate in ensuring their
common stability.

"The Security Council notes with deep
concern the deteriorating relations between Chad
and the Sudan and urges the Governments of the
two countries to abide by their obligations under
the 8 February 2006 Tripoli Agreement and to
urgently start implementing the confidence-
building measures which have been voluntarily
agreed upon. Both the Sudan and Chad must
refrain from any actions that violate the border.

"The Security Council is concerned about
the situation of the refugees from the Darfur
region of the Sudan and from the Central African
Republic, as well as the situation of the thousands
of internally displaced persons in Chad. It
therefore notes the decision by the Government
of Chad not to expel the Sudanese refugees and
urges the Government of Chad to continue
supporting the efforts of humanitarian and relief
agencies in the country in accordance with
international principles governing the protection

of refugees. The Security Council further This statement will be issued as a document of
reaffirms the right of all displaced persons who the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2006/19.
wish to do so to return to their homes. It reminds
all Governments in the region of their obligation
to respect international humanitarian law. In this
regard, the Security Council calls on donor
countries to provide additional resources to The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
respond to the emergency humanitarian situation
in both the Sudan and Chad."

