Mr. Kubis (Slovakia): I would like to join the
previous speakers in thanking you, Madam President,
for convening the meeting. Today's meeting is perhaps
symbolically taking place on the International Day of
Peace. As the recent events in Lebanon have proved to
all of us, once again, there is indeed no solution based
on the use of force, and there is no military solution to
the many challenges and problems of the Middle East
region, with the Israeli-Palestinian dispute at its core.

The only way to achieve a comprehensive and
lasting settlement to the Arab-Israeli conflict in
general, and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in
particular, is through peaceful negotiations and full
implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions and the principles defined by the Quartet.
In that regard, we welcome yesterday's statement by
the Quartet in which it reaffirms its commitment to the
road map.

The recent tragic conflict in Lebanon could have
been avoided if all relevant Security Council
resolutions had been implemented. The conflict again
had an unacceptably high price and caused a lot of
suffering and destruction on both sides. We believe that
resolution 1701 (2006), which we co-sponsored,
provides an important basis for starting the process
towards a comprehensive and lasting settlement to the
Lebanese crisis. We consider that resolution to be the
first step in fully and urgently addressing all causes
that have led to the crisis. In order for the entire
process to be successful, full implementation of that
resolution is needed. All concerned and relevant parties
must fully respect and comply with it.

We call on all relevant parties in Lebanon to
secure the release of the kidnapped Israeli soldiers. We
also agree that it is necessary to address the problem of
Lebanese prisoners. Those two issues, however, must
not be linked, and the release of the Israeli soldiers
must be immediate and unconditional.
The Lebanese Government has to regain full
authority and control over its whole territory in order
to prevent and stop any activities of domestic and
foreign militias. Those militias must be disarmed and
disbanded expeditiously to ensure that there will be no
weapons or authority in Lebanon other than that of the
Lebanese State.

Effective measures must be undertaken on the
borders of Lebanon in order to prevent the flow of
illegal weapons. The arms embargo must be fully
observed by all relevant parties. The cooperation of the
Government of Syria in that regard is also
indispensable and is requested. We also hope the issue
of the delineation of the border between Syria and
Lebanon, including the Sheba'a farms, will be solved
soon.

I take this opportunity to reaffirm our support for
a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on all relevant
Security Council resolutions, negotiations between the
two sides and the agreements reached. We are
convinced that the Quartet still represents the most
appropriate mechanism for advancing the peace
process and that the road map, in a possibly updated
form reflecting the recent developments on the ground,
represents the most efficient plan for achieving a
lasting peace settlement to the conflict.

We welcome the ongoing efforts of Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas to form a Government of
national unity. We hope and expect that such a
Government will be committed to the Quartet
principles and that its political platform will facilitate
an early engagement, as well as the continuation of
dialogue aimed at a solution to the Middle East
conflict. We also hope, and reiterate our call, for an
immediate end to violence by Palestinian factions and
the release of the abducted Israeli soldier.

We remain deeply concerned about the economic
and humanitarian situation in the West Bank and Gaza.
In this regard, we welcome the continuation and
expansion of the temporary international mechanism,
which will enable the channelling of resources and the
delivery of assistance directly to the Palestinian
people, and thereby address their urgent humanitarian
and financial needs. To this end, we urge Israel to
resume transfers of withheld Palestinian tax and
customs revenues, and encourage it to carry out this
transfer via the temporary international mechanism. We
also call for the full implementation of the Agreement
on Movement and Access and for the reopening of the
Rafah and all other border crossings, which must
remain open.

At the same time, we expect the Israeli
Government to continue its commitment to peace in the
Middle East, based on principles laid out in the road
map, and to refrain from such steps and activities as
might be contradictory to the principles of international
law. In this context, we repeat our call for the
immediate release of Palestinian ministers and
legislators in Israeli custody and for a freeze on all
settlement activities.

In conclusion, I reiterate our belief that there
indeed exists a window of opportunity to reinvigorate
the peace process. That opportunity should be seized
by all concerned parties through concrete and
immediate action. In this regard, we welcome the
prospect of a meeting between Israeli Prime Minister
Ehud Olmert and Palestinian President Mahmoud
Abbas in the near future with a view to relaunching
mutual negotiations. We encourage such continuous
engagements among all parties to the conflict.

