Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): It gives me sincere pleasure to welcome
you, Sir, First Deputy Foreign Minister of the Czech
Republic, as President of today's meeting of the Security
Council.

The Russian delegation wishes also to convey its
profound condolences to the United States on the tragic
loss in Oklahoma City of the lives of Americans,
including children, who fell victim to a horrific terrorist
act. This senselessly cruel and barbarous crime
demonstrates yet again the need for the most resolute
joint efforts by the international community to suppress
the threat posed by extremism and terrorism, which has
become global in scale.

Russia will be unable to support the draft resolution
before the Council, because, in our view, it is not
consistent with the principle of positive and negative
incentives previously agreed in the Contact Group and in
the Security Council; according to the principle, those that

 

support the peace plan would be encouraged while pressure
would be exerted on those that reject it. That principle was
intended to be an effective tool in the effort to reach a
peaceful settlement. It might be appropriate today, though,
to ask just how effectively that tool is being used.

I would, in that connection, recall the background to
this issue. In August last year, the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia of its own free will decided
to close its border with Bosnia and Herzegovina to all
except humanitarian goods. The Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia then requested the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia (ICFY) to send an
international Mission to the border to assist in implementing
that decision. In both instances, the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia acted on its own initiative,
thereby demonstrating its readiness to cooperate actively
with the international community in the efforts to achieve
a peaceful settlement, including through the exertion of
serious pressure on the Bosnian Serb leadership to change
its unconstructive position.

This was a courageous and far from easy step, but
despite the inevitable attendant problems the Government
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has held firm over
implementing its decision. The Security Council responded
by adopting resolution 943 (1994), partially suspending
restrictions on commercial flights, the ferry service between
Bar and Bari and cultural and sporting exchanges. We
should honestly recognize that this response was not
entirely adequate or commensurate with the significance of
Belgrade's closure of the border: essentially, these were
symbolic measures that did not really ease the burden of
economic and trade sanctions.

Since that time, and as corroborated by numerous
reports of the Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of
the ICFY, including the latest report - annexed to
document S/1995/302 of 13 April - the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has stuck strictly to its
decision. Its cooperation with the ICFY Mission remains
very good and is steadily improving as experience in
working together is acquired. Problems that arise are
resolved speedily and constructively. Of course, no
Government can seal its borders 100 per cent, so there are
isolated cases of smuggling and other situations. But the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as
clearly indicated in the reports from the ICFY, is actively
facilitating their resolution.

Many are alarmed by the reports of cross-border
helicopter flights; here, as we all know, much remains
uncertain and requires further investigation. In any case,
the border has been substantially closed for nine months,
and this has been a major factor on the side of the earliest
possible achievement of a political settlement to the crisis.
The Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
has shown itself to be a serious partner of the Contact
Group and of the entire international community in the
quest for peace.

Under these circumstances, the Council would seem
to have had every justification for adopting further
positive stimuli, especially since it stated its resolve as
early as resolution 943 (1994) to keep the situation under
close review and to consider further steps to ease
sanctions. As a minimum, it should long ago have made
the partial suspension of sanctions indefinite, as
repeatedly proposed by the Russian Federation. This time,
we presented for the Council's consideration our own
draft resolution, based on resolution 970 (1995); actually,
our draft set out the minimum the Security Council could
do to further encourage the constructive line Belgrade is
taking.

Unfortunately, all our proposals have gone unheeded.
Instead, with each regular extension of the partial
suspension of sanctions, the Security Council has been
inclined to make yet more fresh demands on the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. This trend is reflected in today's
draft resolution, too, which contains many alarming
innovations - this despite the views of the Co-Chairmen
of the Steering Committee of the ICFY, on whose
conclusions doubts are in essence being cast without any
convincing grounds whatever for so doing. We reaffirm
our firm support for the activities of the Co-Chairmen and
of the ICFY Mission, and reject attempts to disparage
them.

For example, the draft resolution attempts to link the
voluntary decision by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
to close its border with Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
situation on its border with Croatia. This is a serious step
towards changing the mandate of the ICFY Mission, and
it is being proposed without consulting Belgrade. It is
beyond our understanding why it was necessary to cut
back the draft resolution's duration to 75 days when a
mechanism, which is still operational was agreed upon in
September last year that provides for the immediate
reimposition of full sanctions should the Government of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia fail to implement its
decision to close the border.
 

One could cite a whole range of other provisions that
are puzzling, to put it mildly. For example, paragraph 2 in
essence proposes to establish harsh restrictions on the
volume of fuel in the tanks of Yugoslav and other aircraft.
Applying this requirement may create serious and
unwarranted difficulties for permitted flights, not to mention
that the Security Council's desire to manage the technical
details of the amounts of fuel in fuel tanks would appear
odd, to say the least. The same paragraph, incidentally, ole
jure introduces additional restrictions on the supply of
aviation fuel to Belgrade, even though resolution 943
(1994) suspended the restrictions on the provisions of the
goods and services needed for international air links with
Belgrade.

The new draft resolution also calls on the Government
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to sever
telecommunication links with the Bosnian Serbs. And yet
the Security Council itself, in resolution 942 (1994),
unequivocally excluded telecommunications from the scope
of application of the sanctions. We find it difficult to grasp
the logic here.

All these measures not only contradict the conclusions
of the Co-Chairmen, but in essence reflect yet another
attempt to introduce a double standard into the work of the
Council. In this instance, the Security Council is beginning
to get into unwarranted micromanagement, whereas in other
instances it closes its eyes to flagrant violations of its own
decisions, as has long been happening with respect to the
embargo on arms shipments to the republics of the former
Yugoslavia.

As a result, on thorough reading the draft resolution
begs the following question: can it be considered a positive
stimulus and if so, then why have the views of the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, whose
policy, in the final analysis, has made it possible to
establish control over the border, not been taken into
account? We have serious doubts as to whether this draft is
intended to encourage those who support the Contact Group
peace plan. Rather, what is involved is in principle a new
approach, that may have very undesirable consequences. It
may very well hand a trump card - or may even have
already handed it - to those who are urging the Bosnian
Serbs not to accept the peace plan, and to prosecute the war
on to victory. We are in any event convinced that that
approach does not enhance the Council's options in its
efforts to achieve a political settlement. The sad thing is
that this is taking place right at this present critical moment,
when we are all justifiably feeling profound alarm over the
future course of events in the region of the former
Yugoslavia.
We would like to hope that in future the Security
Council will be able to offer a more responsible political
approach in its decisions guided not by the considerations
of the moment, but by the interests of achieving a
comprehensive, lasting and truly just settlement in the
former Yugoslavia.

