Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Like previous speakers, we would like to
thank Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Vieira de Mello for the
very instructive briefings that they just presented on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - one on the general situation with regard to
peace and security and on the activities of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), and the other on the
humanitarian situation.

My delegation is gravely concerned at the
continuing deterioration of the situation in the north-
east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
particularly in the Ituri region. Despite the power-
sharing agreement concluded in Pretoria on 17
December 2002 among the various Congolese parties,
fighting has continued among various rebel movements
and armed groups. Those clashes have claimed many
victims, especially among civilians, and have caused
major population movements. Many Congolese have
thus left their homes to gather in camps, and others are
refugees in neighbouring countries.

Today, the population of Ituri is experiencing a
real tragedy, faced as it is with massive human rights
violations. There has been talk of massacres and of
rape on a major scale; there has been talk of pillaging
and of ethnic cleansing. The report mentions certain
atrocious practices that are difficult to name or even to
imagine today. This situation is unacceptable, and those
who are found guilty of such acts must answer for
them. Impunity is unimaginable; it is unthinkable. My
delegation therefore welcomes measures that have been
taken to bring to justice some of the culprits. This
process must be continued and strengthened so that
justice can be done for the victims of these
unspeakable acts.

The precariousness of the situation of refugees
and of displaced persons is particularly accentuated by
the difficulties experienced by humanitarian
organizations in reaching those populations because of
the lack of infrastructure, and particularly because of
the climate of insecurity. We call upon the international
community to intensify its efforts to come to the
assistance of these populations in distress.

Similar efforts must be undertaken for the
population of the region of Yumbi, in the west of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which fell victim
to a violent tornado on 2 February that claimed many
victims and caused severe physical damage. Although
the estimate of casualties has been revised downwards,
the populations of the region still have an acute need
for urgent assistance from the international community.

Finally, my delegation would like to stress the
need for the various protagonists of the Congolese
tragedy to respect the commitments that they have
undertaken. In that way, they will enable the country to
find peace and prosperity for its populations and for all
in the Great Lakes region. In this respect, we welcome
the recent meeting at Dar es Salaam between President
Joseph Kabila and Yoweri Museveni and the
commitments they undertook on that occasion to
promptly set up the commission on the pacification of
Ituri and to create a standing mechanism for
consultation that will enable them to consult on a
regular basis in order to maintain a climate of
confidence and peace between their countries.

Previous speakers have already raised several
other questions my delegation wished to ask. However,
I would like to ask High Commissioner Vieira de Mello
for clarification about measures which the international
community might take to ensure that those responsible
for the atrocities committed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will not go unpunished.
Naturally, we support the idea of creating an
international commission of inquiry. However, we
would like to know the views of the High
Commissioner on taking the matter to the International
Criminal Court or creating a special jurisdiction to
investigate these mass violations of human rights.

Mr. Vieira de Mello shared with us elements of
his detailed report on the violations of human rights in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Cameroon
would like the Council to receive that report in order to
have a more in-depth review.

