Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Herve' Ladsous, for
his briefing on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/824) and an update on the most recent
developments in the Central African Republic. I also
thank Mr. Laassel for his briefing of the report of the
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission.
Uruguay acknowledges that the Central African
Republic took a decisive step this year with a
democratically elected President taking up office,
the formation of an inclusive Government and the
setting up of a National Assembly, among other
important milestones. Those achievements must now
be consolidated by addressing the root causes of the
crisis. To that end, we encourage the new President and
his Government to take specific, visible measures to
achieve national reconciliation. In that regard, Uruguay
welcomes the various reforms being implemented by
the current Government, with the support of United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
and other international partners. Such reforms are being
implemented in the defence, security andjustice sectors,
as well as in the national disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration programme. Nonetheless,
in spite ofthe progress being made, the Central African
Republic continues to face monumental challenges, in
particular with regard to the humanitarian and security
situations.

Uruguay remains concerned about the country's
fragile humanitarian situation, as more than
2.3 million people - virtually half of the country's
population - remains dependent upon humanitarian
assistance. It is also estimated that there are more
than 450,000 refugees in neighbouring countries and
approximately 380,000 internally displaced. In that
regard, we trust that national authorities, with the
support of the humanitarian community, MINUSCA and
other international partners, will continue their efforts
to ease the situation and meet the basic humanitarian
needs of the population.

With regard to the security situation, increasing
tensions among communities and clashes among armed
groups are a source of concern. In addition, crime and
serious human rights abuses by armed groups continue
to pose a threat to civilians. In that respect, Uruguay
condemns the incidents sparked by the murder of a
Central African Republic army officer, on Tuesday
4 October, in the capital of Bangui, which have, to date,
led to the death of, at least, ll civilians. To end the
insecurity and human rights violations, it is critical
to combat impunity. In that regard, it should be noted
that the Government is committed to selecting and
appointing magistrates in order to set up the Special
Criminal Court before the end of the year, which would
help to put an end to impunity.

In conclusion, Uruguay highlights the efforts made
by the Government of the Central African Republic,
which, with the support of the United Nations, the World
Bank and the European Union, is making progress on
a national strategy to restore and rebuild peace, whose
outcome document could be used as an instrument
to mobilize resources during the Donors Conference
scheduled to be held in Brussels on 17 November.

