Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank Special Representative Fall and Director
Ghelani for their briefings today. Their work is vital to
a region facing a wide range of political, economic and
social challenges, particularly in Cameroon, on which I
will focus my remarks.

The security and humanitarian conditions in
Cameroon's North-West and South-West regions have
significantly deteriorated since the previous briefing to
the Security Council on the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), held in June (see S/PV.8284). Violence continues to escalate, obstructing
vital humanitarian aid delivery to over 430,000
internally displaced persons and blocking health and
education services to rural children.

October was the most violent month on record in
Cameroon in recent years. Judging from anecdotal
reports, we fear that November will surpass October
as the bloodiest month on record. We do not want to
see that horrible trend continue again in December. The
violence must stop now. Violence between Government
and Anglophone separatists has resulted in killings
and abductions of civilians, including a United States
missionary, who was killed on 30 October.

Faced with mounting insecurity, tens of thousands
of Cameroonians have fled to neighbouring Nigeria, as
we have heard, while hundreds of thousands have been
internally displaced and need humanitarian assistance.
The stakes in Cameroon are too high for that crisis to
continue unaddressed. Cameroon remains an essential
security partner in the fight against Boko Haram and
the Islamic State in West Africa, including as a member
of the Multinational Joint Task Force. The continuing
crisis threatens to detract from our mutual security
objectives in the Lake Chad basin.

The United States calls for an immediate and broad-
based reconciliatory dialogue, without preconditions,
between the Government of Cameroon and separatists
in the North-West and South-West regions. We urge all
sides to forswear violence, restore peace and resolve
their grievances through political dialogue. We note
that in his inaugural address on 6 November President
Biya expressed confidence that "there is an honourable
way out in everyone's interest". We encourage President
Biya to make good on his commitment to accelerate the
decentralization process and adopt the recommendations
of the Cameroonian National Commission for the
Promotion of Bilingualism and Multiculturalism.

The creation of a Government-led humanitarian
assistance coordination centre is a promising
development. However, the Government has done little
to address concerns over its own lack of respect for the
humanitarian principles of neutrality and impartiality
and the guarantees of unhindered access to conflict-
affected populations. We urge the Government of
Cameroon to prioritize respect for humanitarian
principles and ensure unobstructed access for United
Nations agencies and humanitarian non-governmental
organizations assisting conflict-affected populations.

The United States believes that UNOCA, through
the good offices of Special Representative Fall, could
provide technical assistance and mediation support
to facilitate a broad-based reconciliatory dialogue
without preconditions. We hope that the Economic
Community of Central African States, the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union (AU) and the AU
Commission will enhance their efforts to support the
peace process. We encourage them to coordinate with
UNOCA in that effort.

A peaceful and stable Cameroon is critical to
regional stability in Central Africa, and both deserves
and requires the continued and close attention of the
Council. As noted by our Assistant Secretary of State for
African Affairs last week, the last thing we need, given
the challenges in the region, is for a disproportionate
response by security forces to result in the growing
radicalization and hardening of separatist groups.

In the presidential statement that we adopted in
August (S/PRST/2018/17) the Security Council called
for a strategic review of UNOCA's mandate by 1 August
2019. We look forward to further discussions in the
coming months to make sure that UNOCA's mandate
is appropriately focused on the most pressing political
challenges in the Central African region and that they
are well-coordinated with the four United Nations
missions operating in the same geographic area, so as
to ensure that our efforts have maximum impact and
maximum efficiency.

