Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this new opportunity to present a
briefing to the Security Council on the situation in
Darfur and the activities of African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

The special report (see 8/2016/510) ofthe Secretary-
General and of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission presents the results of the Darfur joint
assessment mission by the African Union and the
United Nations of the situation in Darfur and the steps
to be taken to implement the UNAMID mandate, as
well as the operational effectiveness of the military
and police components of the mission. I will present
the conclusions and recommendations that were the
outcome of the joint assessment and the major events
that have taken place since it was published, on 8 June.

The nature of the conflict in Darfur remains
unchanged since the renewal of the mandate of the
mission, for many reasons.

First, little progress has been made in finding
a viable political solution to the conflict. The
Government of the Sudan and the non-signatory armed
movements have yet to reach consensus with regard
to the role of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
in the negotiation process led by the piece High-level
Implementation Panel of the African Union. On 30 and
31 May in Doha, UNAMID and the Government of
Qatar consulted with the Justice and Equality Movement
and the Sudan Liberation Army (SLA) to help achieve
a rapprochement of the positions of the two parties. It
is regrettable that the Abdul Wahid faction was absent
from the negotiating table, and it which should be urged
to engage constructively in achieving consensus. For
now, the United Nations and the African Union have
called on the Sudanese opposition to follow the road
map proposed by the High-level Panel and signed by the
Sudanese Government in April. If all stakeholders were
to abide by the road map, that would undoubtedly lead
to significant progress in the peace process, thereby
opening the way for progress with regard to ceasefire
negotiations in South Kordofan and Blue Nile states, the
political process in Darfur and the national dialogue.

Secondly, there is the element of intercommunal
violence, which are emanating from disputes over
access to land, water and grazing areas, remains a
major cause of insecurity in Darfur. That communal
violence has also been exacerbated by the politicization
of disputes, the degree to which communities are being
armed, inadequate efforts - it must be said - to restore
the rule of law, and the recurrent impunity enjoyed by
the perpetrators of acts of violence. There have been
four major incidents since January between Arab tribes
and their neighbours - the Gimir and Masalit - in
West Darfur, triggered by incidents of cattle rustling.
On 22 May, for example, a member of an Arab tribe
and a soldier of the Sudanese army were killed in
Azerni, east of E1 Geneina, following the escalation
of a dispute on the non-payment for services rendered,
which escalated into an attack on a mosque in which six
Masalit civilians were killed.

(spoke in English)

In the face of such violence, the Government,
particularly at the State level, has taken measures to
restore security by deploying additional forces to hot
spots, enhancing mediation efforts, including between
farmers and nomads, and planning a broad civilian
disarmament campaign. Despite such efforts, however,
the violence persists, as its underlying causes, which
are inherently linked to those of the broader Darfur
conflict, are yet to be addressed.
Thirdly, while direct clashes between the
Government and the armed movement forces have
subsided as a whole, the fighting with the Sudan
Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction in Jebel Marra,
which rejects any negotiations with the Government,
has continued. In mid-January, the Government
launched an aerial and ground offensive in parts of
Central, North and South Darfur. The aim of that was to
dislodge the SLA/Abdul Wahid from its strongholds in
the mountainous area, which the latter resisted through
asymmetric warfare and the high mobility of its forces.

While the Government stated in April that the
rebellion had ended with the capture of Sorrong in
Central Darfur, reports of clashes have continued,
including indiscriminate attacks against the civilian
population, which UNAMID could not verify due to a
lack of access. Most recently, on 30 May, Abdul Wahid
forces reportedly attacked the Sudanese armed forces
positions east of Nertiti, in Guthrum in Central Darfur.
Ground fighting and aerial bombardments followed,
and continued until 5 June, with reports of casualties
on both sides, as well as among civilians.

As of today, while 2.6 million people remain
displaced across Darfur, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs has reported 80,000 verified
internally displaced persons (IDPs) since the resumption
of fighting in the Jebel Marra area in mid-January.
It has also received reports of as many as 127,000
additional displaced persons, but that number has not
been verified, due to the lack of humanitarian access,
particularly in Central Darfur. Furthermore, a total of
1.6 million civilians continue to reside in the region
in some 60 camps for internally displaced persons.
Although some of those displaced have returned to
their homes, many have chosen to remain in camps or
in urban areas. By the way, IDPs have largely voiced
their rejection of the Government's plans to implement
a voluntary process to end displacement by 2017. They
cited for that the absence of security, stability, justice,
access to basic services, compensation and issues with
their land rights.

With respect to relations with the Government of
the Sudan, UNAMID continued to face considerable
challenges that impeded the implementation of its
mandate, including denials of access and freedom of
movement, particularly, as I already noted, to conflict
areas such as Jebel Marra. Denials and delays in
the issuance of visas and the clearance of shipment
containers at Port Sudan have also continued. Delays
in the clearance of military and police equipment, food
rations and sustainment supplies remain a significant
obstacle in that context. The African Union and
United Nations, with the support of Security Council
members, have consistently engaged the Government
of the Sudan on those matters. At the latest tripartite
meeting, held in Khartoum on 23 May, the Government
reiterated its commitment to continue working with
UNAMID on resolving those issues. More recently, the
Sudanese ForeignMinister reiterated his Government's
commitment to address those challenges. We very much
hope that those assurances will result in much-needed
progress on the ground.

Further to the request of their two Councils, the
United Nations and African Union also continued their
discussions with the Government on the development
of an exit strategy for UNAMID based on the
benchmarks. The Joint Working Group met from 12 to
22 May. The Working Group, which is made up of the
three parties, visited the five states of Darfur and held
discussions in Khartoum. They agreed on a general
evaluation of the benchmarks and on recommendations
whose implementation would provide elements for a
gradual and phased exit strategy. However, the Joint
Working Group did not reach consensus on the issue of
the process leading to a possible reconfiguration of the
mission. On 23 May, during the twenty-first tripartite
meeting, which was also held in Khartoum, the three
parties endorsed the outcome of the Joint Working
Group and requested it to reconvene in four months to
review the implementation of its recommendations and
the benchmarks.

Given the current situation in Darfur, the joint
assessment mission concluded that the strategic
priorities of UNAMID and their corresponding
benchmarks remained valid. Within that framework,
the Chairperson and the Secretary-General therefore
recommended for UNAMID to focus its activities,
first, on protecting the displaced populations and,
secondly, on addressing intercommunal violence more
comprehensively.

In a situation of continuing armed conflict,
intercommunal violence and attacks against civilians,
the current security conditions in Darfur are not
conducive to a large-scale return of IDPs to their
places of origin. Any such return would have to be
voluntary, consented to, safe and accompanied by
durable solutions. Building upon its current strategy
for the protection of civilians, UNAMID would
support the work of humanitarian partners and of the
Sudanese authorities by providing protection to the
displaced and prioritizing existing resources based on a
mapping of the situation in the camps, the areas at risk
for further displacement and potential areas of return
across Darfur.

The sustainable resolution of intercommunal
violence in Darfur would require a comprehensive
political agreement that should recognize fully
and uphold the rights of both farmers and nomads,
empower local-level conflict prevention and resolution
mechanisms and that should strengthen the capacity of
the criminal justice system to maintain law and order
and ensure accountability for crimes. UNAMID needs
to continue engaging the Government of the Sudan on
the need for those goals to be achieved. In the absence
of a more long-term solution, however, UNAMID would
build on its existing activities and develop a strategy
bringing together all the relevant mission components
to address some of the most pressing sources ofviolence
through prevention and mitigation and, with the United
Nations country team, support for the resolution of the
underlying causes.

As part of the joint assessment, the African Union
and the United Nations also conducted a review of the
effectiveness of the military and police components.
The review recommended for the current number of
military and police personnel to be retained and for
the mission to take measures to enhance its overall
flexibility through the reinforcement of troops at the
team sites having greater operational significance. In
parallel, the reduction or closure of other team sites
should take place and a highly mobile reserve military
capability should be established while increasing the
field presence of police officers from within existing
capabilities.

While focusing on those issues will serve to
enhance the impact of UNAMID's conflict resolution
and protection mandated activities, their effect will
remain limited in scope in the absence of further
progress towards a comprehensive and sustainable
political solution. We therefore continue to call upon all
parties to continue efforts in good faith to achieve the
much-needed cessation of hostilities in Darfur and to
work towards ensuring a credible and inclusive national
dialogue process.

Based on the status of the UNAMID benchmarks
and pending the implementation of the recommendations
of the Joint Working Group, the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
therefore recommended for the two Councils to consider
extending the mandate of UNAMID for 12 months,
until 30 June 2017, without modification to its priorities
or adjusting its authorized troop and police ceiling.
I would note that yesterday the African Union Peace
and Security Council endorsed that recommendation.
I therefore wish to reiterate the Secretary-General's
request for the Security Council to also do so.

