Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): As an
aside, and as I have mentioned, I completed part of my
secondary education in Venezuela.

Thewillofthesovereigninademocracyismanifested
in free, open and verifiable electoral processes. As
Costa Rica has already indicated on several occasions,
the electoral process carried out in Venezuela on 20 May
2018 lacked legitimacy because it did not include the
participation of all Venezuelan political actors or the
presence of independent international observers or the
international guarantees and standards necessary for it
to be considered a democratic, free, fair and transparent
process. Costa Rica therefore reaffirms today that it
does not recognize the legitimacy of the Government
that began on 10 January.

Deprived of that democratic capacity, once again,
on 23 January, the Venezuelan people vindicated their
aspirations for peace and reconciliation. And it is for
that reason that Costa Rica has endorsed the transitional
actions taken by the Venezuelan National Assembly.
Costa Rica supports the steps taken to move towards
the holding of free, fair and transparent elections, in
accordance with international standards and in the
period provided for by the Venezuelan Constitution.

Consistent with its commitment to the promotion
of democracy and the rule of law and aware of the need
to respect human rights everywhere, in accordance
with international law, Costa Rica actively joins the
international community in calling for every effort
to restore constitutional order in Venezuela as soon
as possible and resume a path to peace, democracy
and rebuilding of its prosperity, for the benefit of its
inhabitants. We reiterate that any solution to the crisis
must come from Venezuelans themselves andbe achieved
through peaceful means and inclusive dialogue.

Costa Rica will continue to monitor developments
in Venezuela, in order to put an end to the serious
and constant violations of the human rights of the
Venezuelan population and achieve the prompt
restoration of democracy and the rule of law, as a reality
and not simply a desire.

