Mr. Obradovic' (Serbia): It is an honour and a
privilegeto speakto the Security Council, and to be doing
it for the first time only magnifies that. Before making
my statement, I would like to welcome the esteemed
Presidents and Prosecutors of the International Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the Residual
Mechanism for International Criminal Tribunals, and
to thank them for their semi-annual reports.

As a country with a major stake in the ICTY's
proceedings, Serbia has followed the Tribunal's
activities related to implementing its completion
strategy and transitioning smoothly to the Residual
Mechanism with great attention and interest. We have
taken note of all the important elements of the report
of the ICTY President (S/2015/342, annex I) and that of
its Prosecutor, and we appreciate the acknowledgement
of Serbia's important role in ensuring the successful
completion of the Tribunal's remaining trials and
appeals, as reported by the Office ofthe Prosecutor. The
ICTY has, no doubt, made important pioneering efforts
in establishing and further developing the standards
of international criminal law, combating impunity and
attempting to bring a sense ofjustice to the victims of
obnoxious atrocities. That task has not been not easy.

Over the past 15 years, Serbia has made a
significant contribution to those endeavours. It has
executed ICTY arrest warrants, including those against
its highest State and Government officials, to an
extent and in numbers never requested from any other
United Nations Member State either before or after
the establishment of the ICTY. It has provided reams
of evidence, including strictly confidential documents
and testimony of its highest officials to the ICTY and
judicial parties. Serbia has, moreover, achieved a level
of execution of requests for assistance issued by the
ICTY Trial Chambers and Prosecution that is much
more expeditious than the procedure between any two
European countries under bilateral treaties on mutual
assistance in criminal matters. That task - the task of
State cooperation - has not been easy either.

Nevertheless, the ICTY has rendered some
controversial decisions. In particular, we note with
dissatisfaction that in almost all major cases in which
the victims have been groups or individuals of Serb
ethnicity, the accused have been acquitted. Nevertheless,
the Government of the Republic of Serbia has never
stopped cooperating and has continued to fulfil its
international obligations in good faith. I can assure the
Council that this approach will be maintained and that
the Government of my country will exert its best efforts
to create a social milieu in which the legacy of the
Tribunal will be assessed objectively. Surely, time will
help too, as Mr. Brammertz suggested in his statement
to the Council at its previous meeting.

In its position on war crimes perpetrated in the
1990s, Serbia is not confined solely to the process
of cooperation with the ICTY. These crimes are
investigated and tried in my country, as reported
and welcomed by the Prosecutor. Going forward in
addressing those crimes, an action plan in line with
the European Union negotiating framework, on which
we reported in November 2014, is in the final stage
of preparation, while the Ministry of Justice has set
up a working group to draft an overarching national
strategy on war crimes, including many aspects ofpost-
conflict justice. That will be done in cooperation with
independent international experts, including the Office
of the ICTY Prosecutor, the International Commission
for Missing Persons and other relevant stakeholders.
All along, the Serbianjudicial organs have continued to
investigate and prosecute war crimes.

So far, the Serbian War Crimes Prosecutor has
indicted 175 individuals, of whom 68 have been
convicted and 32 acquitted. Another 51 accused
persons are currently on trial in 16 cases. In addition,
4 cases against 14 individuals are on appeal. The data
on the ethnic affiliations of the accused that I have
submitted to the Council for perusal and information
are illustrative of my country's justice blindness in the
field of ethnicity. Out of 175 accused individuals, 2 are
Bosniacs, 2 ethnic Croats, one ofwhom is from Croatia
and the other from Bosnia and Herzegovina, 22 are
Albanians, of whom 17 have recently been acquitted,
and 149 are ethnic Serbs. The trials in those cases are
closely monitored by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) mission in Belgrade
and several domestic non-governmental organizations,
and the rulings by Serbia in these cases have never been
second-guessed as biased or unfair to defendants of
non-Serbian nationality or ethnic origin.

However, we are also well aware that some aspects
of the relevant domestic procedures need improvement.
We have therefore read the Prosecutor's report
carefully and thank Prosecutor Brammertz and his
hard-working team for their continued assistance and
monitoring activities. In that context, I would like to
draw the Council's attention to a glaring and hardly
comprehensible absurdity. When the ICTY Prosecutor
reports to the Council that

"Serbian judicial authorities [would] need to
process a large number of war crimes cases that
[would] predominantly, but not exclusively, involve
Serbian nationals" (S/2015/342, annex 11, para. 52),

one European Union Member State called for the
cessation or limitation of the jurisdiction ofthe Serbian
judiciary for war crimes. And an action to that effect has
been brought before the European Parliament, contrary
to the main objectives of contemporary international
criminal law.

Our 2003 Law provides for Serbia's jurisdiction
over the whole territory of the former Yugoslavia,
regardless of the citizenship of perpetrators or victims.
That provision was necessitated by the fact that, even
though the territory of Serbia was not engulfed by the
armed conflicts of 1991-1995, some among the refugees
who sought and found shelter in Serbia did commit war
crimes. The Serbian War Crimes Prosecutor has rarely
had an opportunity to prosecute the citizens of other
countries. There are no war crime trials in absentia in
Serbia. Only those nationals of other countries found
on Serbian territory and against whom no charges have
been brought in their countries are tried before the
Serbian War Crimes Chamber. Finally, the February
2015 report ofthe OSCE mission to Serbia confirms that
the exercise ofjurisdiction in the case of one Croatian
citizen before the Serbian court is in accordance with
both the customary rules of international law and with
Serbian domestic law.

Yet, action continues to be taken in the European
Parliament. The new argument, proffered in a letter to
the Parliament dated 27 May, calls - in a pretty cavalier
manner, I might add - for the primacy of the principle
of the legal certainty of European citizens over the
war crimes prosecution that they may be subjected to
in Serbia. My Government is all for the legal certainty
of those citizens; yet, in the context of certainty, they
must be certain that there will be no impunity for
the crimes they have committed. War crimes, crimes
against humanity and the crime of genocide are never
under the exclusive jurisdiction of the State on whose
territory they were committed. Delicta contra juris
gentium - they are recognized as a concern of the
international community as a whole.

All countries created from the former Yugoslavia
have an obligation to investigate and prosecute those
who committed atrocities without discrimination on
the basis of the national or ethnic origin of either the
perpetrator or the victim. In that context, the serious
crimes of murder, inhuman acts and cruel treatment
committed by Croatian Government forces against
citizens ofSerb ethnicity during Operation Storm in 1995
were recognized in the Judgment of the International
Court of Justice of 3 February. So far, however, Croatia
has had only one final conviction for the war crime
of murder committed during that Operation. That sad
fact should be taken into account by the European
Parliament, as well as by the Council. Accordingly,
further improvement of regional cooperation on war
crimes issues and the full implementation of bilateral
agreements, as requested in the Prosecutor's report, are
a condition sine qua non for regional peace, stability
and reconciliation.

With your permission, Sir, I shall now address the
case of the Hague defendant Vojislav Seselj. Serbia
joins all those frustrated by the long and ineffective
trial. We understand the emotions of the victims of the
crimes of which defendant Seselj, the politician, has
been accused. We condemn those crimes, regret that
they were committed and sympathize profoundly with
the victims and their families. However, the criminal
responsibility of the Serbian national has not yet
been determined, and the presumption of innocence
in his case must be fully respected. The Serbian
Government is concerned about many aspects of this
odd case, particularly with regard to the respect for the
defendant's rights.

Vojislav Seselj surrendered to the Tribunal
voluntarily in February 2003, a week after the indictment
against him was publicly issued. He waited in detention
for the commencement of the trial for over four years.
He never made a request to the Trial Chamber for a
provisional release and declared his unwillingness to
accept the guarantees of the Government regarding such
a procedural treatment. His trial has been characterized
by many procedural dilemmas and general disorder.
The accused opted for self-representation. He had an
ongoing conflict with the organs of the Tribunal, which
culminated in a long hunger strike, during which his
life was in danger. He was convicted of contempt of
court three times. Finally, he refused to run the defence
case. The trial was closed on 20 March 2012, nine years
after his voluntary surrender. More than three years
later, he is still waiting for the trial judgement - a
situation without precedent in modern case law. If such
a situation appeared before a Serbian court, one can
only imagine the hue and cry that would be raised in the
European Court for Human Rights over the disrespect
of the rights of the accused.

In November 2014, at the time of defendant Seselj's
first provisional release, which was proprio motu, for
humanitarian reasons and without any specific duties
assigned to the Serbian Government, the Security
Council discussed the unacceptable political statements
he had made. My Government does not share Vojislav
Seselj's political ideas and repudiates his statements,
but it does urge the Tribunal to conclude his case.
The seriousness of the accusations cannot undermine
respect for the human rights of the defendant. I call on
the members of the Security Council to pay attention
also to the human rights aspect ofthis case, and not only
to the unacceptable political statements made by the
defendant, which are, incidentally, targeted more often
than not at the democratically elected Government of
Serbia and its pro-European orientation.

I would like to reiterate my country's interest in
the future dialogue on questions related to the ICTY
archives. Also, we reaffirm our previous humanitarian
request with respect to the enforcement of sentences
and the possibility that convicted persons could serve
their sentences in Serbia as well, under international
monitoring.

Instead of a conclusion, I take this opportunity
to commend all the hard-working officials and staff
of the Tribunals and the Residual Mechanism for the
relentless efforts they continue to invest despite all the
challenges and lack of resources they face. They can
always count on the full and unstinting support of the
Serbian Government.

