Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): The Government of
Japan considers the consolidation of peace and the
realization of human security to be the most urgent and
essential agenda for the West Africa region. Japan
continues to undertake various initiatives, mainly
through the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development process, to effectively address those
issues.

In that regard, my Government welcomes the fact
that the transition to peace and stability is proceeding
in Sierra Leone and Liberia and that progress has been
made in a number of areas towards the reconstruction
of both those countries. We are also pleased to note
that Guinea-Bissau has held successful legislative
elections and that a major step has been taken toward
restoring constitutional order. We have been actively
providing support for such efforts in order to accelerate
the pace of progress, as stated at the Security Council
meeting on 25 March (see S/PV.4933). With respect to
Liberia, my Government has extended approximately
$9 million in assistance from March to July to support
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation (DDRR) process, and humanitarian and
similar efforts.

In View of the geopolitical conditions in West
Africa, where the situations in neighbouring countries
are often closely interlinked, it is critical to take a
regional approach to securing the peace and stability of
individual countries. As has been repeatedly observed
in the past, and is pointed out again in the report of the
Security Council mission to West Africa (S/2004/525),
we must recognize that, quite often, instability in a
certain country has a negative impact on the region as a
whole. From that point of view, we are deeply
concerned about the current political impasse in C6te
d'Ivoire and would like to emphasize once again that a
clear commitment and determined efforts on the part of
all parties concerned are needed in order to promote
the peace process, especially in terms of full and
unconditional implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement. In that regard, the Government of Japan
commends the efforts of the Secretary-General, the
African Union and concerned countries to set common
objectives and a work schedule with a view to holding
a summit in Accra on 29 July.

We sent a delegation to the African Union
Summit held in Ethiopia last week. We are glad that we
were able to meet with a number of the leaders and
ministers of countries in the West Africa region to
exchange views on issues of peace in the region,
including that of Cote d'Ivoire, as well as on the
critical importance of consolidating peace.

Having said that, I would like to point out the
following three issues that we consider of particular
importance in promoting a regional approach. First,
Japan welcomes the effort towards achieving mutual
cooperation, especially in the field of border controls,
among the United Nations missions deployed in several
countries of West Africa. It is expected that, as a result
of that effort, limited United Nations resources will be
used more efficiently and that cost-effectiveness will
be greatly increased. We also welcome the gradual
scaling down of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) as a result of its successful
progress. This reminds us of the need for other
peacekeeping operations to be re-evaluated, based on
an assessment of the actual situation on the ground, and
adjusted as necessary. As regards the suggestion in the
report that the United Nations Office for West Africa
should be provided with additional resources, we
would like to emphasize that this proposal should be
thoroughly examined from the standpoint of whether it
will facilitate the promotion of cooperation with the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).

Secondly, it is important to enhance the capacity
of Africa itself for managing conflicts. In this area,
ECOWAS, which is actively conducting various
activities in West Africa for the prevention of conflict,
has a significant role to play in the region. The United
Nations should try to strengthen the capacity of
ECOWAS through further mutual cooperation efforts.
As stated in the report, to achieve sustainable peace
and development, it is essential that not only the
countries emerging from conflict but also all the
neighbouring countries in the region make efforts to
improve their governance through such activities as
strengthened border controls and anti-corruption
campaigns. International support in this regard is
certainly necessary, but we would like to emphasize
that the ownership efforts of Africa are the most
important element.

Thirdly, Japan shares the view that DDRR is one
of the most critical tasks in the peace process. In that
connection, we take note of the point raised in the
report about the discrepancy in available funding
between DD - demobilization and disarmament -
and RR - repatriation and rehabilitation. Japan has
provided support for DDRR in countries such as Sierra
Leone, Liberia and C6te d'Ivoire, and will continue to
cooperate in this field.

We also share the concern of the mission over the
three-to-one discrepancy between the amounts of the
compensation payments offered in Cote d'Ivoire by the
World Bank and in Liberia by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations budget. It is reported that this
discrepancy is accelerating the flow of ex-combatants
into Cote d'Ivoire and is threatening to become a
source of instability. With regard to the compensation
payments, the question of whether the use of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations budget is
appropriate should be re-examined, while promoting
the involvement of the World Bank and other
development institutions.

Moreover, the ongoing implementation of DDRR
in each country will not lead to a fundamental
resolution of the problem unless the flow of small arms
is controlled effectively throughout the region as a
whole. In that connection, we recognize the importance
of the role that ECOWAS has been playing in
controlling the movement of arms by means of its
moratorium on small arms. We also consider it useful
to have the Secretary-General's recommendations on
what action the Security Council should take to help
reduce the proliferation of small arms in the subregion,
as indicated in the mission report.

We have repeatedly underscored the necessity of
evaluating the cost-effectiveness of Security Council
missions. We believe it would be very helpful if a
detailed explanation were made publicly available of
the benefits and costs of sending a Security Council
mission to a region where on-the-ground United
Nations activities are in place.

We would also like to reiterate that it is of the
utmost importance that ownership efforts be promoted
by each country in the West Africa region, with the
cooperation of international society, in order to ensure
the attainment of peace in West Africa. So long as such
ownership efforts continue to be made in the region,
Japan will remain committed to supporting such efforts
as a responsible member of the international
community.

