Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Realism, pragmatism and
objectivity: these are the perspectives that frame the very
important report of the Secretary-General on conflict and
peace in Africa. And it is now up to the international
community, the States Members of the United Nations and
Africa itself to respond in the same vein.

Portugal intends to take up the Secretary-General's
challenge, and is heartened by his words pledging that the
United Nations not only seeks but welcomes its role in
forging a new beginning in its relationship with Africa. We
will support this process not only here in the Security
Council, in the General Assembly and in other parts of the
United Nations system, but also in the European Union and
other international forums.

One concept seems to stand out in the Secretary-
General's report, and that is the absolutely fundamental
need for political will. Political will is needed on the part
of African States themselves, but it is equally required from
the international community as a whole. It is needed to find
political, not military, solutions for the problems that face
Africa today. Political will is needed to commit to the
principles of good governance, in democracy and with
respect for human rights and the rule of law. Political will
is needed from the international community to help free
economic development in Africa from its constraints. And
political will and courage are very much needed to avoid
future situations in which the United Nations would
unfortunately be seen to have turned its back on the African
people.

In a pragmatic spirit, I would like to make a few
preliminary remarks on certain aspects of the report. My
delegation agrees that early warning mechanisms for
conflict prevention also require early action to make them
useful. Concrete measures should be considered to ensure
that the United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, provides a timely response to impending crises.

The Secretary-General is right to point out that,
when the international community is engaged in
peacemaking efforts, the non-proliferation of mediation
efforts should be encouraged. What is important is not
how many are involved but whether or not their efforts
are tightly coordinated towards the same goals. The
United Nations has a central role to play in ensuring this,
as it did successfully in Mozambique, which is now a
model to follow in conflict resolution.

Sanctions can be a useful tool in conflict resolution,
and we agree that they must be better targeted so that
those politically responsible are the ones that are directly
affected, while the population at large is spared as much
as possible. I am pleased to note here that Portugal is able
to respond positively to the appeal by the Secretary-
General regarding legislation making the Violation of a
Security Council arms embargo a criminal offence under
national laws. We already have such legislation.

The proliferation of arms is a scourge on the African
continent. More must be done to stop the illegal flow of
weapons, particularly small arms, across borders from
conflict to conflict. In this context, I would like to stress
the importance of preventing arms that have been
collected at the end of one conflict from ending up in
another war on the other side of the continent. The United
Nations should have a clear role to play here, supported
by Member States, in ensuring that weapons collected are
destroyed.

We support the Secretary-General's call upon
African countries to reduce their defence budgets. We
recognize, however, that this is not always easy or
possible in certain cases where internal stability is
threatened. The international community can also help by
providing adequate support, including financial incentives,
to Governments that enter into agreements to reduce their
military budgets. Portugal agrees that this entire subject
of arms proliferation should be taken up by the Security
Council.

Portugal is actively supporting efforts to reinforce
the capacity of Africa to respond to conflicts, including
peacekeeping efforts. The international community should
continue to assist in the development of these capabilities.
The Portuguese Foreign Minister, Mr. Jaime Gama,
stressed the importance we attach to this at the Security

 

Council meeting of 25 September 1997, held at the
initiative of the United States, which led to the report
before the Council today. In particular, he referred to the
pivotal role the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
should play in this regard.

But he also stressed that the United Nations, and the
Security Council in particular, has the ultimate
responsibility in the maintenance of international peace and
security, and it cannot shirk this burden. When Africa needs
the United Nations, the United Nations must not turn its
back. This is not only a question of responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations; it is ultimately also a
question of common sense. The paralysis to which the
Secretary-General refers must never return to this
Organization and its Member States.

In concrete terms, the emphasis given in the report to
preventive deployment is merited. Timely action taken to
prevent conflict can save lives and resources, and we fully
support resorting to this type of response. Regarding the
implementation of comprehensive settlements, Portugal
agrees that a multidisciplinary peacekeeping operation may
well represent the best chance to establish peace and to
build a foundation for lasting development, based on
respect for human rights and the rehabilitation of civic
institutions.

Portugal will continue, to the best of its ability, to
contribute and to participate in United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa, as it has done in
Mozambique with the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique (ONUMOZ), in Angola with the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM) and the
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) and
in Western Sahara with the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO).

Turning now to humanitarian assistance, we can
generally endorse the recommendations made by the
Secretary-General and are ready to contribute actively to
their development. We agree that all special human rights
missions should be funded from assessed contributions and
strongly endorse, with him, the notion of children as "zones
of peace".

The recommendations regarding refugee camps are
also welcome, particularly in ensuring the safety of the
camps and the separation of combatants from refugees. The
proposal to hold combatants financially liable to their
victims under international law when civilians are made the
deliberate target of aggression is an interesting one, both in
Africa and elsewhere. However, it is not immediately
clear to us how this proposal would be implemented.

We are encouraged to note the importance the
Secretary-General attributes to post-conflict peace-
building, particularly his view that peace-building
elements should be explicitly and clearly identified and
integrated, from the outset, into the mandates of
peacekeeping operations. We fully share this View, and
last year Portugal tried to bring precisely this question
before the Security Council during informal consultations
with a View to its formal consideration. This process is
crucial to ensuring a smooth transition after the
withdrawal of peacekeeping operations, and many peace-
building components are an integral part of those
operations from the very beginning.

Portugal endorses the "strategic framewor "
approach to peace-building, which would provide an
integrated strategy, through the definition of criteria, to
help countries in crisis and permit the coordinated
intervention of States, international organizations and non-
governmental organizations.

While on the subject of peace-building, I would like
to refer to the case of Angola, where a peacekeeping
operation is winding down. This has been a major
investment in peace by the international community. But
many tasks remain to be completed and will have to be
carried out in a peace-building context, as defined in the
report before us today. Angola will therefore be an
important test of the international community's resolve
and commitment to these concepts, and we hope that all
Member States will support this effort and not abandon
the Angolan people.

We could not agree more that peace requires both
good governance and sustainable development. They are
two sides of the same coin. If it is true that the
international community must help Africa towards
achieving real economic growth, it is equally true that
good governance must be practised if development and
peace are to become deeply rooted.

The process of democratization and respect for
human rights and the rule of law are fundamental pillars
of the edifice of good governance. But, as the Secretary-
General reminds us, development itself is a human right
and the principal long-term objective of all countries in
Africa.

 

My delegation is ready to work on many of the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
very important report. The momentum should be
maintained, and we believe the Security Council should
respond positively to the Secretary-General's call to
reconvene biennially at the ministerial level to assess the
situation and to hold a summit-level meeting.

As I stated earlier, Portugal will work hard in support
of the international community's efforts in Africa. To this
end, we have already proposed that a Euro-African summit
be convened in the year 2000 to establish, for the first time,
a political dialogue at the very highest level between the
two continents. The European Union has adopted this
proposal, and talks have begun with our African partners to
make this a reality.
The problems that face Africa are not easy to
overcome, and many human and material resources are
required. But I agree with the Secretary-General that these
problems can be overcome with political will. Let us show
that will.

