Mr. Vimont (spoke in French): On behalf of
Ms. Catherine Ashton, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, it is a privilege for me to participate in today's
meeting on the situation in the Great Lakes region.

The very holding of today's meeting, presided over
this morning by Secretary of State John Kerry and in
the presence of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, bears
witness to our collective determination. We are all
aware that the future of the African continent will be
played out in its different regions, including the Great
Lakes region, which is one where the European Union
has long been involved in seeking lasting peace in the
face of the very difficult and complex challenges that
exist. The European Union intends to remain involved
in the region.

The current situation as regards the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework Agreement constitutes a
window of opportunity based on an ambitious approach
of voluntarily addressing the various aspects of the
crisis, be it at the regional, national or local levels.

Ms. Mary Robinson, Special Envoy ofthe Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region, often speaks of
the "Framework of hope", as several participants have
already mentioned. The European Union fully agrees.
Despite the difficulties, doing nothing is not an option.
That is why I would like to emphasize, as others have
done before me, the importance for the international
community to provide its unstinting support to
Ms. Robinson and, more broadly, to the activities of
the United Nations and all the regional organizations
involved, beginning, of course, with the African Union.
I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome
the appointment of the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Martin Kobler.

Implementing the Framework will be a complex
undertaking, but it continues to be of crucial
importance. Unwavering, coherent and sustained
political support on the part of all those who have
endorsed the Framework Agreement will allow us to
make a difference and guarantee success. It is therefore
essential that all signatories of the Agreement remain
focused on the same objectives and commit resolutely
to its prompt and effective implementation based on
the concrete work undertaken by the Technical Support
Committee.

We cannot hide the truth - the situation in the
Great Lakes remains fragile. The suffering of people,
particularly women and children, who are often the
first victims of violence, is indefensible. Even if all
the preconditions for sustainable peace can at last be
met - they have now certainly been identified - we
must nevertheless not underestimate the challenges
before us. In particular, the prevailing tension at the
border between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Rwanda remains a source of concern, while a
positive regional dynamic is essential if we are to
be successful in implementing any agreement on the
Great Lakes region. All the countries of the region
must therefore be encouraged to embark upon the
path of cooperation, with the fullest respect for their
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

In that regard, the increasing tension on the ground
in recent days, particularly near Goma, is worrying. It
could compound regional divisions and national and
local antagonism. It is essential that all armed groups
operating in eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo be dismantled, particularly the Mouvement
du 23 mars and the Forces Democratiques de Liberation
du Rwanda. That is why the European Union welcomes
the establishment of the Force Intervention Brigade
within the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic People's Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). It is important to find the
proper balance between a necessary political process,
on the one hand, and the capacity of the MONUSCO
Intervention Brigade to carve out space to promote
such a political agreement, on the other hand.

In addition, the challenges of governance and,
in particular, that of security sector reform, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are the central
pillars of stability in the eastern region of the country.
We call on the Government of the Democratic
Republic to tirelessly pursue the implementation of the
commitments that it entered into under the Framework
agreement.

Today's meeting is taking place a few days after the
28 Foreign Ministers of the European Union adopted
conclusions on the Great Lakes region that are both
political and practical and provide for specific actions
based on the priorities identified by Ms. Robinson for
the implementation of the Framework. Those guidelines
relate primarily to the following goals.

Trust and cooperation between the countries of the
region needs to be restored in an atmosphere of respect
for each country's sovereignty.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo should be
supported in its efforts to put an end to the structural
weaknesses in the eastern part of the country, thus
improving local governance and security while
restoring consensus among the different communities.

In that regard, I would like once again to draw
attention to the centrality of the role of security sector
reform. The European Union and its member States
stand ready to fulfil their commitments in support
of the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. However, it is essential that MONUSCO be
able to promptly define its own priorities in that key
area in order to contribute to a division of labour and a
clarification of the efforts that will be required of the
different stakeholders.

We also need the promotion ofa common vision for
every country of the region on democracy and human
rights, based on an open political system and transparent
elections, which will be even more important after the
start of the electoral cycle in the region beginning in
2015. And, lastly, what is needed is the creation of a
strong regional economic impetus for the benefit of
all, so that the dividends of peace and security can
be consolidated. In that regard, the European Union
is ready to continue and to maintain its assistance in
every area it has worked on for the past several years.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that while
the promotion of peace and development in the Great
Lakes can and should be encouraged and shared in
by the international community, those goals cannot
be achieved without the ownership of Governments,
civil society and other influential local and regional
stakeholders. All must therefore now shoulder their
responsibilities and take the opportunity afforded them
by the implementation of the framework of hope. We
have reached a crucial time in the long history of the
Great Lakes region, and we must not let it slip away.

