Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I thank you , Madam
President, for that congratulatory message. I wish to
echo earlier speakers in thanking you for convening
today's open debate on the Council's working methods.
I also express my delegation's appreciation to you
and your delegation for so ably chairing the Council's
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
just made by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Movement Countries.

As an incoming member of the Council, Malaysia
is of the View that today's open debate affords a timely
opportunity for the members of the Council and the
wider United Nations membership to take stock of,
and further discuss, measures aimed at improving the
Council's working methods. We are encouraged to
note that, under Argentina's current presidency, the
Council will convene three open debates. We view this
practice as commendable, as it provides the broader
United Nations membership with more opportunities to
participate in the work of the Council.

Malaysia is also encouraged to note that the calls
for better transparency, coherence and accountability
on the part of the Council by the wider membership
has, to a certain extent, been implemented or taken
on board by the Council. Among other things, those
improvements have been reflected in the various notes
issued by the Council's presidency over the course
of of the past year. In addition, Malaysia welcomes
the development of potential mechanisms to serve
as early-warning systems for the Council, including
through increased use of Arria Formula meetings as
well as more regular briefings, by the relevant United
Nations Special Advisers, Rapporteurs and other senior
officials. That said, there remains room for further
improvement in other areas of the Council's working
methods.

At this juncture, my delegation wishes to underscore
that effecting possible improvements in the Council's
working methods should not take place in a vacuum. In
that regard, Malaysia recalls that several initiatives are
already under way, or about to commence, such as the
upcoming review of the Peacebuilding Commission,
the review of peacekeeping operations and the review
of special political missions. The outcomes of those and
other relevant intergovernmental initiatives should be
factored into the Council's deliberations on improving
its working methods. In that connection, the ongoing
initiative by the Governments of Australia, Finland,
Germany, Greece and Sweden on the high-level review
of United Nations sanctions is also worth noting.

In addition, there should be more coordination
between the Security Council and troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) towards strengthening the
effectiveness ofpeacekeeping operations. The Council's
meetings with TCCs should be sustained, regular and
timely, in particular with regard to the resolutions and
mandates of operations. In that context, the Council's
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations should
involve TCCs more frequently and intensively in its
deliberations, especially at the early stages of mission
planning.

On the Council's application of sanctions as
authorized under the Charter of the United Nations,
Malaysia recognizes the shift from comprehensive
economic sanctions to targeted sanctions. However,
despite such a shift, there should not be a generalized
assumption that targeted sanctions have no effect
whatsoever on the broader population of the country
concerned, and in certain cases on neighbouring
countries and populations. The Council must be open
to reviewing the negative or unintended consequences
of sanctions and respond as appropriate.

With a view to further contributing to today's
debate, Malaysia wishes to make the following brief
comments.

First, with regard to transparency, Malaysia
supports the continuation of the existing practice on
wrap-up sessions and interactive briefings at the end of
Council's presidencies.

Secondly, Malaysia also supports a fairer and more
inclusive allocation of penholderships, as well as a
more transparent process when electing Chairs of the
Council's subsidiary bodies.

Thirdly, Malaysia welcomes the proposal by the
French delegation. In that connection, we reaffirm that
permanent members of the Council should refrain from
resorting to the veto in situations involving genocide,
crimes against humanity, war crimes and crimes of
aggression.

Fourthly, on a related note, the intersection
in terms of the roles of the Security Council and
the International Criminal Court (ICC) also raises
certain questions about the need to further clarify the
relationship between the two bodies, particularly in the
context of the designation of individuals for sanctions
by the Council and/or prosecution by the ICC.

Fifthly, Malaysia reaffirms its support for the
mandate of the Ombudsperson of the Council's
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), which was recently renewed. In that regard,
Malaysia is of the view that the Council should fully
consider the recommendations of the Ombudsperson as
contained in her reports to the Council.

Sixthly, while giving due consideration to both
security and human rights concerns, Malaysia also
believes that there is merit in exploring the possibility
of extending the Ombudsperson's role or mandate to
include all of the Council's Sanctions Committees.

