Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation congratulates you sincerely, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
We also express our appreciation to the representative
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, who did a
commendable job this past month as President.

There is no doubt that mediation is a powerful
instrument for the positive transformation of relations
between the parties to a dispute, and one that makes it
possible to avoid the escalation of armed violence.
Burkina Faso, which is making an outstanding
contribution to mediation in Africa, has quite rightly
made the promotion of mediation a priority during its
term on the Security Council.

Today's debate is of particular interest to Benin,
since we have made dialogue the cement that
reinforces, day after day, the building of our young
democracy, which came into being at the memorable
national conference of February 1990. That exceptional
forum dedicated to national reconciliation was made
possible thanks to the masterful mediation of the local
Catholic Church.

Governments of Benin since 1991 have striven to
maintain special channels of cooperation within and
between national democratic institutions and among
social partners to avoid or contain tensions that could
escalate.

In recent years, the political landscape in Benin
has been enriched by two new national institutions.
The Presidential Mediation Body, which is associated
with the presidency of the Republic, is responsible for
settling disputes between citizens and the
administration at the national and local levels. The
High Council on Cooperative Governance seeks
consensus-based solutions to challenges confronting
the country. Its purpose is to consolidate the direction
of the nation's governance in an environment of peace
and concord in order to perpetuate the legacy of the
national conference of February 1990 by managing
public affairs in a participatory manner.

At the subregional level, Benin participates in
efforts undertaken in the framework of the African
Peace and Security Architecture, which includes
functioning mediation mechanisms. Inter alia, it has
placed its national competencies at the service of the
African Union Panel of the Wise and the Economic
Community of West African States. Two high-profile
women from Benin are members of those mediation
boards. Benin is currently presiding over the
Association of Mediators of the West African
Economic and Monetary Union, comprising French-
speaking States of the subregion.

At the global level, Benin has helped to revive
the international community's interest in mediation,
and above all in the critical role of the Security
Council in that field, by implementing resolution 1625
(2005), adopted on 14 September 2005, which includes
explicit provisions on mediation and preventive
diplomacy. We recall that the Secretary-General
submitted a very instructive report (S/2008/18) in
January 2008 on efforts made pursuant to resolution
1625 (2005). Benin welcomes the significant progress
made since then in the capacity-building of the United
Nations, and in particular of the Department of
Political Affairs, in the field of mediation support,
which is also covered by the report before us today
(S/2009/189), which is a useful complement to the
aforementioned report.

Benin welcomes the Secretary-General's proposal
to act on the United Nations commitment to developing
mediation. The importance of the Secretary-General's
report lies in particular in the fact that he highlights
lessons learned from the practice of mediation, as well
as steps taken or to be taken to meet challenges to the
efficacy of the international community's conflict
prevention efforts. My delegation feels that the stress
placed on the quality of the human resources required
is fully justified, particularly with respect to the need
to train new staff capable of meeting any challenge.

The United Nations should endorse the African
Union's 2002 appeal to all its members to develop
mechanisms for the pacific settlement of disputes. In
that respect, development assistance funds and
programmes should lend effective support to the
capacity-building efforts of national and regional
mediation institutions.

It is important effectively to promote strong
partnership based on subsidiarity and the comparative
advantages of stakeholders so that the Security Council
can exercise its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It
must be able to use appropriately the instruments
available to it, including sanctions. In that way, it can
help proactively to create the conditions for the
rational and cost-effective management of uncertain
situations and crises in order to ensure post-conflict
peacebuilding if violence has unavoidably escalated.

In sum, Benin supports the Secretary-General's
recommendations on the capacity-building of regional
and subregional organizations and other agents for
mediation and conflict settlement and prevention.
Accordingly, the United Nations system should act in a
concerted and coherent manner, in particular to ensure
the structural and systematic prevention of conflicts
that will allow it resolutely to address the elimination
of the underlying causes of conflict, endogenous and
exogenous alike. The primary goal is to build a world
driven by the culture of peace and the virtues of
dialogue at the service of the stability of countries and
the promotion of universal well-being.

In conclusion, my delegation associates itself
with the presidential statement to be adopted at the end
of this meeting.
