Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I wish to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his very
detailed and informative briefing. On my own behalf
and on behalf of France, I would like to once again
commend his work and reiterate our full support for his
tireless efforts.

We have again reached a moment of truth in Syria.
On 27 October in Istanbul, the Heads of State and
Government of France, Germany, Russia and Turkey
underlined their commitment to a lasting ceasefire
in Syria. That truce offers a narrow window of
opportunity that we must seize in order to generate real
political momentum. At this key moment, all our efforts
must now be focused on relaunching a comprehensive
political solution to the Syrian crisis. The establishment
of the constitutional committee by the end of December
should be the first step, and we hope it will be a
catalyst. In other words, the creation of the committee
could and should be the turning point that we have
long sought - the first step towards real political
momentum. The establishment of the committee by the
end of December, at the latest, is therefore our main
priority today.

Of course, there are differences among us, but
everyone around this table has called for the holding
of the first meeting of the constitutional committee
by the end of the year. France, Turkey, Russia and
Germany expressed that idea clearly in a statement on
27 October in the communique adopted in Istanbul. On
27 September here in New York, the members of the
small group on Syria also called for such a meeting.
I know that Russia is also mobilized to implement the
outcome of the Sochi Congress, adopted in January.
We must now all give shape to that shared objective by
honouring our commitments.

It is important to note that the establishment
and functioning of the committee are not in dispute.
The rules of composition were set forth in the Sochi
communique' within the framework set by resolution
2254 (2015). The Special Envoy has full authority to
convene the constitutional committee immediately. The
United Nations also has the power to appoint the list
of committee members from civil society. There is no
ambiguity in that regard. The Special Envoy therefore
has our full support in moving forward independently
and without external pressure. In that context, all the
conditions are now in place for the Special Envoy to
issue invitations to the 150 members of the committee
as soon as possible, so that an initial meeting of the
constitutional committee can be held in December, in
line with the Istanbul summit declaration.

It is the responsibility of the United Nations to
ensure that the final composition of the committee is
balanced, lest it lack all legitimacy. We will keep a
close watch. No one - neither the regime, the Astana
guarantors nor the opposition - has veto rights over the
composition of the third list. The argument put forward
by Damascus about respect for its sovereignty should
fool no one and cannot be used as a pretext to violate its
obligations and commitments. Resolution 2254 (2015),
which we adopted unanimously, has set a legitimate
framework for action that we must all follow. The
commitment made in Sochi is part of that framework. All
of us - including the authorities in Damascus - have
an interest in abiding by the framework, as it is the only
way to achieve lasting peace.
Let us make no mistake - if the process fails,
it will be due to those who sought to derail the rules
established by the international community and
undermine the legitimacy of United Nations mediation.
In that case - that is, if the committee were unable to
meet - we would expect the Special Envoy to clearly
and publicly attribute responsibilities.

Although its establishment is crucial, the
constitutional committee is only a tool. After seven
years of war, there is no trust between the parties and
little trust among international actors. It is therefore
necessary to agree on clear parameters that can be
shared by all. Those parameters exist. They were
reaffirmed in Istanbul and I will recall them here:
first, a durable ceasefire; secondly, the protection of
populations through free and unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance throughout Syria, as well
as the definitive destruction of the Syrian chemical
arsenals; thirdly, a constitutional process and free and
impartial elections, monitored by the United Nations,
that ensure the participation of all Syrians in Syria and
beyond its borders, including refugees and internally
displaced persons; fourthly, the adoption of essential
confidence-building measures, in particular on the fate
of detainees; and fifthly, the establishment of political
conditions for the voluntary and safe return of refugees
and displaced persons, including protection against
political persecution and arbitrary arrests.

Those parameters must guide the Council in the
coming months and create a safe and neutral environment
that will make a political solution credible. Together
with the members of the small group on Syria, we will
firmly support the Special Envoy and his successor to
achieve a political solution based on those principles.

In conclusion, Syria must rebuild itself politically
to regain stability. It will also have to rebuild itself as a
society. That is also why we remain fully committed to
pursuing the important fight against impunity, so that
the Syrian people can one day enjoy justice and lasting
peace once again. In that regard, we welcome the recent
decisions of the national courts and the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. In the case of France, we especially welcome the
issuance of three arrest warrants by the French judicial
system against Ali Mamlouk, Jamil Al-Hassan and
Abdel Salam Mahmoud - three senior officials of the
Syrian repressive apparatus and accomplices in crimes
against humanity in connection with the Caesar files,
including the mass use of torture by the Syrian regime.
We will never compromise on issues of impunity. Only
under such conditions can Syria rebuild economically,
because any other construction would be built on sand.

