Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed for the
information that she has provided us with today. We also
express our gratitude for the briefings by Ms. Chitra
Nagarajan, Senior Conflict Adviser of Adelphi, and
by Mr. Mohammed Bila, representative of the Lake
Chad Basin Commission. We would like to highlight
the Commission's work in developing mechanisms to
address the crisis in the region, including its root causes.

Bolivia is concerned about the continuing threat
posed by Boko Haram to security in the Lake Chad
basin, exacerbating the humanitarian crisis in the
region. This terrorist group's terrible attacks on
civilians, including assassinations, kidnappings, the use
of children as suicide bombers, sexual violence against
women and the recruitment of children, underscore the
continuing importance of coordinating efforts to deal
with its extreme violence. We recognize that the tireless
efforts of Nigeria, the Niger, Chad and Cameroon have
enabled us to make encouraging progress in reducing
the terrorist group's fighting capacity, but we must
continue to counter the terrorist acts that threaten
peace and security in the region. We therefore consider
that the international community's support is crucially
important to the Multinational Joint Task Force and the
countries of the region that are combating terrorism on
behalf of us all.

The region is currently facing a grave humanitarian
crisis, with more than 10 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance. That reality must make us
focus our attention and commitment on uniting the
efforts ofthe States ofthe Lake Chad basin and regional
and subregional organizations, with a short-term focus
on combating food insecurity, addressing the basic
needs of internally displaced persons, refugees and
those most vulnerable, such as children and women,
and improving the general population's quality of life
by providing access to basic services. We therefore
encourage donor countries to honour their pledges
made at the 2017 Oslo Humanitarian Conference on
Nigeria and the Lake Chad Region and make it possible
for those needs to be met.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia recognizes the
importance of developing a joint regional strategy that
takes into account the underlying causes of the crisis
in the region as well as initiatives to combat the threat
posed by Boko Haram. We note that the Governments of
the countries concerned are facing complex challenges
in implementing programmes addressing the root
causes of the crisis, primarily because a large part of
their resources are earmarked for the security sector.
It will be crucial to work to reduce poverty and social,
political, economic and gender-based inequalities, and
to increase countries" ability to provide basic services,
education and infrastructure. We must also consider
the adverse consequences of climate change and
ecological changes. In that context, water shortages,
desertification and drought are increasing instability in
the region.

As we said in last year's meeting on preventive
diplomacy and transboundary waters (see S/PV.7959),
during Bolivia's June presidency of the Security
Council, a high percentage of the world's freshwater
sources are shared by two or more States. Water quality,
use and scarcity can often generate conflicts or the
conditions for potential conflicts. But States that share
this life-sustaining resource must translate those ties
into opportunities to cooperate effectively so that they
can work inclusively to share their knowledge in order
to foster consensus and identify more efficient and
cooperative water-management policies. In that regard,
it is essential that the various bodies of the United
Nations, based on their respective mandates, redouble
their efforts to jointly address that issue together with
the parties concerned.

In conclusion, we believe that it will be crucial
to provide continued coordination and support to the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the Economic Community of Central
African States in encouraging them to redouble their
efforts and in working together with them.

