The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

First, I wish to thank the Secretary-General for
attending today's meeting and for his important and
wise statement.

The Chinese delegation voted in favour of the
resolution that has just been adopted. Our decision was
based on the Chinese Government's consistent and
clear-cut position on the question of Iraq. China stands
firmly for a peaceful solution to the question of Iraq,
through political and diplomatic means and within the
framework of the United Nations. China has always
urged Iraq to fully and strictly implement relevant
Security Council resolutions and to cooperate fully
with the United Nations with a View to thoroughly
accounting for and destroying its weapons of mass
destruction.

China has consistently held that, in seeking a
comprehensive settlement of the question of Iraq, the
sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as the
legitimate concerns, of Iraq should be respected and
that the Security Council should, depending on Iraq's
implementation of relevant resolutions, consider
suspending and eventually lifting the sanctions against
Iraq, which have been in force for 12 years.

We support dialogue between the Secretary-
General and the Iraqi side in order to break the
stalemate and welcome efforts by the Arab League and
other organizations aimed at a peaceful resolution of
the question of Iraq. We also welcome the
announcement by Iraq in September that it would
unconditionally accept a return of United Nations
inspectors, and its subsequent talks with the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on practical
arrangements concerning inspections.

We are in favour of strengthening the
effectiveness of inspections. At the same time, we
believe that relevant provisions relating to the
inspections should be practical and feasible. We
appreciate the work done by UNMOVIC and the IAEA
with regard to the inspections, and hope that they will
be able to return to Iraq at an early date to conduct
independent, fair, professional and effective
inspections, reporting to the Security Council the result
of their inspections in a truthful and timely manner.
That would enable the Council to draw objective, fair
and realistic conclusions and decide on the next steps
in the light of the situation and the views of the various
parties concerned.

China supports the two-stage approach. The
Chinese delegation actively participated at all stages of
the consultations on the draft resolution, and put
forward its views and suggestions in a constructive
manner. We are pleased to note that, after many rounds
of consultations, the sponsors of the draft resolution
accommodated our concerns, and the Council members
have finally reached consensus.

As the sponsors pointed out in their statements
earlier, the purpose of the resolution is to achieve the
disarmament of Iraq through effective inspections. The
text no longer includes automaticity for authorizing the
use of force. According to the resolution that has just
been adopted, only upon receipt of a report by
UNMOVIC and the IAEA on Iraq's non-compliance
and failure to cooperate fully in the implementation of
the resolution, will the Security Council consider the
situation and take a position.

We are also pleased to note that, at the request of
many members, including China, the resolution now
includes other important elements, for example,
reaffirming the commitment of all Member States to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq, Kuwait
and other neighbouring States, commending the
Secretary-General and members of the League of Arab
States and its Secretary-General for their efforts and
recalling its resolution 1382 (2001) and its intention to
implement it fully.

The Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security - a responsibility that is entrusted
to it by the Charter. Now that the Security Council has
adopted this important resolution at this crucial
moment, we hope that it will contribute to preserving
the authority of the Council, facilitate a political
settlement of the question of Iraq and enable an early
return of United Nations inspectors to Iraq.

It is our hope that Iraq will implement the
resolution in good faith, fully cooperate with United
Nations weapons inspectors and fully comply with its
disarmament obligations, so as to create conditions for
an early and comprehensive resolution of the question
of Iraq.

We would also like to point out that the United
Nations inspectors should draw lessons from the
United Nations Special Commission. We trust that
UNMOVIC and the IAEA will strictly abide by the
mandate provided by the Security Council in its
resolutions and faithfully fulfil its duties.

Finally, we once again strongly appeal to all
parties to continue to strive for a political solution to
the Iraqi issue. That is the common aspiration of the
entire international community, particularly the Gulf
States and the Arab States. We sincerely hope that the
adoption and smooth implementation of the resolution
will be conducive to the effective carrying out of
weapons inspections in Iraq and facilitate a final and
comprehensive resolution of the Iraqi issue within the
framework of the United Nations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.
