Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this meeting on the situation in
Yemen and commends Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their
detailed briefings.

Cote d'Ivoire notes with deep concern the extent
of the continuing deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Yemen, which raises fears of widespread
famine. According to United Nations specialized
agencies, 80 per cent ofthe population, that is, 24 million
people, are in need of humanitarian assistance and
protection. On top of that, approximately 17.8 million
of them lack drinking water and 19.7 million have no
access to adequate health care. This bleak picture is
further magnified by the 2 million Yemeni children who
are not being educated due to the closure or destruction
of their schools. Worse, 2,500 of them have been
forcibly recruited to participate in factional fighting.

My country also continues to be concerned about
the equally disastrous economic situation. In its report
Assessing the Impact of War in Yemen, published on
9 October, the United Nations Development Programme
underlines the continuing rise in the poverty rate,
which increased from 47 per cent in 2014 to 75 per cent
in 2019. The report also notes that a protracted conflict
would make Yemen the poorest country in the world in
a few years, with 79 per cent of the population living
below the poverty line, including 65 per cent living in
extreme poverty.

Given the aforementioned, my delegation reiterates
its urgent call for the support of the international
community, including bilateral and multilateral
partners, to rapidly reverse that Vicious cycle and
for all parties to the conflict to respect international
humanitarian law, including the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War of 12 August 1949.

With regard to the political process, Cote d'Ivoire
believes that only an inclusive dialogue, with the
support of regional and international actors, will make
it possible to find a peaceful and lasting solution to the
Yemeni crisis. We therefore once again welcome the
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2019/9, of
29 August, which supports the actions of Mr. Griffiths
towards resuming comprehensive negotiations. We
also urge the various actors to continue the steps taken
during September with a view to relaunching the
political process.

My country also welcomes the joint initiative of
Kuwait, Sweden, Germany and the United Kingdom,
which led to a meeting on 26 September between the
Yemeni parties, the permanent members of the Security
Council and the Special Envoy to discuss ways and
means of advancing the political process, taking into
account those in the south, in order to ensure the
success of the talks in Jeddah.

On the security front, my delegation strongly urges
the warring parties to fully implement the Stockholm
Agreement, signed in December 2018, including the
Agreement on the City of Hudaydah and the Ports of
Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa on the redeployment of
forces. It therefore urges the various parties to continue
the redeployment of forces from the ports, under the
aegis of the Redeployment Coordination Committee,
and to cooperate fully with the United Nations Mission
to support the Hodeidah Agreement in order to ensure
the unhindered and rapid deployment of its personnel
and equipment required for humanitarian assistance.

In addition, my delegation would like to reiterate
its call to all stakeholders to take further action so that
the warring factions expedite the process relating to the
exchange of 15,000 prisoners and the implementation of
the memorandum of understanding on the city of Taiz,
which would facilitate the opening of humanitarian
corridors. Those two initiatives are undeniably
important components of the peace process needed
to build trust between the parties. In that regard, we
welcome the declaration of a ceasefire by the Houthis
on 21 September, as well as the release of 290 prisoners
on 30 September, affirmed by the International
Committee of the Red Cross.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its
conviction that, despite its complexity and gravity, the
Yemeni crisis can be sustainably resolved through bold
compromises between the parties to the conflict within
a constructive and inclusive dialogue, in particular
with the participation of those in the south, women and
civil society.

