Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to thank Mr. Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing.

Afghanistan is going through a crucial phase in its
history. It is facing a series ofongoing, new and renewed
challenges. Accordingly, the international community
must work towards providing the necessary assistance
to this country for a better future for its children. After
many years of war, which has torn Afghanistan apart
and destroyed its institutions - and during which the
country has taken up a great deal of the international
community's efforts and attention - the concept of
threats to international peace and security and the our
way of handling them have changed forever. Today,
more than ever, Afghanistan needs the support of the
international community and of the United Nations.
That is the real challenge that we face in Afghanistan.

Jordan is extremely concerned at the security
situation in Afghanistan, exemplified by the terrorist
attack against the Parliament of Afghanistan this
morning. We recognize the difficulties that the Afghan
authorities are facing in maintaining security and
controlling the situation. Accordingly, the international
community and, particularly, neighbouring countries
must continue to provide support to Afghanistan
in its war against terrorism, and must support the
Government's efforts in controlling the entire national
territory. We therefore encourage international partners
to reinforce and improve Afghanistan's capacities, in
order to adequately address the situation. In the near
future, in cooperation with interested countries and
the Government of Afghanistan, we must carry out a
comprehensive analysis of the situation in determining
how the Council can help bolster security and stability
in that country.

Jordan welcomes the fact that the formation of
the new Afghan Government has been completed
in order to maintain the progress achieved thus far
through democracy. That ongoing process has seen the
involvement of all Afghans, political parties and national
partners in Afghanistan. We welcome the formation of
this new Government, and we hope that it marks the
start of positive change in the political landscape and in
the peacebuilding process in Afghanistan.

Resolving differences among the different components
within Afghan society, in order to ensure the stability
that the country so desires, will not be possible
unless there is national reconciliation throughout
Afghanistan, led by the Afghans themselves. Because
the use of force and violence by different elements will
hinder the achievement of those goals, bringing about a
comprehensive peace remains a great challenge in the
country. Taking that into account, we would stress the
importance of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan's (UNAMA) role and that of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in deploying
their good offices to strengthen national reconciliation.

We call upon all the parties to participate
constructively in that process.

In view of the Afghan President's announcement
that the current legislature will be extended until new
elections are held, we appeal to the Special Commission
on Electoral Reform to start work as soon as possible
and implement all the necessary reforms, avoiding the
mistakes of the past and thereby guaranteeing that
the electoral process will comply with international
standards. We hope that the progress made in that
area will be presented to the Security Council at its
meeting in September. We would like to emphasize
once again the need to expedite the implementation of
anti-corruption reform programmes so as to ensure that
human rights and the rule of law are upheld. We call
upon the Government to intensify its efforts to improve
the situation of vulnerable and marginalized groups
in the country, and we also emphasize that all matters
related to women's rights must be an integral part of all
debates on peace, so that women can be more involved
in future progress.

Jordan is concerned about Afghanistan's poor
economic situation, particularly in View of the fragile
security conditions following the terrorist attacks,
and we trust that the necessary steps will be taken to
improve the economic situation so that donors in the
international community regain confidence in the
country. One of the most important measures will
be the struggle against corruption at all levels of the
Government, as the United Nations and international
financial institutions have reiterated on various
occasions. We call upon the Government to assume
its responsibilities and reach that goal, and we urge
the donor community and countries in the region to
continue to support development and invest jointly
in Afghanistan. We welcome the efforts of UNAMA,
which is working extremely effectively in various areas
under the difficult circumstances in the country, and
we encourage it to continue to play that role.

