Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
briefing by Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, on the humanitarian
situation in Syria. We also welcome your presence here
today, Sir, in presiding over our meeting.

Peru deeply regrets that violence and human
suffering continue to characterize the situation in
Syria, 30 days after the humanitarian ceasefire
demanded by the Council. Resolution 2401 (2018)
remains in full force, and we consider that the Syrian
Government and other actors with the capacity to
influence developments on the ground are obliged to
ensure its full implementation. The ceasefire should
be immediate and enable unrestricted access to
humanitarian assistance throughout Syrian territory.
While there has been some limited progress in that
regard, the delivery of humanitarian assistance must be
continuous and unrestricted.

In view of the Council's responsibilities in line
with international law and international humanitarian
law, Peru will continue to advocate for the protection
of civilians in all conflicts and humanitarian crises.
An indeterminate number of Syrian citizens, including
thousands of women and children, have been driven
out of eastern Ghouta by the violence. We note with
concern that the shelters in the vicinity of Damascus
cannot cope and that they lack food, clean water and
medical supplies. We must remember that international
humanitarian law has mandatory provisions for the
evacuation of civilians. It is also compulsory to take
measures to safeguard private property from looting
and destruction. Syrian citizens must be able to
return to their homes and businesses when security
conditions improve. We must also protect the majority
of the remaining population in eastern Ghouta, who are
particularly vulnerable to reprisals, forced recruitment
and sexual violence.

We are also concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Afrin, Idlib and Raqqa, among other areas
of Syria. The responsibility to protect civilians cannot
be conditional or subordinated to political or strategic
interests. We highlight the efforts of the United Nations
and other humanitarian agencies, such as the Red Cross
and the Red Crescent, to assist people in such a difficult
situation. They have our full support.

Given the intensification of violence in recent
weeks and its devastating consequences for the
population, we must once again reiterate how urgent
it is to make progress towards achieving a political
settlement on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). In that
regard, we hope that progress will soon be made in the
establishment and composition of the constitutional
committee agreed on in Sochi. All the Syrian
parties, and especially the Government, must engage
constructively in this.

