Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, and the Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, Mr. Simonovie,
for their very comprehensive briefings the on recent
events in Ukraine and the human rights situation.

Jordan has also taken note of the sixth report of
the United Nations human rights monitoring mission
in Ukraine, issued by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights. We express
our regret over the non-compliance with the most
important parts of the peace plan, namely, the complete
cessation of hostilities and a halt to the confrontations
between Ukrainian forces and the separatists, although
the frequency of such confrontations has been reduced.
There have been increasing numbers of crimes against
citizens, including forced displacement, torture and
forced labour, and the deprivation of the right of
citizens to stability and security. Jordan is concerned
at reports by human rights organizations on the use
of cluster bombs in several attacks. That is a violation
of the provisions of international law and a dangerous
development that imperils the lives of citizens. In that
framework, we call for an international independent
inquiry, an objective inquiry, to investigate the use of
such internationally prohibited weapons.

Jordan expresses its support for the United Nations
Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine and
for the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Special Monitoring Mission. We support them
because of their important role in monitoring events
regularly and presenting periodic reports to the Council
on the facts on the ground in Ukraine, especially in the
eastern part of that country. We call on the Government
of Ukraine and the separatists to facilitate the entry
of those missions to all parts of the country in order
to promote security and stability. We reiterate our
full support for efforts to find a solution to the crisis
through dialogue and diplomacy, and we reaffirm the
need to protect citizens and respect the provisions of
international law, human rights, international human
rights law and to prevent elicit attacks against citizens,
in contravention of human rights.

Putting an end to the conflict is a political
responsibility and a moral responsibility for all those
concerned. The Security Council must play its role
and make every possible effort to facilitate a political
solution with regard to Ukraine's sovereignty and unity.
We call on all parties to respect their commitments, the
peace agreements and the Minsk memorandum, and to
remain open to the various viewpoints in order to reach
a lasting solution.

We welcome the positive measures taken by
Ukraine: the adoption of the transitional status
legislation, especially that giving special status to the
regions of Donetsk and Luhansk, which have been
autonomous for three years, as well as the preparations
for the local elections to be held next January. We call
on the Government of Ukraine to make greater efforts
aimed at guaranteeing the freedom and equal rights
of all citizens of Ukraine, including the members of
minority groups. Political, social and cultural rights are
all equally important for stability.

We hope that the parliamentary elections scheduled
for 26 October will be organized in a climate of
stability and confidence in order to facilitate the reform
process and a return to the rule of law and democracy
in Ukraine's political life.

