Mr. Salim: Like my colleague, I would also like
to thank the Council for the opportunity given us, and
also for the serious attention with which the Council
has been addressing this issue. I shall also be very brief
in answering the specific issues that were raised, in
particular the link between the political process and the
issue of security.

Ideally, we would obtain an agreement, and then
life would become much more comfortable for
everybody, especially for the peacekeepers. But that is
the ideal. The reality on the ground is that there is no
such agreement. The reality on the ground is that
unless you address the issue of security the political
process becomes impossible.

Wherever we went, whatever we discussed,
whether it was with the representatives of the internally
displaced persons or the representatives of civil
society, whether it was in areas I covered in my
statement, in Government areas or in areas controlled
by the rebels, everybody has been talking about
security, security, security. So the issue of security
becomes important. Therefore, the question of the
rapid deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) becomes
important.

I want to say one more thing on this point. The
African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) was there,
and it did a lot under very, very difficult circumstances.
But AMIS began to lose credibility because it did not
have the required resources and the required
equipment. Now there is a danger that if nothing is
done to really beef up UNAMID, it will face same
problems that AMIS had. I talked earlier about the
euphoria of expectations. When we were in Darfur
everybody was waiting for UNAMID. Everybody was
talking about how important it was to have UNAMID.
But the minute they begin to see that, really, the
difference between UNAMID and AMIS is very small,
there will be a problem. So I think that it is in the
interest, not only of the peace process, but also for the
credibility of the Security Council, that this question is
addressed in an effective manner.

The engagement of civil society, I think, is a
must, and as Jan has pointed out, initially, both the
Government and the movements were totally opposed
to any idea of involvement with civil society. Now we
have begun to see some change. As he said, the
Government of the Sudan has told us clearly that they
are supportive of the idea of civil society. But in the
final analysis, you have got to involve these people,
because neither the Government nor the movements
can claim to have exclusive representation of the
people of Darfur. There are people, whether traditional
leaders or civil society organizations, who want peace.
One thing that comes out in this situation is that the
people in Darfur want peace. Irrespective of their
political affiliation, irrespective of where they are
located, they want peace.

On the question of incentives and disincentives, I
think my friend Jan has responded rightly. He used the
words "incentives and disincentives". If you go
through my speech, you will see that I used the phrase
"encourage or discourage". But basically what we are
saying is that the Council must be in a position to do
something. I would humbly caution against repeated
warnings which have no follow-up action, warnings
like "if you do this, something will happen; if you do
not do that, something else will happen". And nothing
happens. Then not only is the credibility of the Council
is at stake, but even the capacity of those who are
involved in the peace process becomes somewhat
impaired. So I would say that, yes, there is a need for
encouragement or incentives, and there is a need also
for discouragement or disincentives.

On the question of inclusion, I think that
inclusion is very important, as Jan said also. We know
the position of the Government of the Sudan. We know
how they feel after the attack on Omdurman. But the
response of the international community has been
swift. Going beyond that, one cannot say that a given
party should be excluded. I think that it should be the
movement itself which excludes itself from the
process. You should not start excluding people from
the negotiations, especially a movement which has
some degree of support - although I understand full
well, as was rightly explained, that there is a feeling
that JEM's agenda goes beyond Darfur.

In specific response to the representative of Costa
Rica, I will say this: In both of our statements, we have
made it very clear that primary responsibility for the
situation in Darfur must be that of the Government of
the Sudan. There are areas where the Government of
the Sudan has not responded regarding what we expect
them to do. For example, every time that we have gone
to Khartoum, we have repeatedly appealed for the
non-utilization of aerial bombardment. We have said
very clearly that there should be a proportionate
response. What do we mean by this? If there is an
attack, for example, like JEM's attack, it is logical for
the Government of the Sudan to exercise self-defence.
However, when one uses air power and the air power
affects not only the movements but also ordinary
civilians, then there is a problem. That is why we have
been insisting on that.

Secondly, at this point in time, when it comes to
negotiations, it is very difficult to hold the Government
of the Sudan responsible, because they say all the time
that they are ready for negotiations. Maybe we can say
that, although they say that they are ready to negotiate,
perhaps in their hearts and minds they are not ready.
You cannot argue on that basis; you can only argue on
26

the basis of what is real. I think it is important to reach
a stage where the Government of the Sudan will be
tested, and they can only be tested in negotiations:
What is your position on power sharing? What is your
position on wealth sharing? What is your position on
the question of security? When we reach that stage,
then we will be in a position to say whether or not the
Government of the Sudan is cooperating on the
question of negotiations.

Finally, after my limited experience in dealing
with the Darfur question, I will say this: when we talk
of incentives and disincentives, they must be universally
applied. Even though, as I said, the Government of the
Sudan bears primary responsibility, it would be wrong
to assume that on the one hand you have all the nice
guys and on the other hand you have all the bad guys.
That is not true. In other words, therefore, you have to
deal with the nice guys and the bad guys wherever they
appear, whether they come from the Government side or
the side of the movements.

