Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths for his
briefing and tireless efforts to bring together the parties
to engage in discussion. I repeat that Martin has the full
support of France. I would like to convey three brief
messages, before I address some ofthe points in greater
detail during the consultations that follow.

France regrets that the talks planned in Geneva at
the invitation of the United Nations could not be held.
As Mr. Griffiths eloquently recalled, it is essential to
safeguard the possibility for restarting the dialogue.
Geneva might be a missed opportunity in that regard,
but it is by no means the end of efforts to move the
political process forward.

My third message is that, more than ever, we must
call on the parties to remain engaged with the Special
Envoy in order to resume dialogue as soon as possible
and move forward the political process, which is the
only possible solution to the conflict in Yemen, as we all
know. United Nations mediation is the only path towards
a relaunching discussions with a view to reaching an
agreement on the management of the Al-Hudaydah port,
a resumption of talks, a lasting cessation of hostilities
and the setting of the parameters for a political
solution. The time is ripe for the implementation of the
confidence-building measures identified by the Special
Envoy, with a view to a sustainable, comprehensive and
inclusive political agreement.

My third message is a matter of urgency. The
quest for a political solution is not only essential but
also urgent, while the humanitarian situation, already
disastrous, continues to deteriorate. Only a political
solution will make it possible to put a lasting end to
the suffering of the Yemeni people. Such a solution
will require resolute and unanimous support from the
members of the Security Council for the efforts of
Mr. Griffiths - support that is in place- but it will also
require, in more proactive terms, coherent messages
from us collectively to the parties to the conflict and
regional actors alike.

At the moment, the population of Yemen is surviving
only thanks to the extraordinary efforts undertaken
by the United Nations and humanitarian actors on the
ground, whom I salute. We reiterate in the strongest
terms: it is imperative that international humanitarian
law and human rights law be respected. In that regard,
swift and unimpeded humanitarian access must be
guaranteed to populations in need. Those obligations, it
must be hammered home, are incumbent upon all.
That is the spirit in which France will continue to
strive towards the goals I have just recalled, sparing
no effort as we work with all the relevant actors to
those ends.

