Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing.

The information coming to the Council from the
ground is quite disturbing. The actions carried out by
the separatists and the intensification of fighting in
urban areas have brought about serious humanitarian
consequences. Today we call upon all parties for
restraint, to protect the civilian population and to
respect international humanitarian law, bearing in mind
the hundreds of thousands of terrorized and displaced
persons.

Russia's support for the separatists, in violation
of Ukraine's territorial integrity, is inadmissible. The
presence of Russian soldiers on Ukrainian territory and
their direct participation alongside separatists in the
taking of lives in Novoazovsk must not be tolerated.
As the President of the French Republic recalled this
morning, Russia must respect Ukraine's sovereignty; it
must halt its support to the separatists and call on them
to accept a bilateral ceasefire. That is the framework
in which a lasting political settlement must be sought,
but Moscow must also agree to de-escalation measures.
That presupposes the immediate halting of the delivery
of military materiel to the separatists. It also assumes
control along the Russian-Ukrainian border. On those
issues we expect signs from Russia that will finally
enable us to engage in a serious dialogue that benefits
everyone. The prolongation or escalation of the conflict
is not in the interests of Ukraine or Russia or the
international community.

Although the face-to-face meeting in Minsk
between Mr. Poroshenko and Mr. Putin on 26 August
led to few concrete results, it was a positive step in
that it allowed for direct contacts between the two
Presidents, after the 6 June meeting in Benouville.

The Ukrainian crisis is one of the worst crises in
Europe since the end of the Cold War. Our objective is
to ultimately achieve a lasting political solution to this
crisis, which has lasted for far too long. As long as Russia
pursues escalation, it will not take the opportunity to
resume political dialogue. We will therefore maintain
the pressure. That is why the European Union adopted
a substantial package of economic sanctions against
Russia on 29 July. The sanctions will be maintained
and will increase ifthe escalation continues. We hope it
will not reach that point, as that is not in the interest of
Russia or of anyone else.

