Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
for his briefing on the situation regarding a Middle
East settlement. We listened carefully to the statements
made by the representative of Palestine and the
Permanent Representative of Israel. We hope that, after
he leaves New York, Ambassador Gillerman will, on
the basis of the rich experience gained here, devote his
energies and talents to the cause of a just Israeli-
Palestinian settlement and a comprehensive Middle
East settlement. Without these, there can be no truly
prosperous Israel, living side by side with an equally
prosperous Palestinian State. That is precisely what, we
firmly believe, should be the goal of the entire
international community.

Russia welcomes the ongoing Israeli-Palestinian
dialogue. The keys to success are a fundamental
commitment by the parties to the provisions of the
Road Map, a recognition of the need to implement the
obligations set out in that instrument and assistance in
creating conditions conducive to the establishment of a
lasting peace in the Middle East. Those objectives can
be attained only through mutual compromise, and
efforts to achieve concrete results will ultimately
ensure the establishment of an independent and viable
Palestinian State, living in peace with its Israeli
neighbour within secure internationally recognized
borders and fully renouncing terrorism as a method of
achieving political goals.

However, the current tangible progress being
made on the diplomatic front cannot conceal the
ongoing alarming events occurring in daily life, many
of which were referred to today by Mr. Pascoe. Despite
the truce, which is generally being observed, the threat
against the lives of Israeli citizens fully remains as a
result of extremist raids, as confirmed by the terrorist
acts committed in Jerusalem on 2 July and today,
22 July. The Palestinians need to comply fully with
their counter-terrorist obligations under the Road Map.

The difficult humanitarian situation in Gaza
continues. In the West Bank, the Israeli authorities,
ignoring the repeated appeals of the United Nations
and the international community, continue to build
settlements and the separation wall. The Palestinian
people continue to suffer from poverty and
unemployment. They are unable to move freely
between their towns and are often victims of arbitrary
behaviour at Israeli checkpoints.

Given all that, the international community and,
in particular, the Quartet of Middle East mediators,
must do their utmost to establish an atmosphere
conducive to the establishment of Israeli-Palestinian
contacts. Arrangements for lasting peace between the
parties will not be possible unless Gaza and the West
Bank are reunited under the leadership of the
legitimate administration of the Palestinian Authority.
Russia is doing its utmost to support current efforts to
restore Palestinian unity on the basis of the Palestine
Liberation Organization programme and is sending a
clear signal to Hamas and President Abbas as to the
timeliness of their current efforts to heal the
destructive rift between the leading Palestinian
factions.

We welcome the contacts being made between
Syria and Israel with the effective mediation of Turkey.
We anticipate that those contacts will continue and
move steadily towards full-scale direct talks aimed at
creating the ultimate conditions for peace between the
two States: an end to the occupation and a
comprehensive settlement of the long Arab-Israeli
conflict on the basis of the relevant decisions of the
Security Council, the Madrid terms of reference, the
principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative. That is a strategy of justice, security and
peace. Its objectives are fully attainable if all
stakeholders shoulder their obligations to help to
advance them.

In that context, I wish to reaffirm that Russia
firmly intends - with the support of the Quartet, as
reaffirmed at its recent Berlin meeting, and with the
support of a broad range of other interested parties -
to hold an international conference on the Middle East
in Moscow. The conference should provide a powerful
impetus for accelerating the Annapolis process and
advancing the peace efforts on other tracks of the
Middle East settlement process.

I now turn to the situation in Lebanon. We
welcome the formation of a Government of national
unity in that country. A very important step has thereby
been taken towards full implementation of the
agreement reached by the Lebanese parties at Doha
with the mediation of the League of Arab States and
Qatar.

We welcome Lebanon's reaffirmation of its
ability, independently and without outside interference,
to achieve consensus in the service of higher national
interests. The completion of the formation of the
Lebanese constitutional bodies of Government, which
was reached through serious efforts and mutual
compromises, was aimed at ensuring further progress
in resolving other issues on the national agenda in the
interests of strengthening the independence,
sovereignty and unity of Lebanon. To that end,
Lebanese parties need to abide strictly by the existing
arrangements and refrain from any steps that could
spark tensions.

Russia will continue to contribute to addressing
Lebanese problems peacefully, on the basis of
intra-Lebanese dialogue and consent, without outside
interference from anywhere in the affairs of Lebanon.
In that regard, we welcome the practical steps taken by
Beirut and Damascus to normalize the entire range of
Syrian/Lebanese relations.

We are pleased that mutually acceptable solutions
have been found to a number of challenging problems
related to Lebanese detainees in Israeli prisons and
with respect to clarifying the fate of the Israeli soldiers
who have been missing since July 2006. We view the
United Nations-sponsored humanitarian exchanges
between Israel and the Lebanese Hizbollah as an

important development in line with the demands of the
international community, including resolution 1701
(2006). Those exchanges contribute to easing tensions
in the Middle East and reaffirm that constructive
dialogue and not confrontation yields results in the
interests of the civilian population of the Middle East.

Much is currently being said about the emerging
positive trends in various areas of the Middle East
peace process. That is indeed true. Under such
conditions, it is particularly important that collective
efforts through the channels of multilateral diplomacy
consolidate those gains in every respect, working to
achieve, by exclusively peaceful means, a
comprehensive and lasting settlement in the Middle
East.

