Mr. De la Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
First of all, Sir, I would like to thank you for having
chosen to draw the Security Council's attention to the
question of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons and mercenary activities and to have
organized this workshop with the Ministers,
delegations, States of the subregion and representatives
of the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS).

Since this morning, the debate has shown that
these two scourges are everywhere, but they have a
particular impact on West Africa, and they threaten
peace and security. They undermine economic
development, are at the heart of many excesses, and
contravene human rights. These two threats are most
often linked. Mercenaries and other armed groups
profit from easy access to illicit trafficking in small
arms in order to acquire large quantities of weapons at
often ridiculously low prices; and, therefore, they
maintain their ability to harm.

We also see in post-conflict situations, in the
context of fragile peace efforts, that if these
phenomena are not overcome in time, they remain an
ongoing impediment to strategies for peace,
demobilization and the reintegration of ex-combatants.
In fact, we have seen that mercenaries, once present in
a war economy based most often on the exploitation of
lucrative natural resources, such as diamonds, drugs or
other illicit trafficking, have no trouble at all in
recruiting their troops and in acquiring enough small
arms to continue their nefarious activity.

Another point that these two things have in
common is that they have a trans-border character. We
see the ground and air routes that are used by
traffickers of small arms that criss-cross the subregion
and the groups of mercenaries. These activities know
no boundaries. They use country X as a base for their
atrocities, and then they gradually export conflict and
war economy to the entire subregion.

I would first like to talk about mercenary
activities and then small arms and light weapons, since
they are related phenomena. For convenience's sake, I
will distinguish between them in my statement.

Thousands of combatants, often completely out of
control, are traversing the conflict areas of the
subregion - from Liberia to Sierra Leone and
throughout Cote d'Ivoire. These are mercenaries
Without borders who leave in their wake only
destruction, atrocities, theft, murder, rape and attacks
of all kinds, including those carried out in Sierra Leone
by so-called "short sleeves" and "long sleeves". We
must therefore ask why this phenomenon occurs more
frequently in West Africa than it does elsewhere. I
would offer one explanation: the first civil war in
Liberia.

Combatants in that bloody conflict were never re-
integrated into society, or even disarmed. The
international community was not up to the task of its
responsibilities. A number of those combatants merely
reconstituted themselves into the conflict in Sierra
Leone, either as rebels of the Revolutionary Armed
Forces (RUF) or as part of the Civil Defence Force
(CDF) militia. As far as the RUF is concerned, they
undoubtedly received support from the Government of
Liberia, as the reports of the Groups of Experts on
Sierra Leone and Liberia have pointed out. The
Security Council reacted by imposing sanctions against
the Government of Liberia. Resolution 1343 (2001),
which was renewed as resolution 1408 (2002),
demanded that the Liberian authorities cut off all ties
with the RUF. That decision was necessary but
insufficient. Those mercenaries will not disappear,
despite the disappearance of the RUF as a rebel army.

Today it is mostly Liberian mercenaries - but
also mercenaries from Sierra Leone - who are
clashing in the western part of Cote d'Ivoire. That is an
inter-Liberian conflict, and not one between the people
of Cote d'Ivoire. Those mercenaries are impeding the
return to peace. Let us not forget that the ceasefire is
being respected in the rest of the country.

The international community must take action in
the face of this a phenomenon, and France is
determined to do its share. What, then, should we do?
The first obligation when confronting the use of
mercenaries is to contain them with an effective
military presence. The Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
has referred to "robust peacekeeping", which is a very
good English phrase. The United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) employed robust
peacekeeping successfully against the RUF. French
troops are doing the same today in Cote d'Ivoire
against the rebel movements in the western part of the
country. But robust peacekeeping is only an initial
phase. The only long-term solution entails real
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes. In Sierra Leone the United Nations has
thus demobilized and reintegrated over 46,000
combatants. Liberia must be the next field of action.
There is no other way to avoid other countries in the
region being convulsed by conflict similar to that
which is unfortunately taking place today in C6te
d'Ivoire.

I would now like to say a few words about
combating the illicit traffic in small arms. We need to
take action at the national, regional and international
levels in order to eradicate illicit markets and the
destabilizing supply of small arms and light weapons in
the West African subregion.

In September 1999, France launched an initiative
to conclude an international instrument on the marking
and tracing of small arms and light weapons. Our goal
was to identify the illicit traffic in these weapons. My
country is pleased with the work that has been done -
on the basis ofjoint proposals submitted by France and
Switzerland - by the United Nations Group of Experts
on this subject with regard to the feasibility of this type
of international instrument. We hope that there will be
long-term negotiations for an international convention
in this field.

France would like to emphasize the importance of
producing States having a responsible attitude. If they
have not yet done so, they must without delay adopt
stringent legislation on export controls.

All of these essential measures are currently
being implemented or explored as part of the
Programme of Action adopted by the first United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Traffic in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which was held
in July 2001. The biennial conference to be held in July
will provide an opportunity for an initial examination
of the work under way. Another meeting, to be held in
2005, will allow us to begin preparations for the 2006
review conference. The Security Council has supported
these efforts, as it and the international community
should in fact do with regard to efforts under way in
the subregion.

In that regard, my country has from the beginning
supported the Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in West Africa, which was adopted by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). Last February, France announced the
renewal of its contribution to the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development (PCASED), which is managed by the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The
Programme has the specific task of supporting the
implementation of the Moratorium. In addition, since
2000, France has supported the operations of the
United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament at Lome.

The effectiveness of the Moratorium must
nevertheless be strengthened, especially as regards
establishing exemptions and an end-user certificate that
cannot be forged. France hopes that the Executive
Secretary of ECOWAS will limit requests for import
exemptions made by States to the legitimate security
needs of those countries.

On this issue, I would like to know the
assessment of partners as regards the progress made in
the implementation of the Moratorium and the
proposals made to strengthen its effectiveness.

Assistance provided within the PCASED
framework to implement the ECOWAS Moratorium has
a special role in operational activities. Those activities
pertain to the establishment by each State participating
in the Moratorium of a national commission and a
small arms register. It also entails their training
security forces, harmonizing legislation and collecting
and destroying confiscated weapons. We have
concluded that the results achieved are encouraging.
Twelve national commissions have been set up in the
15 participating countries. Nevertheless, additional
efforts will have to be made in order that the
commissions are truly able to begin their work.

I have one final question for the representatives
of the Secretary-General.

The West African subregion is obviously being
threatened by a number of conflicts, in particular by the
two on our agenda today: the proliferation of small
arms and the use of mercenaries. Would it then not be
worthwhile for the Secretariat to prepare for the
Council a report on the specific risks that exist in this
region - as Mr. Annan himself suggested in his report
of the summer of 2001 on the issue of conflict
prevention? Such a report could highlight the trans-
border dimensions of conflicts that are already on the
Council's agenda. It would also be based on relevant
information at the disposal of the Secretariat and
various actors on the ground, such as UNDP. In
particular, the report could focus on the problem of
small arms and light weapons and of mercenary
activities, even if other questions - particularly
humanitarian ones, for example - would also be part
of that discussion.

I think that this work would facilitate the follow-
up on this important question that is being considered
by the Security Council.

