Mr. Burian (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to commend the Russian presidency for its
initiative in organizing today's timely and highly
relevant debate.

Let me also join previous speakers in welcoming
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for the first time to
the Security Council this morning and thank him for
his opening remarks. We very much appreciate the
Secretary-General's commitment to working closely
and intensively with the Security Council on all crucial
issues related to the maintenance of international peace
and security. I would like to assure him of Slovakia's
full support for his work, his dedication to leading by
example, and his eagerness to work hard in all three
pillars of the United Nations portfolio - security,
human rights and development.

We believe that the emergence of new threats to
international peace and security requires the constant
attention and regular adaptation of the Security Council
and its working methods to the new security
environment. That is particularly true for some of the
most daunting challenges, such as the upsurge in
terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, and massive intra-State conflicts with the
potential to destabilize entire regions, such as the crisis
in Darfur. It is our joint responsibility to intensify our
efforts to achieve tangible progress in our work, which
should bring people more peace and security, better
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
and greater prosperity. Words, statements and
proclamations need to be transformed into practical
measures, making a real difference on the ground.
Otherwise, the entire United Nations system, including
the Security Council, will lose its relevance and
credibility.

We believe that the Security Council, in addition
to its usual focus on peacekeeping operations, must
equally concentrate on conflict prevention and post-
conflict peacebuilding, which are undoubtedly very
complex and extremely challenging tasks, but crucially
important ones.

As part of the Council's preventive diplomacy, in
accordance with the 2005 World Summit Outcome
DOCUMENT and Security Council resolution 1625
(2005), we believe that the Council needs to do more in
such areas as the protection of civilians, including
women and children, in military conflicts. We must do
everything to prevent another Rwanda or Srebrenica
from happening again. In that regard, we fully endorse
the concept of responsibility to protect adopted by our
heads of State and Government in September 2005.
Furthermore, we hope to be able to rely on receiving
more regular and more analytical reports from the
Secretary-General on regions of potential armed
conflict. The good offices of the Secretary-General will
certainly continue to be an indispensable tool.

As regards post-conflict peacebuilding, it is
crucial that the Council make better use of the potential
and of the coordinating and advisory functions of the
Peacebuilding Commission. The first results related to
the situation in Burundi and Sierra Leone have been
promising but fairly modest so far. Our joint efforts
need to be intensified and widened. Smooth transitions
from peacekeeping to the post-conflict phase ought to
be addressed in a more comprehensive and more
systematic way.

In this context, I would like to highlight the issue
of security sector reform as one of the crucial
challenges. The re-establishment of functioning
security institutions often lies at the core of many
peacebuilding efforts. Neglecting or insufficiently
carrying out this reform has too often had in dire
consequences, including countries relapsing into
violence and armed conflict. That is why Slovakia, in
cooperation with other partner countries, has recently
launched an initiative that will result in an open
Security Council debate next month on the issue of
security sector reform.

Also among the Council's top priorities are the
looming threats of terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. Slovakia firmly believes
that the Council needs to intensify its efforts in these
major areas and strive for more tangible results by
implementing existing resolutions, in particular
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004),
1718 (2006) and 1737 (2006). The Council must also
seek to enhance and streamline the work of its relevant
committees.

In addition to receiving and evaluating reports
from States Members of the United Nations, more
needs to be done, in particular, in providing guidance
and technical assistance to States in capacity-building,
local and regional ownership and strengthening United
Nations partnerships and cooperation with regional,
subregional and other intergovernmental organizations.
Efforts of regional and other stakeholders and of the
United Nations must reinforce and complement one
another, thereby making the best use of existing
capacities and often very limited resources.

My statement today would be incomplete without
mentioning the ongoing need for comprehensive
reform of the Security Council, to which Slovakia is
firmly committed. Such reform must include both an
increase in the Council's membership and an
improvement in its working methods.

Slovakia welcomes and is committed to fully
implementing the outcomes of the intensive work
conducted last year by its revitalized Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. As a current non-permanent Council
member, Slovakia will spare no effort to help achieve
further progress in the work of the Informal Working
Group.

Mandate review was another essential element of
the World Summit's reform agenda, one that could help
make the entire Organization, including this Council,
more relevant, efficient and effective in its work.

In conclusion, allow me once again to reiterate
my delegation's full commitment to the Security
Council's intensive and close cooperation with the
Secretary-General and with the entire United Nations
Secretariat.

Finally, we would like to thank the Russian
delegation for preparing the draft Presidential
Statement, the adoption of which we support today.

