Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to thank
Ambassador Mariano Fernandez Amunategui for his
very comprehensive briefing. Brazil commends his
much appreciated work to assist Haiti in its efforts
towards enhanced stability and concrete progress in
key political, economic, social and institutional
objectives.

As the Secretary-General notes his report
(S/2011/540),

"Haiti has experienced, for the first time in
its history, a peaceful transfer of power from one
democratically elected president to another from
the opposition." (S/2011/540, para. 2)

This is in itself a major achievement. It also brings new
challenges. We call on all political actors in Haiti to
contribute to the forging of a broad political compact
based on a common set of national priorities. That will
greatly facilitate continued international cooperation
and support to the country.

The humanitarian situation in Haiti has shown
considerable improvement, as the number of people
living under tents has declined significantly. But the
thousands of Haitians still in camps are precisely the
most vulnerable. We must redouble our efforts so that
housing projects increase in pace and scale. Strong
international engagement is still essential to ensure that
all pressing humanitarian needs are met. Mitigating
natural disasters and preventing cholera outbreaks are
still crucial tasks we must all help to complete.

Brazil reiterates its full support to the Haiti
Interim Recovery Commission and would welcome the
extension of its mandate. In that regard, we hope that
its renewal will entail enhanced national ownership of
the reconstruction process. In turn, that would improve
the dialogue between the Commission and Haitian
society. Reconstruction must help to tackle the
economic challenges that have long thwarted Haiti's
path towards prosperity. That is one of the many ways
by which we can assist Haitians not only to rebuild but
to rebuild better.
Job creation remains the most urgent challenge.
We therefore favour a more strategic vision of the

reconstruction efforts, with the expeditious
implementation of approved projects and special
attention to those that are labour-intensive.

Brazil also welcomes the appointment by
President Martelly of his presidential consultative
council for economic development and investment. We
hope that this initiative will contribute to enhancing the
coordination of international cooperation, fully
developing Haiti's economic potential and attracting
investment, in an environment of stronger democratic
governance and the rule of law.

Infrastructure and energy remain key aspects in
that respect. Brazil continues to believe that the
construction of the hydroelectric plant of Artibonite 4C
is a critical project that will boost economic growth
and job generation, while providing a clean source of
energy for millions of people. We urge all interested
partners to rally behind this project so that it can be
implemented as a matter of urgency. Brazil will
continue to support the development of Haiti, through
technical cooperation and economic assistance. Such
initiatives pave the way for the sustainable peace and
stability in Haiti.

Throughout the years, the experience of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) has provided us with many examples of
the benefits of addressing security and development as
interlinked challenges. Recent events have confirmed
that perception. In July, as mentioned by Ambassador
Fernandez Amunategui, MINUSTAH conducted
Operation Phoenix in poor areas of Port-au-Prince,
with the aim of dismantling resurgent gang and
criminal activity. The Operation resulted in lower
crime rates and an increase in the level of social
assistance, better public services and enhanced
economic opportunities for the local population.

Last month, MINUSTAH completed the
installation of 208 lampposts in Cite' Soleil, in a
partnership with the Brazilian military contingent and
local contractors. Apart from its economic benefits,
that initiative is expected to have a major impact on
crime rates in the area and provide enhanced security,
especially for women.

Brazil supports the renewal of MINUSTAH's
mandate as recommended in the Secretary-General's
report. We concur with the proposed drawdown of
military and police contingents to pre-earthquake
levels, with the understanding that such a measure will

be implemented in a way that does not impact the
Mission's assets and capacity to preserve stability in
the country.

Brazil also sees a need to initiate a serious debate
on the future of the Mission. Our collective reflection
should in particular take into account the security
situation on the ground as it evolves, as well as the
interlinkages between security and development as key
components of sustainable peace. It is essential that
efforts on the security front be accompanied by even
stronger support by the international community to
socio-economic development and the strengthening of
the institutional capabilities of the Haitian State.

Brazil's commitment to Haiti, bilaterally,
regionally and through the United Nations, remains
unwavering. It stems from the deep-rooted and long-
standing solidarity of the Brazilian people towards our
Haitian brothers and sisters. We will continue to assist
Haiti, including through MINUSTAH, in its quest for
independence, justice and prosperity.

