Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by expressing our appreciation to
Portugal, and to you in particular, Mr. President, for
your leadership and commitment to improving the
Security Council's working methods, and for having
organized this debate.

Costa Rica aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the
group of five small nations (S-5), but we would like to
suggest some additional ideas and proposals, focusing
on transparency.

In a representative entity such as the United
Nations, transparency should be a basic standard and a
permanent practice in all its bodies, including the
Security Council. We know that in order to effectively
promote international peace and security, the Council
needs a reasonable degree of confidentiality for some
of its analytical, deliberative and decision-making
processes. However, such confidentiality should be the
exception, not the rule. Beyond this, it is crucial to
cultivate a genuine willingness to share all information
that is not confidential through transparency and
disclosure processes that are systematic, timely and
easily accessible to all Member States. Better
transparency, apart from being a duty, would increase
the perception of the Council as a representative,
reinforce its legitimacy and enable it to draw on the
most relevant contributions of all Members of the
Organization, thereby improving its effectiveness.

Costa Rica recognizes that in the wake of the
presidential note of July 2006 (S/2006/507) and its
update of last year (S/2010/507), significant progress
has been made in transparency. In the written version
of this statement, we highlight the Council's most
important advances, so I will not repeat them now.
However, I should add that from the non-governmental
point of view, the Security Council Report website has
contributed fundamentally to well-informed,
systematic and rigorous monitoring of the activities of
the Council.

To sum up, we can say that the Security Council's
transparency has improved. Nevertheless, the
improvements are not enough; they have not been
consolidated, much less duly formalized. As such, they
are at risk of paralysis or reversal. For example, while
the number of meetings open to all Member States has
increased, these are often preceded by informal closed
meetings where agreements are negotiated. The reports
by the presidencies assessing the work done during the
month of each presidency are extremely infrequent.
The Council's annual report to the Assembly, due to its
enormous length, inadequate synthesis and total lack of
analysis, is rarely illuminating and is not released far
enough ahead of the debate on its contents. Special
reports on topics of particular relevance, as provided
for in the Charter, are strikingly absent.

In light of these and other considerations, I would
like to conclude with some specific suggestions. Many
of these are included in the annex to the draft
resolution that has been submitted for consultation by
the 8-5, and Costa Rica considers them particularly
important. The list is included in my written statement;
I will simply cite as examples the importance of
regularizing the assessment reports made at the end of
each presidency; scheduling more frequent and
substantive consultations with interested Member
States as part of the process of drafting and preparing
draft resolutions and other work produced by the
Council; notifying Member States in a timely manner
about the development and final assessment, including
budgetary aspects, of missions established by the
Council; holding more frequent and more substantive
open meetings of the Council; and cultivating a more
open attitude towards external contributions.

Five years after the appearance of presidential
note 507, the Council is at a critical juncture where its
transparency and general working methods are
concerned. It must either rekindle its energy and
momentum in order to consolidate the gains achieved
so far and move forward with those that are still
pending, or remain stagnant and regress, with negative
results for both its effectiveness and its legitimacy. We
all know that the first is the only real option.

