Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): You
will no doubt notice, Mr. President, that I am very
pleased today to not be speaking alone in an open
meeting of the Security Council, as is usually the case.
As a result, as I said, we are quite pleased to be in such
good company this morning vis-a-vis our membership.

I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for presenting the Secretary-General's reports
(S/2017/435 and S/2017/565). I would also like to
reiterate our gratitude to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Maman Sidikou, and to the
entire team and staff of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) for the work they have been
carrying out in more than complex conditions. We
reiterate once again Uruguay's commitment to stability
and peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
not only in our capacity as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council but also as a country that has
contributed troops in Congo over the past 16 years
without interruption.

We are at a critical point for the future of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. As already
mentioned, six months ago the comprehensive and
inclusive political agreement was signed thanks to the
significant mediation efforts by the National Episcopal
Conference of the Congo, which generated expectations
for a peaceful solution to the crisis. In six months, and
before the end of the year and in accordance with the
agreement, elections are supposed to be held, leading
to a peaceful transfer of power. At this point, halfway
through the year, there is serious concern about the
slow and limited progress in the implementation of the
political agreement, as well as about the deepening of
certain adverse trends in the situation of the country.

Uruguay reiterates its support for the political
agreement, which we believe is the only viable solution
to the crisis, and urges all the political actors to fully
implement the agreement. It is crucial for the parties
to step up their efforts in implementing the transition
arrangements, in setting up the national council to
follow up the implementation of the agreement and in
instituting confidence-building measures. All of these
elements are provided for in the agreement.

The report of the Secretary-General contained in
document S/2017/565 and Mr. Lacroix's briefing give an
account of an ongoing worsening of several negative
trends with respect to the situation of the country,
mainly in the areas of security and human rights. We are
concerned about the spread of insecurity in the western
part ofthe Democratic Republic ofthe Congo. There has
been an increase in violence among ethnic communities,
particularly in the Kasai region. Instability persists in
many sectors in the eastern part of the country, due in
large part to the activities of armed groups and militias.
The risk of violence in the main urban areas has grown
in the light of the looming electoral context. This new
outlook poses serious threats to a growing number of
civilians, many of whom have been forced to relocate
within the country or in neighbouring countries.

Uruguay expresses its deep concern over the
continuing deterioration of the human rights situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are struck
by the significant increase in the number of violations
that have been documented by MONUSCO month after
month, affecting above all vulnerable populations, such
as children and women. But we are even more struck by
the fact that State actors have been responsible for more
than half of documented human rights violations.

We are also concerned by the trend towards
maintaining restrictions on the democratic space, with
an increase in violations of civil and political rights, in
particular the freedoms of peaceful assembly, opinion,
expression and thought. Uruguay reiterates that it is
the responsibility of the Government to respect and
protect human rights and fundamental freedoms. We
urge the national authorities to act swiftly to commence
investigations and prosecutions in order to bring to

justice those responsible for violations of human rights
as well as to fight impunity.

In conclusion, Uruguay acknowledges
MONUSCO'S efforts to readjust its priorities and
its mandate with a View to transforming the force to
increase its efficiency and effectiveness. However, I
would reiterate on this occasion what we said during
the mandate-renewal debate last March with respect to
reducing the number of MONUSCO troops. At a time
when there is a obvious increase in violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we are even more
concerned about comments on possible new reductions
in the coming months. As for the strategic review of
MONUSCO that the Secretariat will carry out in the
next few weeks in order to adapt the Mission's mandate
to the new requirements, we fully confirm that the
recommendations arising therefrom will be based on a
frank assessment of the current situation on the ground,
which, in our opinion, is not at all encouraging.

