Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We would
like to thank Special Envoy De Mistura for his briefing
and for all the work that he has done on behalf of the
Syrian people.

Today's meeting takes place in an atmosphere of
uncertainty and urgency about the future of Syria. The
violence on the ground has diminished for now. That
de facto de-escalation provides an opportunity to move
forward decisively with a political process to bring about
a peaceful and permanent resolution of the conflict. At
the same time, the longer we allow the Syrian regime
to stall and equivocate and to do everything that it can
to avoid coming to the table for constructive talks on a
political settlement, the greater the danger of a return
to the violence that has plagued Syria for nearly eight
years will be.

The United States reiterates its firm position that the
constitutional committee should be convened without
delay - in December, before the end of the year, if not
sooner. The United Nations and the Special Envoy must
move towards that goal by issuing invitations to all 150
committee members without further delay.

The Special Envoy and the Security Council have
been discussing the formation of that committee for
almost a year. The United Nations has compiled the list
of the committee members with input from the relevant
parties. The list of civil society representatives was
to be determined by Special Envoy De Mistura. He
has been more than patient and flexible in accepting
input from the Syrian regime and from others. Any
further deliberation must be seen for what it is: an
artificial delay and a transparent attempt to distract
and delay progress towards a political solution in Syria.
Neither the Syrian regime nor the Astana group, in
particular Iran and Russia, can be allowed to veto the
Special Envoy's decision on the membership of the
constitutional committee.

A committee over which Al-Assad or Iran have
veto power is not credible and does not represent the
interests of the Syrian people. Let us recall how this
began - not with terrorism or with military combat
but with a Government violently repressing peaceful
demonstrators. That Government must not now be
given a veto over fixing the mess that it made.

The burden is on Russia to show that it wants its
own diplomatic initiative to succeed. Russia must
bring the Syrian regime to the table. If it truly wants
a political solution, Russia must end the obstruction
of that process. In the past, Moscow has proved that
it has the ability to influence its client in Damascus.
It must use that influence today to prevent the Syrian
regime from continuing to delay the formation of the
constitutional committee.

The convening of the constitutional committee is
a first and critical step towards a political transition
in Syria. However, the international community will
not even begin to consider providing reconstruction
support before a durable and irreversible political
process is clearly on track. Providing assistance before
that point does nothing to address the root cause of the
Syrian conflict: the repression by Bashar Al-Assad
and his regime of the Syrian people. Al-Assad cannot
be rewarded for destroying his own country and
overseeing the killing of hundreds of thousands of
Syrians. The international community must hold
Al-Assad accountable, and the Syrian people must have
the opportunity to hold him accountable. All those who
were displaced or forced to flee the regime's repression
must have the opportunity to have a new constitution
that will protect them, as well as deliver parliamentary
and presidential elections in line with resolution 2254
(2015). Only then will Al-Assad's victims achieve a
measure ofjustice and only then will all the people of
Syria be able to look forward to a better future.

It is long overdue that we begin the difficult task
of ending the conflict and providing for the safety and
stability of Syria. The Syrian people must not be forced
to wait any longer. We must urgently seize this fleeting
window of opportunity to achieve a political transition
and a lasting peace in Syria.

