The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations. Members of the Council have before
them the report of the Secretary-General on the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, document S/2007/759.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest possible terms the 7 January attack by
elements of the Sudanese Armed Forces, as
confirmed by the African Union-United Nations
Mission in Darfur (UNAMID), on a UNAMID
supply convoy. The Security Council stresses that
any attack on or threat against UNAMID is
unacceptable, and demands that there will be no
recurrence of attacks on UNAMID. The Security
Council welcomes the commitment of the
Government of the Sudan to undertake a
complete and full investigation into the incident,
together with the United Nations/African Union.

"The Security Council welcomes the
transition of authority from the African Union
peacekeeping operation (AMIS) to UNAMID,
which occurred on 31 December. The Security
Council commends AMIS for its prompt action to
begin to re-establish peace and security in Darfur.

"The Council calls on the Government of
the Sudan to expedite full compliance with
Security Council resolution 1769 (2007),
including through concluding all the necessary
arrangements for the expeditious deployment of
an effective UNAMIID force.

"The Council further urges the Government
of the Sudan and all armed groups to respect an
immediate and complete ceasefire and demands
that all parties cooperate fully with the
deployment of UNAMID and respect its security
and freedom of movement.

"The Security Council reiterates that an
inclusive political settlement and the successful
deployment of UNAMID are essential for re-
establishing peace and stability in Darfur. The
Security Council urges all parties, including rebel
groups, to engage fully and constructively in the
political process under the leadership of United
Nations Special Envoy Mr. Jan Eliasson and
African Union Special Envoy Dr. Salim Salim,
who have the Council's full support. The Security
Council expresses its readiness to take action
against any party that impedes the peace process,
humanitarian aid or the deployment of UNAMID.
The Council also recognizes that due processes
must take their course.

"The Council expresses concern about the
deterioration of security and humanitarian
conditions in Darfur and calls upon the United
Nations and all Member States to facilitate the
rapid and complete deployment of UNAMID. The
Council urges capable Member States to
contribute the helicopter and transportation units
necessary to ensure the successful
implementation of UNAMID's mandate."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2008/ 1.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.15pm.
08-2057]
