Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China appreciates Viet Nam's initiative to convene today's open debate. We are pleased to see you, Your Excellency Mr. Pham Binh Minh, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, presiding over the meeting. We thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his briefing, which contains a host of important observations and insights worthy of in-depth consideration by us all. China also thanks Mrs. Mary Robinson for her presentation. I wish to take this opportunity to express my deepest condolences in connection with the demise of passengers from various countries in the Ukrainian airplane crash that took place in Iran, and I express my heartfelt sympathy to the victims' families. Seventy-five years ago, the Charter of the United Nations officially came into force, marking the birth of the United Nations and the start of a brand-new chapter in human history. The Charter of the United Nations is a great historical text that came into being in the twentieth century as a cornerstone of multilateralism. The Charter establishes the basic norms governing international relations today, develops generally recognized principles of international law and charts the way forward for human society. Over the past 75 years, the four purposes and seven principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations make up the basic credo by which States interact with one another. The principles of, inter alia, sovereign equality, the peaceful settlement of disputes, the prohibition of the threat or use of force, respect for the political independence and territorial integrity of States and non-interference in their internal affairs have taken root in the hearts and minds of peoples and have contributed significantly to world peace and development. If we look around the world today, universal peace remains elusive. Unilateralism is on the rise, dealing heavy blows to the international rule of law and order. As a result of spreading protectionism, the world economy is plagued by uncertainties. That is compounded by acts of bullying, the effects of which are being felt around the world and are jeopardizing global peace and stability. The recent sudden heightened tension in the situation in the Arabian Gulf region has significantly increased the risk of war. Much remains to be done to achieve peace and security, as today's world makes it more imperative than ever to uphold the Charter. This year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations. Recalling the spirit of the Charter is the best way to commemorate the Organization's seventy-fight birthday, and that is especially relevant given the present context. One need only open the Charter to find its unequivocal message expressed in the first paragraph of the Preamble, namely, "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind", That is the founding aspiration of the United Nations and, more important, the mission of the Organization's 193 States Member. Seventy-five years later, we must ask ourselves: Have we really succeeded? Will this and succeeding generations be saved from the scourge of war? The answer, which remains as yet unknown, will depend on whether every State bears in mind the founding aspiration proclaimed in the Charter and honours the mission enshrined within it. In upholding the Charter, we must pursue mutually beneficial cooperation. The world is undergoing the most dramatic shifts in a century. No country alone can take on the challenges confronting humankind. No country can afford to regress to self-imposed isolation. It is imperative to create greater opportunities through cooperation, overcome risks and challenges and achieve shared development. It is also imperative to strive for win-win results on an equal footing and refrain from an all-for-me approach, so that all countries enjoy equal rights and benefits from equal opportunities on a level playing field. In upholding the Charter, we must be guided by the international rule of law. Countries must interact with one another in good faith, with integrity and must not waver or go back on their word. International cooperation must be anchored in rules, which means that one must not do whatever one wants. We must firmly oppose the practice of putting one country's own interests above those of others, oppose the wanton misinterpretation of international law, oppose the hegemonic logic of its selective application and oppose long-arm jurisdiction and unilateral sanctions. In upholding the Charter, we must adhere to the principles of equity and justice. Equity means that matters of an international nature should be discussed and managed by us all; that all countries are equal regardless of their size; and that big countries have a duty to help smaller ones, as do rich countries poorer ones. Justice is manifested in mutual respect for one another's sovereignty, independence and territorial Integrity. It is also manifested in respect for every country's independent choice of path towards development and right to pursue a better life and a bigger space for development. In upholding the Charter, we must take effective measures. The Charter should not merely ornament a bookshelf, much less be used for lip service. It should be put into practice on the ground to generate tangible results. The Charter confers upon the Security Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. That is the sacred mission of the 15 members of the Council. We must always act in the interest of the greater good, namely, safeguarding world peace. We must enhance mutual trust, strengthen unity, avoid the politicization of certain issues and remain committed to diffusing conflicts and preventing wars so that we can have a safer and more secure world. Currently, the United States unilateral military adventurism has led to heightening tension in the situation in the Arabian Gulf region. China supports Secretary-General Antonio Guterres' call for peace. We have been actively engaged in diplomatic efforts and are committed to playing a responsible and constructive role in safeguarding international law, equity, justice and regional peace and stability. We call on all parties concerned to exercise maximum restraint, return to dialogue and consultations without delay, jointly work towards a de-escalation of the situation and collectively uphold the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. If the situation in the region were to spiral out of control, it would not serve the interests of any party. Restoring peace is of crucial importance to the entire world. The Security Council should discharge its duty emanating from the Charter with regard to the maintenance of international peace and security. China was the first country to sign the Charter. It has consistently and scrupulously adhered to the purposes and principles of the Charter and has unfailingly supported efforts to defend the authority and functions of the United Nations. In 2015, before the General Assembly (see A/70/PV.13), President Xi Jinping systematically expounded on the importance of building a community of shared future for humankind, which is a continuation and sublimation of the purposes of the Charter. In the face of the new era and new situations, China's commitment to the Charter is unwavering, and China will honour every one of its promises to support the United Nations. China will uphold the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes, play its important role as a permanent member of the Security Council, remain committed to taking an impartial stand on both international and regional hotspot issues and propose constructive solutions to safeguard international peace and security. China will uphold the sovereign equality, political independence and territorial integrity of all countries and non-interference in other countries' internal affairs, and is ready to share its development experience and provide the necessary assistance to countries in need. But China will not impose any models or attach any political strings to its assistance. China will uphold the principles of the non-use and non-threat of force. Peaceful development has long been enshrined in China's Constitution. Regardless of its stage of development, China will never seek hegemony or expansion. China will faithfully fulfil its obligations under the Charter, actively participate in United Nations peacekeeping operations, seriously fulfil its financial obligations to the United Nations and support the United Nations central role in international multilateral affairs. China will actively implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. China will have completely eradicated absolute poverty and comprehensively built a well-off society by 2020. China will promote the high-quality joint construction of the Belt and Road Initiative so that the dividends of China's development will be able to benefit all countries in the world. The world we live in is full of hope. It is also rife with challenges. We must not give up our dreams just because reality is complex. We must not abandon our pursuits just because our ideals are not within easy reach. Let us act together and work tirelessly to realize the purposes and principles of the Charter and build a community of shared future for humankind.
