Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, and Mr. Stephen O'Brien, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator. I would also like to
thank the United Kingdom for calling today's important
meeting.

The city known today as Aleppo has been
continuously inhabited for more than 7,000 years. Over
the centuries, it has been won and lost by a succession
of empires * the Greeks, the Romans, crusaders,
the Ottomans and more. It has been home to diverse
populations of traders and merchants, which included
Muslims, Jews and Christians. That is not ancient
history. Those influences have long been visible in
the city's architecture, tasted in its food and felt in its
culture. By the sixteenth century, it was famous enough
for Shakespeare to cite it in Othello and Macbeth.

A city does not become one of the world's oldest
without surviving great challenges. Aleppo has endured
wars, occupations and earthquakes. In 1260 it survived
a siege by the Mongols. After so many centuries, a city
like this might seem able to survive anything. But in
recent days, young Syrians have spread a slogan across
social media: "Aleppo is burning". After five years of
war, the recent explosion of violence has threatened what
remains of the city. Just today, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
warned that continued violence could be catastrophic
and that it could force 400,000 more residents to flee.
Imagine the ripple effect and the consequences of that
additional displacement.

To save Aleppo - what is left ofAleppo - we need
progress on the same three fronts needed for peace in
Syria overall. It is not that complicated. As Special Envoy
De Mistura previously underscored, the three elements
are stopping the fighting, improving humanitarian
access and engaging in political negotiations to bring
about transition. This year has actually shown that all
three are possible - however belatedly, unevenly and
imperfectly implemented - when there is political will.
The cessation of hostilities has, up to this point, saved
lives. Humanitarian access, while still grotesquely
restricted, has improved modestly. And Special Envoy
de Mistura has convened the parties for talks in Geneva.
All three tracks are interlinked and interdependent and
we cannot, as some have argued, neglect any one of
them and expect the other two to succeed.

In recent days, as evidenced most clearly by what
has occurred in Aleppo, all three of those tracks are in
grave peril. First, as others have noted, across much of
Aleppo, the cessation of hostilities has given way to
horrific violence. The Syrian Observatory for Human
Rights reported that more than 270 civilians were killed
in Aleppo just since 22 April. While all sides have
contributed to the violence, the military escalation was
attributable largely to the actions of a single party - the
Al-Assad regime. The regime launched more than 300
air strikes, 110 artillery strikes and 18 missiles, and
dropped more than 68 bombs on the city over just
these past two weeks, according to credible actors on
the ground. All of that while still paying lip service
to a cessation of hostilities. Against that backdrop, the
United States has been working urgently with Special
Envoy De Mistura and with the Russian Federation
to reaffirm the cessation across the country. Through
those efforts, the parties to the cessation agreed to
recommit to the truce in Aleppo and its suburbs earlier
today. The city has been calmer, and we urge all parties
to comply fully so that hostilities actually cease - not
just in Aleppo but across the country.

The regime and some of its supporters sometimes
claim to be attacking the Al-Nusra Front or Da'esh, but
the sites hit in Aleppo show otherwise. Consider this
list of targets struck by the regime or its allies between
20 and 29 April - not ancient history, but rather a
matter of the past couple of weeks. This list of targets
was provided by the Syrian Network for Human Rights,
which has proved highly reliable during the conflict:
an ambulance in the Bab Al-Nairab neighbourhood,
a public market in the district of Al-Sakhour, a civil
defence centre in Al-Atarib, a bakery in Al-Ameriyeh,
a school in the Bab Al-Hadid district and a mosque
in the Al-Sukkari district. The distinction between
civilians and military personnel and targets has to be
respected in accordance with international law. Yet
every day the photos and videos out of Aleppo show
that that distinction has been obliterated.

It is important to note that violence by the Al-Nusra
Front or Da'esh is violence by groups that are not
a party to the cessation and are not protected by the
cessation of hostilities. The rest of the opposition that
signed up for the cessation and abided by it cannot be
held responsible for the actions of terrorists who have
made no secret of their desire to keep fighting. Nobody
benefits more from this war, and from the failure to
reach a political solution and a political transition, than
the terrorists. However, one cannot lump the like with
the unlike, the innocent with the guilty.

These attacks have imposed an incalculable toll on
Aleppo's civilians, and they contribute to a devastating
humanitarian situation in the city. But the regime has
also taken additional measures that show its overt intent
to ratchet up civilian suffering in Aleppo. The Syrian
Government has restricted humanitarian access and
blocked aid, thereby undercutting that second element
necessary for a peaceful resolution to be advanced. The
International Syria Support Group (ISSG) has just been
informed, as Under-Secretary-General O'Brien has just
confirmed here today, that the regime has approved
only eight deliveries for 25 per cent of people in the
United Nations May delivery plan for besieged and
hard-to-reach areas, and the Syrian Government did
not approve any of the Aleppo locations in the United
Nations May plan. Is that a coincidence or is it simply in
keeping with the regime's massive offensive designed
to terrorize the people of Aleppo?

Though the Council should need no reminder,
resolution 2254 (2015) calls for rapid, safe and
unhindered access throughout the country. Aleppo is
a place of huge need right now. We often focus in our
remarks on those who have been killed, but think of
all of those who have been injured and are in desperate
need of help. Resolution 2254 (2015) proscribes the
removal of medicines and medical supplies from aid
conveys, but, again, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has documented that
that is a routine practice throughout Syria. It is the
exception when medical supplies are actually allowed
through on convoys. It is a rule, and a rule that is
enforced across the board by the Syrian Government's
bureaucracy, to remove medical supplies from convoys.

Just to give one example, on a recent convoy to
Rastan, the authorities even went so far as to remove
the scissors and anaesthetics from midwifery kits.
Who does that? Let us be honest. The people who
do that are people who do not give a damn what the
Council prescribes. They do not care. They have
stopped listening.

At the same time, the regime has deliberately
targeted first-responders, health-care workers and
medical facilities. Of the 33 hospitals open in Aleppo
in 2010, fewer than 10 are reportedly functioning today.
The most recent example, as we all know, was the loss
of the Al-Quds hospital, which suffered a horrific
attack that killed at least 50 civilians, including the
city's last pediatrician, Dr. Muhammad Waseem Moaz,
a man described by a colleague as the loveliest doctor
in their hospital. He was a man who had sent his family
to safety in Turkey, while he stayed behind to treat his
patients. He was a man so committed to his people that
he often slept in the hospital in case a child needed
emergency help during the night.

According to Physicians for Human Rights, the
attack that killed that great doctor along with so many
others was actually the third strike on the hospital since
the war began. That is not an accident. Ifyou hit a hospital
once by mistake, you can adjust your targeting and
make allowances, but that was wilful targeting. At least
six medical facilities throughout Aleppo were attacked
during the past week, and the most recent attack, as we
have heard, was yesterday against the Dabbit maternity
clinic in regime-held territory where more civilians
were killed. All of those attacks are reprehensible.
Just yesterday, the Council adopted resolution 2286
(2016) on, inter alia, the importance of the protection
of medical personnel and the importance of access to
medical care in armed conflict. Every member of the
Council voted in favour, and it is now time to call for its
implementation in a real context - the context of Syria.
And that means urgently pressing the regime and any
group that would shell a hospital to comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
cease targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including hospitals and medical personnel.

That brings me to the third and final element
necessary for progress towards the conflict's resolution:
political negotiations aimed at political transition.
After five years of war, it should be abundantly clear
that the conflict will be settled only through political
dialogue. Aleppo is a living monument to the belief
that military force can achieve something for the people
of Syria. The need for a political solution is precisely
what the Council agreed in December 2015 when we
adopted resolution 2254 (2015). Yet we have seen one
party in particular renege on its commitments to a full
cessation ofhostilities nation-wide and to the full, rapid
and unhindered delivery of humanitarian aid, blatantly
disregarding resolution 2254 (2015). That undermines
the conditions needed for negotiations and makes
finding common ground and forging compromises
exceedingly difficult.

Let me conclude. There is plenty of blame to go
around for the worsening situation in Aleppo, but there
can be no doubt about where the primary responsibility
lies. It lies with the same regime that is responsible for
committing similar offenses throughout the country: the
one that has laid siege to 15 cities throughout Syria and
restricted access to aid for millions of Syrians, leading
to the preventable deaths of countless civilians; the one
responsible for 12 ofthe 13 attacks on medical facilities,
recorded from January through March by Physicians
for Human Rights, and 24 of the 25 deaths that resulted
from those strikes; the regime responsible for last
week's air strikes against a Syrian civil-defence station
in the town of Al-Atareb in Aleppo Province, which
killed five brave men who volunteered to serve their
communities as first-responders: Ahmad Abdullah,
Khaled Bashar, Ahmad Mahmoud, Hamdo Haj Ibrahim
and Hussain Ismail - the most recent casualties among
the more than 115 white helmets, who have died in the
line of duty since the war began; and the same party
and the same regime responsible for the vast majority of
the 400,000 deaths - and counting - in the conflict.

The party primarily responsible for the burning in
Aleppo is a United Nations Member State. That should
revolt us. The party is a United Nations Member State
indifferent and cold to the ghastly suffering of its
people. That should galvanize and unite us. All those
with influence, particularly Russia and Iran, must press
the regime to meet its commitments and obligations.
For our part, the United States will continue pressing
the opposition to do the same. We will work with our
Russian counterparts to try to restore a real and lasting
cessation of hostilities in Aleppo and elsewhere in
Syria and facilitate a political transition away from
Al-Assad - the only way in which this war will finally
end. The entire ISSG is going to have to be a part of
making that happen.

Today, a Syrian surgeon in Aleppo, Dr. Osama Abo
El Ezz, wrote in the New York Times of losing so many
of his close friends who were medical professionals over
the last five years. Over the past week, he wrote, "The
bombardment has reached such ferocity that even the
stones are catching fire". Of the cessation of hostilities,
he wrote,

"Imperfect though it was, it offered Syrian civilians
a brief respite from five years of violence. People
had begun to recover during the truce, to get their
lives back."

He continued to recount that now, people in Aleppo
are waiting for death and even praying for it in some
instances to take them away from "this burning city",
as he put it. All of us here must work relentlessly to
restore and maintain the respite from violence, for which
Syrians yearn and which they deserve, to ensure that
they receive vital humanitarian aid to survive - many
are on death's door right now as we sit here - and to
build the political solution, which is the only escape
from the daily inferno.

