The President (spoke in Russian): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
March 2008, I should like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Ricardo Alberto Arias, Permanent Representative
of Panama to the United Nations, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of
February 2008. I am sure I speak for all members of
the Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Arias for the great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question

Letter dated 1 March 2008 from the Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab J amahiriya
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2008/142)

The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Israel in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Carmon
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
1 March 2008 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document 8/2008/143 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council which will
be held on Saturday, 1 March 2008, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and previous practice in
this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in response to the
letter dated 1 March 2008 from the Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
contained in document S/2008/142.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to photocopies of a document to be
issued under the symbol S/2008/l44, which contains
identical letters dated 1 March 2008 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine addressed to the
Secretary-General and to the President of the Security
Council.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, at this meeting. I
now give him the floor.


