Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): First, I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this timely meeting
on the situation in Kosovo. I also thank the Special
Representative, Mr. Harri Holkeri, and commend him
for his comprehensive briefing, particularly taking into
account his recent appointment. It was a very thorough
analysis of the situation. The proposals he brought to
the Council are relevant and important.
Turning to the Secretary-General's report, my
delegation wishes to express its appreciation for the
progress that has been made towards the achievement
of a substantial degree of autonomy during the period
under analysis. At the institutional level, we note the
gradual transfer of the non-reserved responsibilities
listed in chapter 5 of the Constitutional Framework and
the work of the Transfer Council. The current transfer
of responsibilities from the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to the
Provisional Institutions remains an encouraging
development of the political process in Kosovo.
Political stability requires the formation of stable
institutions through the establishment and
strengthening of local democracy.

My delegation salutes UNMIK's effort in
improving the operation and mechanisms of Kosovo's
Provisional Institutions, which has resulted in a gradual
increase of responsibilities and the promotion and
application of hiring practices established in Kosovo's
law concerning public administration.

We also note with interest the Government's
presentation of quarterly plans and reports regarding its
activities. We observe with equal satisfaction the
normal functioning of the Kosovo Assembly, especially
the decentralization of the municipal level and
cooperation with the Government and UNMIK.

Another crucial element of this institution-
building process is the strengthening of the rule of law,
which should be done by enhancing the efficiency,
impartiality and overall functioning of the judicial
system, together with strengthening of law enforcement
institutions. In that connection, we welcome the
increase in the number of judges and judicial
employees, as well as the rebuilding of the judicial
infrastructure. These improvements should
substantially enhance the capacity of the investigation
and prosecution of serious criminal acts, which still
prevail.

We would like to express our serious concern
about the lack of security, and to condemn all the acts
of violence and terrorism that have been taking place,
which Mr. Holkeri referred to this morning again.
These are real setbacks for United Nations efforts to
foster multi-ethnicity in Kosovo. They go against the
spirit of resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework.

We encourage the role played by local leaders in
the establishment of the reconciliation and inter-
communal dialogue, with the aim of combating
extremism and violence and, at the same time,
promoting freedom of movement within the country
and the return of refugees and displaced persons under
conditions that provide real security.

Reinforcement of the Kosovo Police Service is
another important step that will improve the security
situation. We therefore welcome the crucial role played
by UNMIK police in the transfer of knowledge and
skills to the Kosovo Police Service in order to enhance
security in minority areas and other sensitive locations.

We welcome the economic reforms in Kosovo,
such as the privatization process of socially owned
enterprises, the amendments to the tax law, the
financial and operational audits and cooperation with
the European Union's Stabilization and Association
Process Tracking Mechanism. These are all very
positive steps.

My delegation welcomes the most recent progress
in the political process - the opening of talks between
the Government of Serbia and Montenegro and the
Kosovo Provisional Institutions, which were held in
Vienna on 14 October. Thanks to the commendable
efforts of Mr. Holkeri, the re-establishment of direct
dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade on practical
issues of mutual interest, such as energy,
transportation, missing persons, refugees and internally
displaced persons, is a substantial step towards the
implementation of confidence- and security-building
measures. It is a positive step towards the full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). My
delegation also expresses its hope that the parties will
maintain their commitment to democracy and the rule
of law by continuing that constructive dialogue.

We encourage UNMIK and the Special
Representative, Mr. Holkeri, to maintain their very
good work in order to add momentum to intensifying a
constructive dialogue that should be further extended
to include political issues and finally culminate in the
achievement of concrete results. I reaffirm my
delegation's full support for Special Representative
Holkeri.

To conclude, we reiterate that the policy of
standards before status remains a consistent objective
in framing the future of Kosovo. We appeal to the
parties to continue to work towards building a
democratic, multi-ethnic and multicultural society, with
full respect for the rule of law and minority rights.

