Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): Cuba wishes the presidency of the United
Kingdom every success in the Security Council and
also wishes to pay tribute to the fruitful Syrian
presidency. We all welcomed the good news today of
the establishment of the African Union.

The Security Council is not the appropriate organ
to debate the law of treaties or to discuss the
International Criminal Court (ICC) simply because the
Charter of the United Nations does not confer on it
powers to do so.

However, the issue being discussed today has
implications for the very essence of the United Nations
system and its capacity for maintenance of
international peace and security. It has to do with the
future of the principles of international law.

Cuba is not a party to the Rome Statute. At the
same time, we believe that the legitimate rights of
States that have taken the sovereign decision to sign
and ratify that legal instrument must be respected.

The unusual decision of the Government of the
United States, announced on 6 May 2002, to "cancel"
its signature of the Rome Statute was already in itself a
disquieting action. It demonstrated that there are
absolutely no guarantees concerning legal instruments
already signed or those that that country could sign in
the future.

The proposals being made in this body by the
delegation of the United States regarding the scope of
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court are,
in a few words, an armed assault on the law of treaties.
The ultimate aim is to expand the powers of the
Security Council even further in order to give it the
capacity to amend international treaties, a right that
belongs solely to the States parties to a given treaty.
The Council has no power to amend the legal regime
established by a treaty. Nor can the Council be given
the power to extract norms from treaties that have been

agreed to by sovereign States parties - and which
generate rights and obligations solely for those
parties- and make them binding on all States

Members of the United Nations by invoking Chapter
VII of the Charter.

In essence, what we are debating today is the
validity of the Charter of the United Nations and the
mandate it has conferred on the Security Council. Were
the Council to endorse the gross violation of the
Charter and international law that this attempt seeks to
impose on it, it would imperil the founding principles
of the United Nations as well as the very existence of
the Organization as it is defined in the Charter.

On what grounds does the United States try to
justify its attempt to take refuge in the veto and to
guarantee illegitimate immunity? Allow me to quote
the reply given to that question by the Ambassador of
that country during his statement in this very Chamber
on Sunday, 30 June:

"Some contend that our concerns are
unwarranted. With our global responsibilities, we
are and will remain a special target and cannot
have our decisions second-guessed by a court
whose jurisdiction we do not recognize."
(S/PV4563, p. 2)

Curiously enough, that argument was not mentioned
this morning. In other words, they would have us
believe that they deserve different treatment as
"payment" for the risks associated with their self-
proclaimed and unrequested status as guarantors of
peace and security in the world. In order to maintain
the serious tone that this debate merits, I will refrain
from commenting on those assertions.

The inconsistencies and the double standards
present in the position of the United States become
evident, among other things, when, at the same time
that they express opposition to the International
Criminal Court they maintain their firm support for the
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and other
ad hoc tribunals created precisely by decisions of the
Security Council and with, as the representative of the
United States recognized a few hours ago, a "key role"
(supra) played by the United States.

What is happening today reflects the increasingly
unilateral policies of the United States. What we are
debating today cannot be seen in isolation from other
recent actions of the United States, including its
unilateral withdrawal from the Anti-Ballistic Missile
Treaty and the Kyoto Protocol, its refusal to accept the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, its decision
to set up a national missile defence system, its
blockage of the negotiations to adopt a verification
protocol for the Biological Weapons Convention, its
proclamation at West Point of a new doctrine providing
for preventive unilateral attacks on other countries on
the pretext of combating terrorism, and its disclosure of
a revised nuclear posture, which has received broad
international condemnation.

It is simply unacceptable for the United States to
now hold United Nations peacekeeping operations
hostage to narrow national interests. The threat of the
veto jeopardizes not only the existence of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina; it also
threatens the other 14 operations now deployed.

We fully support the statement contained in the
recent letter of the Secretary-General to the Secretary
of State of the United States to the effect that the
proposals put forward by that country fly in the face of
treaty law and that the only real result of their adoption
would be that the Security Council would risk being
discredited. If the Council gives in to pressure from the
United States, it must face the grave consequences of
such irresponsibility. The meagre credibility that this
body still retains would simply vanish completely.

We are witnessing unlimited arrogance on the
part of the world super-Power, which is now
demanding the right to act and conduct itself like an
empire to which international and other laws do not
apply. This must be vigorously rejected by the
countries represented at this table. At this stage, the
members of the Security Council have the duty to act
in a manner commensurate with the scale of their
important responsibilities. We trust that the majority
will do so.

