Ms. Bensouda: I welcome this opportunity to
engage with the Security Council on the occasion of
my Office's thirteenth report on the situation in Libya,
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).

At the outset, allow me to observe with profound
regret that the overall security situation in Libya has
deteriorated significantly since my last briefing to
the Council last November (see S/PV.7806). Reports
indicate that the country is at risk of returning to
widespread conflict. Such an outcome would not bode
well for the rule of law in Libya and would surely
aggravate a climate of impunity, which could in turn
lead to widespread human rights abuses and violations
of international humanitarian law. As is often the case,
it is ordinary civilians - innocent men, women and
children - who bear the brunt of the suffering caused
by a state ofinsecurity.

It is in that context that the International Criminal
Court (ICC) now, more than ever, has an important
role to play in Libya. I am convinced that timely
and concrete action can make a tangible difference
to Libyan lives. With that in mind, and cognizant of
my responsibility to pursue the important mandate
conferred upon my Office by the Council, I remain
committed to prioritizing the Libya situation in 2017.

Since I last reported to the Council, steady
progress has been made in my Office's investigations.
That progress has been achieved notwithstanding the
prevailing security situation in Libya, which continues
to prevent my investigators from carrying out their
work on the ground. Undeterred and driven by a firm
commitment to fulfil our mandate vis-a-vis Libya,
my Office continues to employ innovative methods to
collect evidence from outside of the country through
secure channels. Such efforts are made possible largely
by the cooperation of States and the ongoing assistance
of the Libyan Prosecutor-General's Office. My Office
will continue to explore options for its investigators
to resume activities in Libyan territory in a safe and
secure environment.

As the Council is aware, an existing warrant
of arrest, issued under seal by the Court against
Mr. Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled, has recently been
made public. Mr. Al-Tuhamy is the former head of the
Libyan Internal Security Agency, under Muammar
Al-Qadhafi. My Office has alleged that the suspect
is responsible for the crimes against humanity of
imprisonment, persecution, torture and other inhumane
acts, and the war crimes of torture, cruel treatment
and outrages upon personal dignity. These crimes
were allegedly committed by Mr. Al-Tuhamy as part
of Mr. Muammar Al-Qadhafi's response to the events
of 2011.

In issuing the warrant, the Pre-Trial Chamber of
the Court found reasonable grounds to believe that the
Internal Security Agency led by Mr. Al-Tuhamy, along
with other Libyan military, intelligence and security
agencies, arrested and detained persons perceived to
be opponents of Mr. Al-Qadhafi and his rule. These
persons were allegedly subjected to various forms of
mistreatment, including severe beatings, electrocution,
acts of sexual violence and rape, solitary confinement,
deprivation of food and water, inhumane conditions of
detention, mock executions, and threats of killing and
rape in various locations throughout Libya.
At this juncture, the unsealing of the warrant
of arrest against Mr. Al-Tuhamy would enhance the
chances of its execution and would equally send an
important message to would-be perpetrators that the
Court remains seized of the situation in Libya and
continues to be active in carrying out its judicial work.
Furthermore, my Office has recently become aware
of reports that Mr. Al-Tuhamy is currently residing in
Libya. The victims of Mr. Al-Tuhamy's alleged crimes
deserve justice and yearn to see justice done. State
cooperation with the International Criminal Court and
the Council is crucial to ensuring that justice for these
victims can be realized. I therefore urge Libya, first
and foremost, as well as all States - by they States
parties or non-State parties - to take immediate action
to verify Mr. Al-Tuhamy's whereabouts and to take all
possible steps to facilitate his arrest and surrender to
the Court.

I equally hope to count on the tangible assistance
and cooperation of this body for the expeditious
execution of the warrant of arrest and for the timely
arrest and surrender of Mr. Al-Tuhamy to the Court.
What message does it send to the victims and the
perpetrators - indeed, what is the deterrent impact - if
ICC warrants of arrest are issued but not enforced and
the capture of suspects remains elusive? We all have
our respective roles to play and we must deliver on our
joint commitment to ending impunity for Rome Statute
crimes in Libya.

In my last statement here (see S/PV.7806), I briefed
the Council on my Office's application to the Court's
Pre-Trial Chamber for an order directing the Registry
to transmit the request for the arrest and surrender of
Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to Mr. Al-'Ajami Al-
'Atiri, Commander of the Zintan militia, which had
custody of the suspect at that time. My Office has since
received reliable information that Mr. Al-Qadhafi
is no longer under the control of Mr. Al-'Atiri but
rather under the control of the Zintan Revolutionaries'
Military Council. I renew my call on the Government
of National Accord to take the necessary steps to
transfer Mr. Al-Qadhafi into its custody so that Libya
can surrender him to the Court in accordance with its
international legal obligations, the judicial rulings of
the Court, and the repeated calls of members of the
Security Council.

With respect to the case of Abdullah Al-Senussi,
as the Council will recall, in July 2015 the Tripoli
Court of Assize issued its judgment in the trial of
Mr. Al-Senussi, Mr. Al-Qadhafi and 35 other former
members allied with Mr. Muammar Al-Qadhafi in
relation to crimes allegedly committed during the
events of 2011. Mr. Al-Qadhafi was tried in absentia.
Both Mr. Al-Qadhafi and Mr. Al-Senussi were
convicted. The case of Mr. Al-Senussi is currently on
appeal before the Libyan Supreme Court.

On 21 February, the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), in cooperation with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, issued its full report on the conduct
of this trial. The report acknowledges the challenges
inherent in prosecuting a complex case against former
officials in the context of an ongoing armed conflict
and political polarization. However, it concludes that
the trial fell short of international fair trial standards.

It is important to recall that the Appeals Chamber
of the International Criminal Court has held that
due process violations in a domestic trial must be
so egregious that the proceedings can no longer be
regarded as being capable of providing any genuine
form of justice to the accused in order for the case
to be deemed admissible before it. My Office has
thoroughly reviewed the report and is considering it,
along with the full Libyan trial judgment, within the
framework of articles 19 (10) and 17 (2)(c) of the Rome
Statute to determine whether new facts have arisen that
negate the basis on which the Pre-Trial Chamber found
Mr. Al-Senussi's case inadmissible before the Court.

It is undoubtedly disconcerting to the Council that
the ongoing political instability and volatile security
situation in Libya have reportedly led to the widespread
commission of serious crimes. Reports of the continued
killings of civilians, abductions, detentions, torture
and sexual violence in Libya should be of great
concern to all of us. My Office continues to receive
and examine information from a variety of sources,
including non-goverrunental organizations and private
individuals, with respect to crimes alleged to have
occurred throughout Libya since 2011. I welcome
the submission of reliable information by concerned
groups or individuals regarding crimes that may fall
within the Court's jurisdiction. In particular, my Office
continues to collect and analyse information relating
to serious and widespread crimes allegedly committed
against migrants attempting to transit through Libya.
My Office is collaborating and sharing information
with a network of national and international agencies
on this issue.

I am deeply alarmed by reports that thousands of
vulnerable migrants, including women and children,
are being held in detention centres across Libya in
often inhumane conditions. Crimes, including killings,
rapes and torture, are alleged to be commonplace.
I am similarly dismayed by credible accounts that
Libya has become a marketplace for the trafficking
of human beings. The Council has itself expressed
concern that the situation in Libya is exacerbated by
the smuggling of migrants and human trafficking into,
through and from Libya. These activities could further
provide fertile ground for organized crime and terrorist
networks in Libya.

The situation is both dire and unacceptable,
demanding a concerted response on the part of the
relevant actors to address these serious trends of
criminality. I take this opportunity before the Council
to declare that my Office is carefully examining the
feasibility of opening an investigation into migrant-
related crimes in Libya should the Court's jurisdictional
requirements be met. We must act to curb these
worrying trends.

Additionally, my Office has been closely following
events in Ganfouda, in Benghazi, where civilians have
reportedly been heavily impacted by protracted fighting
between the Libyan National Army and the Benghazi
Revolutionaries Shura Council. Reports indicate that
on or around 18 March, forces of the Libyan National
Army took over Ganfouda. Following this takeover,
disturbing video footage emerged that appears to show
Libyan National Army forces committing serious
crimes, including summary executions of detainees. I
would like to draw the attention of all the parties to the
conflict to the provisions of the Rome Statute relating
to the responsibility of commanders and other superiors
to prevent or repress the commission of crimes by their
forces and to submit any such crimes for investigation
and prosecution. My Office remains seized of the
Libyan situation and continues to monitor events as
they unfold in Benghazi and across the country.

I would be remiss if I did not acknowledge the
excellent cooperation that my Office receives from a
network of States, organizations and entities. First and
foremost, I must again express my utmost gratitude
to the Libyan Prosecutor-General's office, which
continued to provide invaluable assistance during the
reporting period. I am also grateful to the individuals
and groups within the Libyan community working
tirelessly to promote and support the work of the
International Criminal Court, in the interests of the
victims and in the hope of building the future of Libya
on the pillars ofjustice and accountability.
I also note the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and look
forward to our continuing fruitful collaboration. I would
like to take this opportunity to publicly acknowledge
and commend the tireless efforts of Mr. Martin Kobler,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
his team at UNSMIL, and to thank them for their
continued support. I would also like to express my
deep appreciation for the vital support that my Office
receives from several other States and organizations,
including the Netherlands, the United Kingdom,
Tunisia, Italy, the European Union and the European
Union Naval Force. There are a few States that have not
responded promptly to requests for cooperation, and I
respectfully urge them to do so.

With the Council's indulgence, I would like to
stress one final point, which is the important issue of
the challenges that my Office continues to face where
resources are concerned. In that regard, I welcome
the initiative taken by the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya, to issue a note verbale in November
2016, bringing to the attention of all States the need to
ensure adequate funding to support ICC investigations.
Without adequate resources, the Court's crucial work
is hampered and its ability to affect the current climate
of impunity in Libya is diminished. I once again
respectfully urge the Council to promote the work of
the International Criminal Court in Libya by supporting
the United Nations efforts aimed at providing it with
financial assistance.

The Libyan people continue to strive for solutions
that can pave the way for sustainable peace, security
and prosperity in Libya. Justice and accountability
are indispensable in that equation, without which
we run the risk of the cycle of violence continuing,
further entrenching divisions within Libyan society
and ultimately making national reconciliation more
difficult to achieve. I am heartened by reports of some
recent positive developments in the political dialogue.
In conclusion, I would like to say to those victims
and victim-groups advocating for a more prominent
role for the International Criminal Court in Libya
that I am listening. To those who have expressed their
fears and disappointments to my Office - as well as
their hopes and aspirations for the future of a Libya
grounded on the pillars of justice where gross human
rights violations are distant memories - I say that their
calls for action are not falling on deaf ears. The Libyan
people have endured too much and have suffered for
too long. They deserve that deeper sense of safety and
security that society provides when it is fully immersed
in the protective embrace of the law. And while I am
under no illusions that the International Criminal Court
is a panacea - for it surely is not - I, along with my
team, am committed to playing our part.

I thank the Council and all those who are following
this meeting from inside and outside this Chamber for
their attention.

