Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like to thank
President Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their informative reports (see S/2018/ 347 and S/2018/47l) and briefings, and to pay tribute to
their commitment to fighting impunity and ensuring
accountability by way of the high quality work of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals (IRMCT). Let me also join other members
of the Security Council in expressing our thanks to
Peru for very ably and effectively chairing the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals.

Poland notes with satisfaction the significant
progress made in the work of the Mechanism and looks
forward to its further achievements. Recognition is due
to the efforts of the President, the Prosecutor and the
staff in carrying out their tasks effectively and with
a sense of commitment while facing a considerable
workload, including increased judicial activity and a
large number of challenges.

We appreciate in particular the focus on the
expeditious completion of trials and appeals, and we
welcome the numerous innovative, flexible and cost-
effective practices and arrangements adopted to that
end. Instances of proceedings held ahead of previous
projected schedules are encouraging. Also positive
is the commencement of the implementation by the
Mechanism of the recommendations made by the
Office of Internal Oversight Services in March 2018.
Moreover, the efforts undertaken by the Mechanism to
protect and assist the victims and witnesses of atrocities
are especially commendable.

We take note of the challenges that the Mechanism
faces, including in relation to its budgetary situation.
Also in this respect, the crucial importance of sustained
cooperation and support from States Members of the
United Nations must be acknowledged, as we have a
major influence on the timely and efficient fulfilment
of the mandate of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals. In this context, we call on
all States to fully cooperate with the Mechanism,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, and to render the necessary assistance to
it, especially with regard to the location and arrest of
the remaining fugitives indicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

Finally, let me underline that international criminal
justice institutions, including the Mechanism, play a
crucial role in upholding accountability and fighting
impunity, which are key to effective conflict prevention.
Allow me to reassure the Council of Poland's continued
and unwavering support for the Mechanism.

