Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the constructive nature of
today's discussion, which is in line with the Russian

approach. The Russian Federation has consistently
supported the efforts of the Sudanese parties to
implement the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA), the main document for a settlement in Southern
Sudan. By encouraging the efforts of the parties to
ensure that keeping the Sudan unified is an attractive
outcome, the CPA stipulates the holding of a
referendum on self-determination for Southern Sudan.
In order to support peace and stability in the Sudan and
in Africa as a whole, it is now crucial to ensure the
timely and proper holding of the referendum.

The Sudanese people must determine the future
of their State on their own. The Russian Federation will
respect any outcome of the referendum. Irrespective of
its outcome, the referendum will pave the way for the
whole of the Sudan to make the transition to a
significant new level of development. It is important
for the parties' representatives to continue their
bilateral efforts to implement their CPA obligations.
We welcome the fact that, in line with the timetable for
preparing for the referendum, the voter registration
process has started and is taking place in a peaceful
and organized fashion.

We note the active role of the African Union and
its High-Level Implementation Panel for Sudan,
chaired by Thabo Mbeki, which will assist the parties
to achieve significant progress in agreeing upon the
fundamental principles of settlement, including the
issues of border demarcation, the distribution of
revenue from natural resources, finances, security,
citizenship and international legal instruments. The
agenda includes the issue of the organization of the
referendum on the Abyei region. A compromise must
be reached to resolve disagreements on Blue Nile and
Southern Kordofan states. The parties must make
maximum efforts to prevent an increase in inter-tribal
conflict in these regions and to keep the process within
the context of the negotiated decisions.

The pending issues should be addressed by the
parties exclusively in the political sphere. Further
assistance from the international community and
international and regional mediators to normalize the
situation in the Sudan should focus on supporting
constructive interaction among the Sudanese parties.
We welcome the work of the Secretary-General's panel
to monitor the referendums. We trust that it will help to
build trust among the Sudanese parties.
We attach particular significance to the role of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) in
helping to ensure security, protect the civilian
population and provide technical and logistical support
to the process of planning and holding the
referendums. In that respect, the main responsibility
for ensuring the security of the country's civilian
population and the foreign citizens within the territory
of Southern Sudan lies with the Sudanese authorities.

In order to ensure the Sudan's stability, it is
crucial to resolve the conflict in Darfur. The Doha
political process must therefore be comprehensive and
bring the main rebel groups on board. It is important to
influence in a coordinated manner those leaders of the
rebel movement who have doggedly remained outside
the negotiation framework. Early achievement by the
Darfur parties of substantive political agreements will
facilitate the holding of the referendums in the Sudan
and give impetus to the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

Russia respects the sovereignty and independence
of the Sudan and will continue, in cooperation with the
Government of National Unity, including both parties
to the CPA, to assist Sudanese settlement politically
and practically. The President of the Russian
Federation, Dmitry Medvedev, has taken the decision
to deploy an additional Russian helicopter unit to
UNMIS. Russian representatives will participate in the
international observer team for the forthcoming
referendum in Southern Sudan.

