Ms. Marais (South Africa): We thank Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacebuilding Support, and Ambassador Jiirg Lauber,
Chair ofthe Burundi configuration ofthe Peacebuilding
Commission, for their insightful briefings on the
evolving situation in Burundi and their unwavering
commitment to the process. We would also like to
thank Ambassador Smai'l Chergui, African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, for his briefing
in that regard.

South Africa fully supports the continued facilitation
process led by the East African Community (EAC)
in the spirit of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement, with the support of the African Union and
the United Nations. We welcome the designation of
President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda as the mediator
of the process, with the support of President Uhuru
Kenyatta of Kenya and President John Magufuli of
Tanzania. In this regard, the work of former President
Benjamin Mkapa of Tanzania was invaluable. We also
acknowledge the critical role played by the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, former President
Michel Kafando, as well as the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission under the able
leadership of Ambassador Jiirg Lauber.

At this juncture, however, South Africa considers
it prudent to highlight the need for the Council to
continuously coordinate the Council's positions with
those of the African Union (AU) Peace and Security
Council when dealing with African issues. Africa has
very clearly defined regional organizations, which deal
systematically with issues related to African peace and
security. In the case of Burundi, the EAC is charged with
the responsibility of overseeing the Burundi process.
South Africa had hoped that there would be greater
appreciation for allowing the processes of the region to
run its course, which would then enrich discussions in
the Security Council. Allowing for regional processes
to unfold is a key factor in Africa owning the solutions
to its own problems and achieving enduring peace. We
therefore look to the direction of the leadership of the
East African Community and the African Union to
chart the course on Burundi with the assistance of, and
in coordination with, the United Nations.

South Africa maintains that it is only through an
inclusive dialogue that we can address any political
impasse in Burundi. This requires the international
community to lend support to the initiatives of the EAC.
In this vein, we also call on the Government of Burundi
to create a conducive environment that facilitates
dialogue with the key stakeholders of the East African
Community-led process. As a guarantor of the Arusha
Agreement, and as part of Mandela's legacy, South
Africa always stands ready to support the Government
and the people of Burundi as they democratize their
country, opening more political space for all political
parties and allowing the media to play its role in
informing society and spreading tolerance.

With regard to the political developments in
Burundi, we continue to be encouraged by the stable
security situation in the country. We congratulate the
Government of Burundi on initiating a number of
preparatory process for the elections, especially the
establishment of an Independent National Electoral
Commission, which is now fully operational. We
welcome the adoption of the Burundian electoral code
and their commitment to the 2018 Kayanza road map,
which lays the foundation for peaceful elections in
2020. We commend the decision by the Government
of Burundi to finance the elections with their national
budget and we encourage Burundi to work closely with
the East African Community and the African Union to
create an environment conducive to free, fair, peaceful,
democratic and inclusive elections in the spirit of the
Arusha Agreement.

South Africa also welcomes President Pierre
Nkurunziza's commitment to not stand as a candidate for
the presidential election in 2020 and we look forward to
the Government and political parties working together
to hold inclusive and peaceful elections. Burundians
must be the beneficiaries of democratic elections
that can deliver democracy and development with the
assistance of the region. All parties must be permitted
to canvass for support countrywide, without hindrance.
There should be no no-go areas for any political party
or politician.

South Africa commends Burundi's contribution to
international peace and security through its deployment
of more than 6,000 Burundian men and women in
various peacekeeping operations, mostly in the Central
African Republic and Somalia, making Burundi one of
the top troop-contributing countries.

We call on the international community to support
Burundi in strengthening their peacekeeping capacity,
as it is of critical institutional value to the county. As
a member of the African Union Peace and Security
Council, Burundi is congratulated on remaining
committed to the promotion of peace and security by
contributing to silencing the guns in Africa by 2020.

South Africa is gravely concerned about the
dire humanitarian situation in Burundi. We urge the
Security Council and the international community to
do more to alleviate the socioeconomic challenges and
humanitarian situation facing the people of Burundi.
We call on its partners to support the implementation of
the ten-year national development plan for the benefit
of the Burundian people. In this vein, we reiterate the
call by the AU during its thirty-second Summit for the
European Union to lift the unilateral sanctions imposed
against the Republic of Burundi.

We are encouraged by the ongoing voluntary
repatriation movement of Burundian refugees,
which saw 67,710 refugees voluntarily repatriated
to Burundi, mainly from Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, between
August 2017 and May 2019. The increased return of
refugees is a manifestation of the return to peace and
stability in the country. We urge the international
community to support these efforts and call on
them to provide assistance for the repatriation and
reintegration of returnees.

Finally, we appeal to the Security Council and the
international community to support the Government
and the EAC mediation process to lay the foundation
for an environment that is conducive to the holding of
democratic elections and to support a peaceful transfer
of power, in order to ensure peace and stability beyond
2020.

