Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to express our appreciation to the delegation of
China for facilitating a discussion on the crucial topic
of the protection of civilians.

It is important for the Council to periodically
evaluate its response to the protection of civilians,
because the protection of civilians from the scourge of
conflict is at the core of maintaining international peace
and security. If the Council is not seen to be protecting
civilians and if innocent children, women and men
continue to suffer on our watch, then we have failed
the mandate entrusted to us. South Africa is thus fully
committed to the protection ofcivilians in armed conflict
and continues to support a strengthened normative and
legal framework for enhancing such protection. In that
regard, the report ofthe Secretary-General (S/2012/376)
is welcome. That report, along with previous reports
from the Secretary-General, provides us with practical
steps that the Council and Member States should
adopt in order to address contemporary challenges in
protecting civilians. Addressing the five core protection
challenges identified in his reports remains urgent.

The Security Council has made commendable
progress in including protection of civilian mandates
in its decisions. The two new peacekeeping operations
deployed in 2011, the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan and the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei, both have such components. Additionally,
several other United Nations peacekeeping operations,
including the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, have developed comprehensive
protection-of-civilian strategies. Those actions have
operationalized the commitments made by the Council
in its resolution 1894 (2009).

My delegation wishes to underscore the very
encouraging and noteworthy strides made by the
African Union Mission in Somalia to mitigate the killing
or injury of civilians in its active military campaign in
Somalia. Those commendable efforts, highlighted by the
Secretary-General in his report, relate to the improved
recording of casualties and its policy of "indirect fire"
to mitigate harm against civilians. That also includes
a component of voluntarily making amends for harm
suffered as a result of lawful efforts.

While we have made important advances in
protecting civilians, we must at the same time
ensure that such efforts are not abused for furthering
objectives that fall outside of the scope of that noble
and moral endeavour and sensitive responsibility.
Equally, we must ensure that the protection of civilians
is not selectively pursued, as that wwould erode the
credibility of the international community in pursuing
that goal. It is therefore regrettable that the plight of
civilians in Palestine, Afghanistan and Western Sahara
is being ignored without any accountability.

A further challenge relates to the abuse of
protection of civilians mandates, which erodes not only
the credibility of the Council when it acts but also its
ability to act. Abusing the authorization granted by this
Council to advance political and regime-change agendas
has created mistrust within the Security Council and
has led to paralysis and inaction on the part of the
Security Council when faced with similar challenges
and has prevented the Council from acting resolutely
in advancing the protection-of-civilians agenda. The
responsibility for such failure must be borne by those
who abuse the trust of the Council through idiosyncratic
interpretations of protection mandates.
Another challenge relates to the use of unmanned
aerial assets against targets, which inevitably leads
to the killing of innocent civilians. That concern is
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General, and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Navi Pillay, is on record as stating that drone
attacks raise serious questions about compliance with
international law. Those challenges to the protection
of civilians underscore the importance for this Council
and the international community in general to engage
robustly with the concept introduced by Brazil of
responsibility while protecting. Those entrusted with
the protection of civilians have a stake in ensuring that
our actions do not undermine the very same objectives
that we seek to advance, and there has to be scrupulous
compliance with international humanitarian and human
rights law in carrying out those mandates.

Additionally, United Nations peacekeepers should
always remain impartial in carrying out their mandates.
Their mandates for protecting civilians under imminent
threat could be compromised if the United Nations
were perceived as being biased and found to be unable
to perform on its protection mandate owing to a lack of
the requisite resources and capabilities, in particular air
assets. Ensuring the long-term protection of civilians
requires a mission-wide response and strategy. While
peacekeepers can assist States in providing immediate
protection for civilians in the short term, it is only by
building national institutions in the areas of the rule
of law, justice and security sector reform that we can
ensure the long term protection of civilians.

The Secretary-General in his report correctly places
emphasis on the need to protect medical facilities,
medical personnel and hospitals. Health-care personnel
must be able to provide aid unhindered and in safety.
This is a real and present challenge. South Africa
wishes to express its condolences on the occasion of the
killing of a volunteer for the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
yesterday in eastern Syria. It is deplorable that that is
the fourth time since last September that a member
of the International Committee of the Red Cross has
been killed while on duty. South Africa appreciates the
excellent and outstanding work that the International
Committee of the Red Cross continues to do under very
challenging circumstances.

My delegation also shares the concerns of the
Secretary-General with regard to the plight of migrant
labourers, particularly those from sub-Saharan Africa
recently caught in the conflict in Libya. Our delegation
has consistently raised that concern in the context of
the Libyan conflict. In that regard, we have consistently
condemned all acts of killing, sexual violence,
discrimination and arbitrary arrest perpetrated against
migrant workers and their families.

In conclusion, we wish to underline that it remains
the primary responsibility of States to protect civilians
within their borders. Armed opposition groups also bear
responsibility for ensuring that unarmed civilians are
protected, and the failure by both State and non-State
actors to uphold that principle should not go unpunished.
Accountability must first and foremost be sought
at the national level. Failing that, the international
community has a collective responsibility to act, using
mechanisms at its disposal, including independent
fact-finding commissions, commissions of enquiry
and the International Criminal Court. On 19 January,
the Council adopted a presidential statement on justice
and the rule of law (S/PRST/2012/1), which reiterated
the Council's call on all parties to armed conflict to
comply with the obligations applicable to them under
international humanitarian law and to take the required
steps to protect civilians. The Council also reaffirmed
its strong opposition to impunity for serious violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights law
and stressed States' responsibility in that regard.

We hope that our debate today will not be a mere
formality or an exercise in rhetoric but rather that the
Council will, through its decisions and actions, lend its
full authority to efforts to protect civilians everywhere.
It is only when we carry out that responsibility
consistently and without fear or favour that we can truly
be the champions of "we the people" on whose behalf
we act.

