Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The acceding country Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland, Serbia,
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Norway, Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align
themselves with this statement, the full version of
which is being circulated in the Chamber and will be
posted on our website.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2013/350) and Special
Representative Jan Kubis for his briefing.

We were greatly saddened by the recent terrorist
attacks in Afghanistan. The EU condemns such
cowardly attacks on humanitarian organizations and
children. We support the efforts of the Government
of Afghanistan and the international community to
create a secure environment in which the people of
Afghanistan can live without the fear of terrorism and
violence.

We welcome the announcements of this week that
signal the potential for a better future for Afghanistan.
The announcement of the final stage of the transition
process highlights the progress made in the competence
and effectiveness of the Afghan National Security
Forces.

The EU welcomes the convening of the presidential
and provincial council elections due to take place on
5 April 2014. We strongly urge the Afghan authorities
to continue to prioritize preparations for the elections,
based on the principles of inclusiveness, transparency
and credibility. In particular, it is important to put in
place an electoral legal framework consistent with the
Constitution, with credible measures to prevent fraud
and overseen by independent bodies. Accordingly, the
Government of Afghanistan is urged to speed up the
legislative process and engage in earnest in bringing
that work to a successful conclusion. The EU is assisting
in the preparations of the elections through technical
advice to the Independent Election Commission and
as one of the major funders of the electoral assistance
programme led by the United Nations Development
Programme.

The international conference held in Tokyo last year
reaffirmed the partnership between the Government
of Afghanistan and the international community.
The full implementation of reforms, in particular on
elections, financial transparency, the rule of law and
human rights, especially the rights of women, as well
as continued efforts to combat corruption, remains
paramount in achieving a successful transition and
long-term transformation in Afghanistan.

We look forward to reviewing the progress made
by Afghanistan and the international community in that
regard at the meeting of senior officials to be held on
3 July in Kabul. The EU believes that the Government
needs to implement the following measures as a matter
of absolute urgency ahead of the meeting. First, the
electoral legislative framework should be adopted so
the elections are governed by law, the status of the
Independent Election Commission is regularized and a
credible electoral complaints mechanism is established.
Secondly, the Chief Justice should be appointed in
accordance with the Constitution. Thirdly, the mining
law, which is so important for attracting investment,
should be enacted.

Credible and sustained action is also required to
implement the statutory safeguards, most notably the
Law on the Elimination of Violence against Women,
that strengthen human rights in Afghanistan, in
particular the rights of women. The EU attaches great
importance to gender equality and the empowerment
of women. Afghanistan also needs to take systemic
action to advance judicial reform. The failure of the
Government of Afghanistan to develop a working
justice system plays into the hands of insurgents and
those who would resort to summary justice.

An effective justice system and police force are
critical to the rule oflaw in Afghanistan and something
the EU is supporting, inter alia, through its support
for police reform and the justice sector. We are glad to
announce that, on 27 May, the Council of the European
Union extended the European Union Police Mission in
Afghanistan until 31 December 2014.

The EU welcomes the outcomes of the third
Heart of Asia ministerial conference, held in Almaty.
The Istanbul Process has brought about important
measures aimed at building confidence and increasing
cooperation and inclusive sustainable development
across the region. The EU supports endeavours on
the part of the Heart of Asia countries to continue
strengthening intra-regional trust.

We are currently in the final phase of negotiating the
cooperation agreement for partnership and development,
which will form the basis of EU-Afghan relations for
the next 10 years. We are also in the early stages of
putting in place the foundations for our development
cooperation through 2020. Those are clear indications
of the long-term commitment of the EU and its member
States to support Afghanistan through a comprehensive
approach that ensures synergies between political,
security and development engagement.

