The Secretary-General: Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for arranging this meeting on very short
notice.

We meet at a moment of extreme gravity, first
and foremost for the people of the Middle East, but
also for the authority of this Organization, and
especially the Security Council. As the Council is
aware, during the night the Israeli air force bombed the
village of Qana, in southern Lebanon. That village is
no longer in the area of operations of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). We
therefore had no United Nations personnel nearby at
the time of the attack, although Chinese engineers and
two medical teams have now managed to reach the
2

area. They are helping to clear the rubble and are
giving treatment to survivors. I am therefore relying on
the Lebanese authorities for my information.
Preliminary reports say that at least 54 people have
been killed, among them at least 37 children.

We must condemn this action in the strongest
possible terms, and I appeal to the Council to do
likewise.

I am deeply dismayed that my earlier calls for the
immediate cessation of hostilities were not heeded,
with the result that innocent life continues to be taken
and innocent civilians continue to suffer. I repeat that
call once again from the Council Chamber, and I
appeal to the Council to do likewise. I send my deepest
condolences to the families of all the victims of
violence - in Lebanon, in Israel and in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Gaza.

This tragedy has rightly provoked moral outrage
throughout the world. Regrettably, some Lebanese
people have turned their anger against the
Organization. Earlier today a large number of
protesters broke into our headquarters in Beirut and
briefly set it afire. I am glad to say that the fire was
quickly put out. As of now, three staff members have
been reported injured - and, I am glad to say, none
critically. The demonstrators have now left the
building, after intervention by the Lebanese armed
forces. I am deeply grateful to the Government of
Lebanon for that prompt action, as well as to the
Speaker of the Lebanese parliament, Mr. Nabih Berri,
and other Lebanese leaders whose statesmanlike
appeals for calm were decisive.

The United Nations House is the hub of our
humanitarian activities in Lebanon, which will
continue throughout the country. But, naturally, we fear
similar reactions elsewhere in the region or in the
wider Islamic world. I appeal to the authorities and
people in all countries to respect and ensure the safety
of United Nations personnel. I appeal to everyone to
understand that we are doing our best to help, through
diplomacy, humanitarian action and through the efforts
of UNIFIL, which, as all are aware, suffered tragic
losses only a few days ago.

The tragic events in Qana remind us that 10 years
ago over 100 people who had taken refuge in that same
village suffered a similar fate. We must deliver the
region from this seemingly endless cycle of violence.
06-44873
In the last 18 days several hundred Lebanese
citizens have been killed, the vast majority of them
civilians and at least a third of them children. During
the same period hundreds of thousands of Lebanese
have had to flee their homes, many of them under
heavy shelling. Meanwhile, over 50 Israelis have died,
including 19 civilians; and the population of northern
Israel has been subjected to intense and continuous
rocket fire. Thousands are now in shelters. It is
important to stress that both sides in this conflict bear a
heavy responsibility, and there is strong prima facie
evidence that both have committed grave breaches of
international humanitarian law.

The present fighting began on 12 July with an
unprovoked Hizbollah attack on Israel and the
kidnapping of two Israeli soldiers. Since then,
Hizbollah has continued firing rockets indiscriminately
into northern Israel from positions apparently located
in the midst of civilian populations. No one disputes
Israel's right to defend itself, but by its manner of
doing so it has caused, and is causing, death and
suffering on a wholly unacceptable scale.

As the Council is aware, I have repeatedly
condemned all actions that target civilians. The High
Commissioner for Human Rights has reminded all
parties that they may be held accountable for any
breaches of international humanitarian law. But the
most urgent need is to bring the fighting to a halt
without further delay. For that, the Council has a
solemn responsibility. Action is needed now, before
many more children, women and men become
casualties of a conflict over which they have no
control. I therefore reiterate my call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities, to allow desperately needed
humanitarian relief to reach the victims.

While that is happening, we can work together on
the political framework needed for a lasting ceasefire
and a sustainable solution, the strengthening of
Lebanon's Government, the disarming of all militia and
the implementation of all Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006). I
will work with the Council on the development and
deployment of a stabilization force to support the
Government of Lebanon in its decision and
responsibility to extend its authority throughout the
country.

I know there are differences among Council
members about the precise sequence of actions needed.
06-44873

I beg them to set those differences aside and come
together on the most urgent point: the immediate
cessation of hostilities.

I should also share with the Council that, this
morning in my conversation with Prime Minister
Siniora of Lebanon, he told me his Government had
taken a decision that it would no longer engage in
further diplomatic discussions and efforts to find a
solution without a ceasefire. I asked him whether the
Government as a whole had taken that decision, and he
reaffirmed that it was the decision of his Government.

The other information that I would like to share
with the Council is that UNIFIL did receive a request
from the Israel Defense Forces for the population of
two villages - Ramyah and Ayta al-Shab - to be
evacuated before sunset today. Of course, UNIFIL has
refused to evacuate the villages, indicating that it does
not have the capacity to do so. These requests have
often come, where their assistance is required, from the
Government of Lebanon. That is something I thought
members should know, to let them understand the
dynamics in the region and in the south.

Let me conclude by stating very clearly and
briefly that the authority and standing of the Security
Council are at stake. The authority and standing of the
Council are at stake: people have noticed its failure to
act firmly and quickly during this crisis. Today's events
at the Economic and Social Commission for Western
Asia (ESCWA) were in part an expression of that
frustration.

For the sake of the people of the region and of the
Organization, I urge the Council to act, and to act now.

