Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Finland, Mr. Stubb, for his statement and for
his activities as Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE).

The Russian Federation has consistently
supported the overall development and improvement of
cooperation of the United Nations and its Security
Council with regional and subregional mechanisms,
which harmoniously complement each other on the
solid basis of the United Nations Charter, in particular
Chapter VIII, truly taking into account the comparative
advantages that they each possess. Of course, what is
crucial here is a clear division of labour and full
respect for the primary responsibility of the Security
Council for the maintenance of international peace and
security, which will make it possible to increase the
capacity of the international community to resolve
crises. We note with satisfaction that, as a regional
mechanism, the OSCE has established close and
fruitful cooperation with the United Nations in a
number of key areas, primarily those related to security
and the settlement of regional conflicts.
8

The OSCE is to play an important role in settling
the crisis that broke out in August in the Caucasus. We
hope that the OSCE observers will effectively and
strictly carry out their mandate and cooperate with the
European Union observers, who, according to the
Medvedev-Sarkozy document of 8 September, must be
deployed in the security zone near the South Ossetia
area, by 1 October 2008.

We share the view of those who have said they
regret that the Permanent Council of the OSCE was
unable to take a decision about the deployment of the
additional 80 OSCE monitors. That happened because
the United States of America and certain other
members of the Permanent Council of the OSCE did
not fulfil the Medvedev-Sarkozy document of
8 September, but distorted some of its provisions.

For its part, the Russian Federation will do
everything it can to support the activities of the OSCE
monitors.

