Mr. Trautwein (Germany): We express our
sincere gratitude to Ambassador Motoc and his team
for the able and forward-looking guidance of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We thank him for this morning's briefing,
which we welcome as a further step in transparency
and inclusiveness. Germany considers this openness
towards the broader membership essential in achieving
the goals of the resolution. The full engagement of
every Member State is needed for the successful
implementation of this important resolution.

We highly appreciate the support by the
Department for Disarmament Affairs for the
Committee in the recruitment of four experts, and we
welcome the invitation for further nominations for two
more experts from as wide of a geographic basis as
possible. The Committee is now well-equipped to fulfil
its mandate.

We encourage States in a position to do so to
offer assistance in response to specific requests by
States lacking the legal and regulatory infrastructure,
implementation experience or resources for fulfilling
their obligations under the resolution. As noted by both
the report of the Secretary-General's Advisory Board
on Disarmament Matters and the report of the High-
level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, the
Committee should assist Member States in achieving
an effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
inter alia by offering model legislation for security,
tracking, criminalization and export controls.

Germany also welcomes the recommendations
contained in the two reports aiming at developing
minimum standards for the implementation and
improvement of non-proliferation policies and
legislation regarding the transfer of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) and related material to non-State
actors. We reiterate our position that determined efforts
and further steps in nuclear disarmament and in the
implementation of the Chemical and Biological
Weapons Conventions, as well as in the areas of the
means of delivery, are necessary to effectively close
existing gaps in the non-proliferation regimes. We
would thus prevent the further proliferation of WMDs
and related materials and their means of delivery,
including to non-State actors.
We encourage the Chair to deepen contacts with
the heads of the International Atomic Energy Agency
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, as well as with the relevant non-proliferation
bodies, in order to establish close working relations.
Germany looks forward to continued active support for
the Committee and the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).

