Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): First I would like to thank
the Presidents of both Tribunals, Judge Fausto Pocar
and Judge Erik Mose, as well as the Prosecutors of the
Tribunals, Ms. Carla Del Ponte and Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow, for their reports to the Security
Council.

Japan notes with satisfaction that both Tribunals
have been making efforts to achieve justice through
two avenues: the efficient conduct of their trial
activities and the improvement of their management
capacity. We appreciate the fact that the Tribunals have
worked to accomplish the transfer of mid- to low-level
accused to domestic courts. We believe that the closer
involvement of local authorities and populations will
contribute to the process of reconciliation among the
people and to the establishment of the rule of law.
We have also noted with appreciation the efforts
made by neighbouring States and by the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in
the arrest of Ante Gotovina on 7 December. We call for
continued efforts to apprehend the key remaining
fugitives, especially Radovan Karadzic and Ratko
Mladic, and to arrest Felicien Kabuga and transfer him
to the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR).

In his report to the Council, Judge Pocar
indicated that despite the efforts of neighbouring States
and of the ICTY, trials may not end by the end of 2009
but may continue beyond that date if the remaining
fugitives are not apprehended in the coming months.
While we understand the concerns that may prompt
such an observation, we also feel it necessary to
express our concern about the possibility of extending
the ICTY's mandate beyond the date envisaged in its
completion strategy.

We raise that concern now because, although
there are still five years left until we reach the final
deadline set by the completion strategies, we believe
that it is not too soon to call attention to it. In that
connection, our view is that, first, both the ICTY and
ICTR should be strongly encouraged to make every
effort to complete their activities in accordance with
their completion strategies by the final deadline - that
is to say, by the end of 2010 - as endorsed by the
Council. To that end, all necessary and appropriate
measures should be explored, including the transfer of
ongoing trials to the domestic courts.

Secondly, if the activities of the Tribunals should
continue beyond the deadline set in the completion
strategies, it is our view that we should consider the
possibility of providing the necessary funding for the
Tribunals beyond the deadline through voluntary
contributions from States directly concerned and from
interested States.

We do not say that out of a lack of commitment
on the part of my country to the cause of justice and to
ending impunity; on the contrary, our long-term,
substantial support to the ICTY and the ICTR is clear.
Our more recent major support for and active role in
the establishment of the Khmer Rouge trial in the
former Democratic Kampuchea is further testimony of
our deep commitment in that regard.

However, we would find it very difficult to
justify our support for funding the activities of the
ICTY and the ICTR out of the regular budget if it were
to begin to look like support for what seems like an
almost indefinite period. Achieving justice requires not
only the will of the international community, but also
resolve on the part of the States concerned. Today, we
have the International Criminal Court and the special
courts in Sierra Leone and Cambodia all funded by
contributions from countries directly concerned and
with special interest in the matter. That reflects not
only budgetary considerations, but also the importance
of the active involvement of the relevant States in
bringing about justice. Given those circumstances, it
would be difficult for us to justify the continued
funding of the ICTY and the ICTR beyond the

completion target date of 2010 - should it become
necessary - other than through voluntary
contributions.

From a long-term perspective, the process of
achieving justice and ending impunity will require and
benefit from a parallel cooperative effort - in addition
to international criminal tribunals - that will promote
and sustain the rule of law and the mechanism of fair
trials at the community and national levels. According
to the reports of the Tribunals, the ICTY has developed
a cooperative relationship with neighbouring States and
regional institutions, and the ICTR has worked on
capacity-building in relevant States with regard to
techniques for arresting fugitives and for conducting
fair trials, through workshops for justice officials.
Those are commendable efforts. Ten years have now
passed since the establishment of both Tribunals, and
we believe that the achievements they have
accomplished as a result of those cooperative efforts
should be firmly transferred, where appropriate, to
practices at the local and State levels with a View to
meeting international standards.

In conclusion, we would like to express once
again our confidence that both Tribunals will work to
ensure the strict implementation of their completion
strategies. We are confident that they will take all
necessary measures to attain that objective during the
next five years, while at the same time making every
effort for capacity-building in the relevant States in
order to ensure fair trials that meet international
standards.

