The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered, within its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, its role in the
prevention of armed conflicts. The Council emphasizes
the need fully to respect and implement the principles
and provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and norms of international law, in particular in this
context those related to prevention of armed conflicts
and settlement of disputes by peaceful means. It
affirms its commitment to the principles of the
political independence, sovereign equality and
territorial integrity of all States. The Council also
affirms the need for respect for human rights and the
rule of law. It will give special attention to the
humanitarian consequences of armed conflicts. The
Council recognizes the importance of building a
culture of prevention of armed conflicts and the need
for a contribution from all principal organs of the
United Nations in that regard.

"The Security Council stresses the importance of
a coordinated international response to economic,
social, cultural or humanitarian problems, which are
often the root causes of armed conflicts. Recognizing
the need for the development of effective long-term
strategies, it emphasizes the need for all United
Nations organs and agencies to pursue preventive
strategies and to take action within their respective
areas of competence to assist Member States to
eradicate poverty, strengthen development cooperation
and assistance and promote respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms.

"The Security Council recognizes that early
warning, preventive diplomacy, preventive
deployment, preventive disarmament and post-conflict

peace-building are interdependent and
complementary components of a comprehensive
conflict prevention strategy. The Council emphasizes
its continuing commitment to addressing the
prevention of armed conflicts in all regions of the
world.

"The Security Council is aware of the
importance of its early consideration of situations
which might deteriorate into armed conflicts. In this
context, it underlines the importance of the
settlement of disputes by peaceful means, in
accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations. The Council recalls that parties to
any dispute, the continuance of which is likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security, have an obligation to seek peaceful means
of settlement.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations to take action on its own initiatives in order
to maintain international peace and security. The
results of the Council's mission to Jakarta and Dili
from 6 to 12 September 1999 demonstrate that such
missions undertaken with the consent of the host
country and with clear goals can be useful if
dispatched in a timely and appropriate manner. The
Council expresses its intention to support, with
appropriate follow-up action, efforts to prevent
conflict by the Secretary-General through such areas
as fact-finding missions, good offices and other
activities requiring action by his envoys and Special
Representatives.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
important role of the Secretary-General in the
prevention of armed conflicts. The Council expresses
its readiness to consider appropriate preventive
action in response to the matters brought to its
attention by States or the Secretary-General and
which it deems likely to threaten international peace
and security. It invites the Secretary-General to
present to the members of the Council periodic
reports on such disputes, including, as appropriate,
early warnings and proposals for preventive
measures.

"In this regard the Council encourages the
Secretary-General to improve further his capacity to
identify potential threats to international peace and
security and invites him to indicate any requirements

 

to fulfil these capacities, including the development of
the Secretariat's expertise and resources.
"The Security Council recalls that the United
Nations Preventive Deployment Force, as the first
United Nations preventive deployment mission, has
prevented the spillover of conflict and tensions from
the region to the host country. The Council will
continue to consider the establishment of such
preventive missions in appropriate circumstances.

"The Security Council will also consider other
preventive measures such as the establishment of
demilitarized zones and preventive disarmament.
While fully conscious of the responsibilities of other
United Nations organs, it emphasizes the crucial
importance of disarmament and the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and the means of their
delivery for the maintenance of international peace
and security. In particular, progress in preventing and
combating the excessive and destabilizing
accumulation of and illicit trafficking in small arms
and light weapons is of vital importance to the
prevention of armed conflicts. The Council will also
take appropriate measures in situations of post-conflict
peace-building aimed at preventing the recurrence of
armed conflicts, including through adequate
programmes for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants. The Council
acknowledges the increasingly important role of the
civilian components of multifunctional peacekeeping
operations and will look towards their playing a
greater role in wider preventive efforts.

"The Security Council recalls the provisions of
Article 39 of the Charter of the United Nations
concerning measures to prevent armed conflicts. Such
measures may include targeted sanctions, in particular
arms embargoes and other enforcement measures. In
imposing such measures the Council will pay special
attention to their likely effectiveness in achieving
clearly defined objectives, while avoiding negative
humanitarian consequences as much as possible.

"The Security Council recognizes the link
between the prevention of armed conflicts, the
facilitation of the peaceful settlement of disputes and
the promotion of security for the civilian population,
in particular the protection of human life.
Furthermore, the Council underlines that the existing
international criminal tribunals represent useful
instruments to combat impunity and can, by helping
to deter crimes against humanity, contribute to the
prevention of armed conflicts. In this context the
Council acknowledges the historic significance of
the adoption of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court.
"The Security Council recognizes the important
role that regional organizations and arrangements are
playing in the prevention of armed conflicts,
including through the development of confidence-
and security-building measures. The Council also
emphasizes the importance of supporting and
improving regional capacities for early warning. It
emphasizes the importance of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations in
preventive activities in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations. The Council
welcomes meetings between the United Nations,
including the Security Council, and regional
organizations, and encourages participants to
continue to focus those meetings on issues related to
prevention of armed conflicts.

"The Security Council will continue to review
its activities and strategies for the prevention of
armed conflicts. It will consider the possibility of
holding further orientation debates and strengthening
its cooperation with the Economic and Social
Council. The Council will also consider the
possibility of a meeting at the level of Foreign
Ministers on the issue of prevention of armed
conflicts during the Millennium Assembly.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1999/34.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 2.25 p.m.
