Mr. Oshima (Japan): We thank the Romanian
presidency for its timely initiative to once again
convene a meeting as a follow-up to the previous one
held under its presidency in July 2004, to focus the
Council's attention on the important question of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security. We also appreciate the presence of Romania's
Foreign Minister to preside over this important debate.

My delegation welcomes as well the participation
in this debate of regional and subregional
organizations, representing different parts of the world,
that are actively involved in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and in promoting
cooperation with the United Nations. We benefit
enormously from their comments, ideas and proposals.

I welcome in particular the participation today of
an important subregional organization from our part of
the world. I am referring in particular to the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
which plays a vital role in promoting cooperation,
harmony and resilience for economic and social
development, as well as, in recent years, in such
political- and security-related arenas as counter-
terrorism and fighting piracy.

As is widely acknowledged, regional
organizations are playing an increasingly important
role in the prevention, resolution and management of
conflicts, including in addressing their root causes.
That is a very welcome and important development
that deserves our full encouragement and support. The
2005 outcome document of the Assembly's High-level
Plenary Meeting did just that by supporting a stronger
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations, including through the increased
involvement of regional organizations in the work of
the Security Council and enhanced support for
capacity-building at the regional level.

We note in particular, and applaud, the
increasingly active and effective role played by the
African Union in the prevention of conflict and
political mediation. We welcome the political
commitment and the increasing sense of regional
ownership with which the African Union and Africa's
subregional organizations have engaged in peace
processes in a number of serious situations on the
continent. Just this month, for example, the African
Union Peace and Security Council gave new impetus to
the peace process in Cote d'Ivoire. The African Union
is also engaged in peacekeeping on the ground in
Darfur and in peace negotiations in Abuja. In addition,
the Economic Community of West African States and
other subregional organizations are making efforts to
prevent deadly conflicts in Africa. We pay tribute to
them.

Those welcome efforts made by regional and
subregional organizations in Africa and elsewhere
should, as necessary, be supported or complemented by
the United Nations, and by the Security Council in
particular. To that end, interaction and cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations needs to be strengthened,
and concrete ways should be developed to facilitate
that. We support, for example, creating more
opportunities for heads of regional and subregional
organizations to brief the Security Council on their
activities as they relate to the maintenance of peace
and security. Likewise, the holding of meetings
between representatives of regional organizations and
members of the Security Council during the Council's
field missions are useful ways to strengthen the needed
interaction and cooperation.

More specifically, we note and welcome the
growing role of regional organizations in peacekeeping
operations, particularly in Africa, where they are most
numerous. We believe that promoting further
cooperation and creating partnerships between regional
organizations and the United Nations in the area of
peacekeeping is a desirable and feasible goal that
should be positively pursued. To that end, several
issues will need to be considered.

First, the capacity to rapidly deploy peacekeeping
personnel to meet emergency requirements has always
been a challenge. To better cope with that challenge,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations has been
advocating for some time the idea of a strategic reserve
of peacekeepers that can be relied upon for rapid
deployment once a peacekeeping mission is
established. That interesting proposal is still under
discussion, with many questions yet to be resolved.
The outcome document by world leaders also talked
about the idea of rapidly deployable capacities.

In developing such a rapid-deployment capacity,
regional organizations can play a useful role, and in
fact some organizations - the European Union, for
example - have developed such a capacity. Other
regional organizations can follow - if necessary, with
the assistance of the donor community - for the
provision of training, equipment and other capacity-
building assistance to the troop-contributing members
of regional organizations, such as the standby force of
the African Union.

Secondly and more generally, in the area of peace
operations, more effective cooperation and partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
that are engaged in peace operations is desirable. While
the role of regional organizations in peace operations
has been growing, their capacities for sustainable
operations, particularly in developing regions of the
world, are often limited. The United Nations can play a
useful supporting or facilitating role in order to
strengthen the sustainability of peace operations
conducted by regional organizations, particularly when
the operations in question are authorized by the
Security Council.

To that end, various forms of support can be
considered, ranging from United Nations assistance in
military planning, such as that now being provided to
the African Union mission in the Sudan, to support in
areas where regional organizations and their member
States face difficulties, including in transport, logistics
and engineering.

Before closing, let me state that we believe that
there is an important role in the proposed
peacebuilding commission for regional organizations,
and we strongly support the participation of regional
organizations, as appropriate, in the activities of the
peacebuilding commission.

Today's discussion is timely and provides an
important opportunity to take stock of the current state
of affairs and consider the future course of action in
meeting the challenges of enhancing cooperation and
coordination between regional organizations and the
United Nations, particularly the Security Council. We
trust that today's debate will take us one step further in
that direction.

My delegation appreciates the effort of the
Romanian delegation in preparing a draft resolution on
the subject, which we strongly support.

