Mr. Kolby (Norway): I, too, would like to thank
Mr. Guehenno for his briefing. We note that work on
the legal framework is progressing and that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General intends to hold
Kosovo-wide elections this year. We are encouraged by
Mr. Guehenno's information about progress towards
ensuring the return of Kosovo Serbs to the working
group. We expect that, as part of this process, more
Kosovar energy will be directed towards the legal and
political arena. Norway deeply regrets and condemns
the violent attacks against minorities, which seem
increasingly well organized and aimed at undermining
our efforts to ensure a multi-ethnic Kosovo.

Continued extremist violence, which is also
taking place against fellow ethnic Albanians, shows
that progress towards elections is not matched by
improvement in the security situation. For elections to
be held, we need a security framework as well as a
legal framework. Kosovo Albanian leaders should
know that the best support they can give to the election
process is to take vigorous, public measures to prevent
violence and create conditions for the return of
refugees and displaced persons. However desirable
province-wide elections may be, their success will
depend on whether these requirements are met. In this
connection, I would like to ask Mr. Guehenno whether
it is his impression that the Kosovo leaders fully
appreciate the need to do more with regard to the
security situation.

To ensure legitimate elections, it is essential that
Kosovo Serbs and other minorities are properly
represented in the preparations, the voting and the
institutions. We believe that closer cooperation
between the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia could contribute to this
end. Norway fully supports the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to involve the
Yugoslav authorities, and we welcome his visit to
Belgrade last week and its results. We believe it is now
important to open a full-fledged UNMIK office in
Belgrade.

Norway is encouraged by recent steps taken by
Belgrade to bring to justice persons indicted for war
crimes, as well as to implement the Covic plan in the
Presevo region. To build further confidence, all
political prisoners should be released from jails in
Serbia without delay. For their part, ethnic Albanian
leaders should do more on the issue of missing persons.
We support Mr. Guehenno's comment that a joint
commission would be an important step.

Lack of public trust in the law enforcement
agencies and the judiciary in Kosovo is a serious
challenge. Norway supports the creation of a new
UNMIK pillar to maintain a strong involvement in this
area by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. Tackling the alarming increase in trafficking
in women and children is one of the most urgent tasks.

Finally, Norway fully shares the emphasis by
Mr. Guehenno and others on the importance of the
regional aspects of the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999), and we would therefore also like to hear
his assessment of the possible implications if
Montenegro should take steps to secede from the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
