Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to thank the Peruvian presidency
for having organized this important debate on the
innovative resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace
and security, adopted three years ago. I also wish to
recall and thank the leadership of Jordan for promoting
the resolution.

We are also grateful for the informative briefings
provided by Ms. J ayathma Wickramanayake, Secretary-
General's Envoy on Youth; Mr. Graeme Simpson, lead
author of the progress study on youth, peace and security
(see S/2018/86); Ms. Sophia Pierre-Antoine of Haiti;
and Ms. Kessy Ekomo-Soignet of the Central African
Republic. They have reminded us most young people
of the world wish to contribute and are contributing to
peace and sustainable development for all.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the independent progress study on youth, peace
and security. We feel that the study's main results
give cause for great hope, since they show that despite
the current conflicts and geopolitical tensions on our
planet, most of our young people not only want to
participate in peace processes but also demonstrate
a strong commitment to working for the peace and
security of their communities and countries in many
innovative ways, through initiatives based on promoting
alliances and the use of new technologies. Our youth
want peace and they want to facilitate its sustainability
and their commitment, since investing in sustainable
and equitable development among countries is a way to
prevent conflicts and to turn their contribution into a
peace dividend.

For those reasons, Equatorial Guinea welcomes
some of the recommendations of the report with regard
to the importance of promoting national, regional and
global alliances in order to ensure research and the
collection of the necessary data on youth and peace
and security so as to ensure the implementation of
resolutions 2250 (2015), 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, and 1612 (2005), on children
and armed conflict, and other resolutions relevant
to achieving peaceful solutions to conflicts and to
protecting the civilians who will bear the responsibility
for peacebuilding and sustainable development. In that
regard, we are deeply concerned about the more than
400 million young people who live in areas affected by
armed conflict, terrorist groups and organized crime
and the stigma and violence of social and economic
exclusion - which can be linked to the racial, ethnic
and religious prejudice spread by populist movements,
as well as violent predators and petty criminals - and
who become passive or invisible victims trying to
escape conflict.

We are talking about the largest generation of
young people in history. More than half of the world
population is under 30 years of age. Many of them are
unemployed. In fact, more than 500 million live below
the poverty threshold, and about 14 million of those
are refugees or displaced by conflict. In Africa, more
than 60 per cent of the population is under 24 years
of age. That means that on our continent most victims
of conflict and those who suffer most from conflict,
not counting women of all ages, are young people and
children. Unemployment among African youth is high,
fluctuating between 10 and 29 per cent depending on the
region. Those figures are due to a lack of development,
unequal development among and within countries, a
lack of access to fair terms in international markets,
and conflict, terrorism and violent extremism, among
other issues. That combination of adverse situations
makes such young people and children vulnerable to
the manipulation of terrorist and organized criminal
groups. However, as the report that we are discussing
reminds us, most young people want and are working
for peace. That is why the fight against all such evils
must be anchored in the commitment to sustainable
development and equitable economic growth, gender
equality and the empowerment and participation of
young people and women at all levels. That struggle
should not be on the military front alone.
In his welcome speech at the seventeenth summit of
the African Union Assembly, held in Malabo, Republic
of Equatorial Guinea, on 1 July 2011, President
Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, then Chairperson of the
African Union, said that he called on African youth
as the legitimate heirs to Africa's future, and that for
us, young people were not a problem for society but
a determining factor in society's development process.
That faith in Africa's young people has been a constant
during his presidency, as he has demonstrated through
his support for African Union initiatives such as the
Youth Volunteer Corps, the 2017 theme of harnessing
the demographic dividend through investments in
youth for sustainable development, the annual China-
Africa youth festival and the fifth summit of the
African Union and the European Union, which served
to strengthen those initiatives.

At the national level, Equatorial Guinea held its
first national youth congress in 2010, which led to the
adoption of national policies aimed at ensuring respect
for the political, economic, social and cultural rights of
young people. They include scholarship systems at both
the national and the international level, access to decent
housing and initiatives for the creation of decent jobs
as part of our Horizon 2020 national development plan.

In conclusion, we want to underscore our support
for General Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security
Council resolution 2282 (2016) with regard to improving
young people's abilities and skills and to creating jobs for
them, with a view to contributing actively to sustaining
peace. We also encourage the international community
to support young people in that regard. Africa is the
youngest continent in the world and the only region
where the number of young people continues to grow.
African youth represents the future of the whole world,
not just of Africa. The young people of any region
represent the future of all of us. That is why we call for
the international community and the various entities of
the United Nations, within their respective mandates,
to invest in international policies that promote equality,
cooperation and brotherhood among countries with
the aim of ensuring conflict prevention, sustainable
development and lasting peace and security with the
participation of young people and in the context of
respect for the sovereignty of countries.

