Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.
Dramatic events in the region are quickly
changing the face of the Middle East. Like those
elsewhere in the region, people in Syria are demanding
freedom, democracy and reform. The one and only way
to respond to such legitimate aspirations is through
genuine and inclusive dialogue. Violence and
repression can never be the answer.

Portugal is gravely concerned about the situation
in Syria and the increasing levels of violence resulting
in hundreds of deaths and injuries. We extend our
condolences to the families of all the victims. We
strongly condemn the violence against peaceful
demonstrators and call for an immediate end to the
violence and for those responsible to be held
accountable. We support the Secretary-General's call
for an independent, transparent and effective
investigation into the killings.

Portugal takes note of the Syrian Government's
decision to lift the state of emergency, of the laws
introduced over the past few days, and of the
announced intention to proceed with political reform.
These measures and intentions must nevertheless be
credible, carried out in an effective way and translate
into real improvements and effective reform. Syrian
authorities have an obligation to respect human rights,
including the right to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly, as well as freedom of the press, and
to respect the integrity and dignity of arrested persons
and their right to due legal process.

My country is mindful of Syria's critical
importance to the peace and security of the Middle
East. We also remain fully committed to the
independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria. Portugal welcomes and supports the
statement issued by the General Secretariat of the
League of Arab States on the current developments in
an increasing number of Arab cities, its appeal to
Governments to commit to an immediate
implementation of reform, and the forthcoming
meeting of the League's Foreign Ministers.

Portugal calls once again upon the Government to
Syria to show all possible restraint and to ensure the
protection of its citizens. We call upon all parties in
Syria to engage in a genuine, comprehensive and
inclusive dialogue and to embark on an inclusive and
sustainable reform process.

