Mr. Qazi: I have the pleasure to introduce the
latest report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
2
(S/2009/6l) and I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Council on the current situation in the Sudan.

The Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) has
reached a critical juncture with little over two years of
the interim period remaining. The environment for
these final two years is likely to be difficult and
complex. The implementation of outstanding CPA
provisions, which are mostly political in nature, will
test the parties. The critical challenges that lie ahead
include completing border demarcation, finalizing the
redeployment of forces, census results, elections at
several levels, and the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) process. The Abyei Road Map
agreement will need to be adhered to, including
accepting the decision of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration expected later this year. The provision of a
peace dividend, especially in the South and the Three
Areas, will be key, as will be stabilizing the security
situation through the promotion of reconciliation and
confidence-building measures, especially in hot spots
along the North-South border areas.

Making unity attractive to the people of Southern
Sudan, where a referendum on the issue is scheduled to
be held in 2011, should remain the focus of the parties
and the international community in the next two years.
Preparations for a referendum that maintains peace and
stability, whatever the decision of the people of
Southern Sudan, and preparations for popular
consultations in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
States will need to commence immediately. For a
peaceful referendum, an agreement on wealth and oil-
revenue sharing for the post referendum period will be
a prerequisite.

These challenges have to be met and surmounted
within limited time and with the current situation in the
Sudan marked by deepening political uncertainty and
insufficient mutual trust among the parties to the CPA.
This uncertainty has been exacerbated by the ongoing
conflict in Darfur and the awaited International
Criminal Court decision. As a result, despite the
commitment of the National Congress Party and the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) to CPA
implementation, the Peace Agreement is vulnerable.
Should, as a result, the CPA unravel, conflicts and
instability in the Sudan are likely to escalate
dramatically.

The humanitarian implications of a relapse into
conflict and chaos throughout the Sudan are, to put it
09-22822
mildly, sobering. The CPA is central. The CPA is
fragile. That is the challenge facing the Sudan and the
international community and, with all due respect, the
Security Council today. Without any exaggeration,
2009 could be a make-or-break year for the CPA and
for the prospect of peace in the Sudan.

The National Elections Commission (NEC) has
been established, but it will take some time to reach
full operational capacity. The Government will need to
fund its operations adequately and in a timely manner,
and the national legislature will need to provide an
appropriate legal framework to ensure free and fair
elections. The electoral division of the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) has begun to provide
the NEC with information and materials to assist it in
its work and anticipates receiving a letter of request
from the NEC to provide further details on the
assistance it will need. The scale of assistance,
including training, logistical and technical support, will
determine the staffing and funding requirements of the
electoral division of UNMIS.

According to the CPA, elections are scheduled to
take place by July of this year. But the long delays in
the enactment of the electoral law and the
establishment of the NEC, the time it will take for the
NEC to reach operational capacity, the timelines
established in the National Elections Act itself and the
enormous amount of work to be done call into question
the feasibility of that date. The two CPA parties, in
consultation with the NEC, may need to review the
feasibility of the dates established in the CPA.
However, it is their decision.

From a political point of View, the overall
security situation, especially in Darfur, delays in
legislating an agreed legal framework, possible
differences over the census results, and delays in
border demarcation could affect the timing of the
elections. Not least, the impact of an International
Criminal Court decision will be a factor. Elections are
essential to a democratic transformation process.
However, adequate preparation and progress on other
benchmarks are also essential to ensure that the
election process does not lead to further polarization
that would actually undermine the peaceful
implementation of the CPA.

Similarly, border demarcation affects the
implementation of the other outstanding benchmarks.
Without border demarcation, the elections will be
09-22822

impeded and the referendum will not be possible.
Moreover, redeployment will not be completed without
an agreed border. Delay and deadlock will also
generate additional tensions in an already volatile area.
UNMIS has delivered satellite imagery to the Ad Hoc
Technical Border Committee for the production of a
digitized base map. This new input should enable the
Committee to complete and submit its delayed
technical report to the presidency. Just as with the
census commission, it is important that the work of the
Border Committee not be politicized. There will
inevitably be political bargaining and adjustments once
the technical report is submitted to the leadership of
the North and the South. That is natural, but hopefully
it will not result in deadlock. Meanwhile, UNMIS is
ready to provide further technical support to the
delineation and demarcation process. It is also ready to
provide its good offices for addressing the various
concerns of affected communities.

The situation in Abyei, after the brief flare-up of
12 December last year, remains calm but tense. An
administration has been established, but it is still
without funds and so unable to provide basic services.
That, along with the uncertain security situation, has
been a disincentive for the return of the internally
displaced persons who were forced to flee their homes
last May. There have, however, been some returns to
the surrounding areas of Abyei town. UNMIS and the
United Nations Development Programme recently
organized a meeting of donor countries with the Abyei
administration in which the administration presented
its plans and needs, which a number of donor countries
have indicated their willingness to fund. But the
primary responsibility for providing a budget and
releasing the respective funds rests with the
Government of National Unity.

The redeployment of the Sudanese Armed Forces
and the southern military police forces out of the Abyei
area is almost complete. The Joint Integrated Units
(JIUs) have almost completed their deployment, but
they still struggle to be truly joint and integrated. That
will take time. Meanwhile, the JIUs remain desperately
short of Vital communications and transport equipment
without which their effectiveness will remain very
limited. The Joint Integrated Police Units are not fully
deployed and have yet to deploy out of Abyei town. It
is hoped that the arbitration award of the Permanent
Court of Arbitration, expected in July or later this year,
will be accepted in good faith by both parties. Failure
3
here can expose the CPA to grave danger. Agreements
with regard to the impact of implementing the
arbitration decision on the local populations will be
crucial, and UNMIS will be ready to assist the reaching
of such understandings.

Related to that is continuing concern about free
access in Sector VI. As of now, UNMIS has free access
only in the Abyei Road Map area. It is denied access to
the areas north of the Road Map area, which makes up
two thirds of the Sector VI area. That blinds the
Mission with respect to movements of armed forces
and impedes its ability to monitor the ceasefire
arrangements and respond to situations that may
develop into serious clashes, as indeed happened last
May. It is hoped that those and other restrictions on
UNMIS will be lifted by the authorities in both the
North and South.

Finally, in Southern Kordofan, some positive
developments can be discerned, including progress
with the integration of the areas former SPLM-
controlled areas into the State administration. Local
authorities have stated that the security situation and
intertribal relations within the State have improved. At
the same time, however, the abundance of arms, local
dissatisfaction with the lack of a peace dividend and
fluid tribal and political affiliations does make this area
prone to conflict. Recurrent low-scale conflicts are of
concern in light of the sizeable presence of troops of
both parties in or near the State. DDR and the
provision of a palpable peace dividend are essential
inputs to stabilizing the security situation and
strengthening the structures of peace in all the Three
Areas.

The DDR process is set to commence in earnest
on 10 February with a pilot project in Blue Nile State,
followed by the launch of the operation in Southern
Kordofan, in line with the jointly agreed "Three Areas
first" approach. As capacities increase and funding
becomes available, DDR operations will spread
through the entire country. The DDR process enjoys
strong support from both the Government of National
Unity and the Government of Southern Sudan. Once it
develops momentum, it can encourage the parties to
move more effectively on other aspects of the peace
process, including redeployment and proportional
downsizing of forces in accordance with the CPA.
Accordingly, it also facilitates local stability and
conflict management, especially in the Three Areas.
More than 50,000 ex-combatants have been
preregistered. Should DDR falter, their expectations
would be disappointed and their reactions could further
complicate the security situation.

The North and South Governments, through the
Governments of National Unity and Southern Sudan,
have allocated a total of $45 million for DDR, but the
estimated overall costs are high: $430 million for
reintegration and $200 million for demobilization.
Moreover, demobilization cannot possibly go ahead
without funding for the reintegration process, which
will depend on donor contributions for that process.
The leadership shown by Japan in contributing
$17 million is much appreciated. A round-table
conference is scheduled in Juba for 12 February, at
which a firm political commitment by donor countries
to providing the estimated $80 million for 2009 is
expected.

In that regard, I would like to reiterate that DDR
is an important precondition for peacebuilding and
development across the Sudan. Equally, it must be
frankly stated that the success of DDR, like that of
other CPA benchmarks, including redeployment and
the development of JIUs, is and will remain dependent
on the degree and quality of the commitment of the two
parties to discussing outstanding issues and taking
difficult but necessary decisions for their solution.

The United Nations efforts are increasingly
focused on the transition from humanitarian assistance
to early recovery and development. However, despite
the international community's 2009 Sudan Work Plan,
projected budget cuts by the Government of Southern
Sudan and other factors have increased the need for
humanitarian assistance in the South. In addition to
public salary cuts, the Government of Southern Sudan
has shelved plans to take over basic services currently
provided by international non-governmental organizations
and United Nations agencies. That external support
currently amounts to 80 per cent of the South's safety
net, including health care and clean water. Increased
returns ahead of elections and referendums in South
Sudan and in Abyei will create additional basic
services requirements. To maintain that level of
support, continued financial assistance by the
international community is indispensable.

The Sudan is a large and complex country. Since
its independence in 1956, the Sudanese people have
suffered two civil wars between the North and the
South, a civil war in the East and an ongoing and
09-22822
possibly intensifying conflict in the West. Darfur and
East Sudan are politically part of North Sudan. The
humanitarian cost of the strife in the Sudan has been
enormous. Memories are bitter. Mutual trust and
confidence are lacking in the required degree. The
political and institutional infrastructure is still a work
in progress. The country has two Governments and two
armies. Neither a vote for unity nor separation in the
referendum can bring an end to conflict and suffering
unless the essential blocks of peace are in place. If
unity is to be made attractive, the meaning of the term
will need to be elaborated and agreed upon in terms of
constitutional arrangements. All that will require a
much improved ability and willingness of the parties to
gain each other's trust and work together for mutual
gain. That will be a daunting task, but, given the
alternatives, it is an absolutely necessary one.

It is in that context that the impact of a decision
by the International Criminal Court on the CPA and the
Darfur situation will need to be discussed. The purpose
of the CPA is the building and keeping of peace and
security in the Sudan, without which no justice for its
people will be possible. Towards that end, it is
incumbent upon the Sudanese parties and leadership, as
well as the international community, to remain focused
on ensuring the full implementation of the CPA.

In its deliberations on that issue, the Security
Council may also wish to consider potential threats to
the ongoing functions of UNMIS and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur in
09-22822

the Sudan and the security of its personnel. We have
received assurances of protection and cooperation from
Sudanese authorities at the highest levels, but those
assurances have been qualified by warnings about
public outrage. There have also been public threats and
incitements to violence. The United Nations has made
the necessary contingency plans and kept the Sudanese
authorities informed. Political and security
circumstances permitting, the United Nations is
committed to continuing its work in accordance with
the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council.

In conclusion, the CPA remains fundamental to
peace in the Sudan. The remainder of the interim
period will require determination and joint efforts by
all concerned. The Sudan's parties and leaders and,
indeed, the international community, will be judged by
the people of the Sudan on whether or not they deliver
peace to them. In that regard, I also appeal to the donor
community to continue its invaluable support to the
people of the Sudan at this critical juncture. There is
little time and there is much to do.

