Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): Ukraine entirely
associates itself with the judgement that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is the major challenge facing
Africa, the United Nations and the international
community as a whole. Nothing is more convincing in
this regard than the unprecedented high profile of the
Council's meeting last Monday. Therefore, the
Government of Ukraine will support any endeavour that
can bring us closer to achieving success in coping with
the formidable task of the peaceful resolution of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

It is against this background that Ukraine praises the
initiative of the American presidency of the Security
Council in organizing this meeting, which already has all
grounds to become an extraordinary one.

We applaud and warmly welcome the leaders of the
countries that signed the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement,
whose very presence here gave an important signal that
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is an
achievable goal. Ukraine shares the dominant view that
the Lusaka Agreement represents the most Viable basis for

 
the resolution of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Perhaps since the beginning of contemporary
international relations, diplomacy has produced hardly any
single perfect international treaties. The only technique for
achieving perfection - that is, for restoring peace,
resolving disputes or settling differences - has been the
strict implementation of the provisions of the treaties in
question. We are strongly convinced that in order to
achieve peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in the whole Great Lakes region the same
technique should be applied to the Lusaka Agreement.

Like the other members of the Security Council,
Ukraine is gravely concerned at the further deterioration of
the military and security situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and at the ongoing violations of the
ceasefire. We are also seriously worried about the
deepening of the humanitarian crisis in the region, which
we consider to be a direct result of the continuing disregard
of the Lusaka Agreement.

We strongly support the call for a renewed
commitment by the parties to that instrument. In that
connection, we are encouraged by the statements that heads
of State from the region made two days ago before the
Security Council. The Secretary-General is absolutely right
in concluding that such strengthened commitment is an
essential prerequisite for vigorous international action in
support of the Lusaka Agreement and for allocation by the
international community of the significant resources
required to that end.

At the same time, we also strongly believe that any
further hesitation on the part of the Security Council in
speeding up the United Nations deployment in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo would have a negative
effect on the peace efforts in that part of the world.

In that respect, we thank the Secretary-General for his
well-conceived recommendations for the next stage of the
deployment of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, submitted in his
report of 17 January 2000 (S/2000/30). Ukraine will
encourage the Security Council to take prompt action on
those recommendations. The deployment of United Nations
military observers will leave no excuse for further delays in
the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. We call on
the parties to reach an accord on a new, realistic and
workable calendar for implementation of the Agreement.

-V "Mu-MMJ A-tuvv

 
The parties to the Agreement should pay special
attention to putting an end to the presence of foreign
troops in the Democratic Republic of the Congo when
that presence is inconsistent with the principles of the
United Nations Charter. Ukraine strongly maintains that
no consideration can justify measures taken in violation
of fundamental principles of international law, in
particular the principles of the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of States.

Furthermore, we would like to express our concern
at the reports of illegal exploitation of the economic
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
Security Council should be prepared to take concrete
measures to stop such illegal activities.

We recognize that the problem of armed groups in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo dangerously
affects the security of many States in Central Africa.
Particular emphasis has to be placed on the problem of
security on the eastern border of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We agree that launching a comprehensive
disarmament and demobilization process for the armed
groups operating in that country is a matter of urgency.

Ukraine also supports the initiative of the French
Government to convene at an appropriate stage an
international conference for the Great Lakes region to
address comprehensively all remaining root causes of the
current conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
some of which, as we know, go deep into history.

Recent events should not be forgotten either. That is
why, in our opinion, the report of the independent inquiry
into the actions of the United Nations during the 1994
genocide in Rwanda should become the subject of our
thorough consideration.

In conclusion, I would like to express our optimism
that this "week of the Democratic Republic of the Congo"
within the Security Council's "month of Africa" will
produce very concrete results contributing to the
restoration of peace and security in the Central African
region. The presidential statement to be issued today is a
good first step. Quick Council action on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will meet the long-held
expectations of African countries and of the whole
international community, thus strengthening the credibility
of the Security Council. From what we heard on Monday,
I think there are good grounds for such optimism. Let us
work together to bring peace to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

 
