Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate the Lithuanian presidency on taking the
initiative to convene today's important and far-reaching
open debate of the Security Council on the human
cost of the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons (SALW).
My delegation also expresses our appreciation to the
President for the interesting concept note on this theme
(S/2015/306, annex).

I thank the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their briefings. I
would also like in particular to express my delegation's
gratitude to the representative of the West African
Action Network on Small Arms, Mr. Karamoko Diakite
of Cote d'Ivoire, and convey our appreciation for his
valuable advocacy on this crucial matter.

Malaysia strongly believes that efforts to address
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons must
be taken consistent with a holistic perspective on arms
control and disarmament, post-conflict peacebuilding,
conflict prevention and socioeconomic development.
We would further underline the need to address the
root causes of the illicit transfer of small arms and light
weapons, including inter alia, the supply of SALW to
armed groups, whether by Governments or through
the black market, excessive accumulation and surplus
of SALW in post-conflict situations and the growing
demand for small arms and light weapons by armed
groups and non-State actors.

Accordingly, we welcome today's open debate of
the Council as a reflection on how the illicit transfer of
small arms and light weapons in armed conflicts has
resulted in an alarming human cost. While the Council
has also maintained a focus on non-proliferation,
including on weapons of mass destruction, we are of the
View that it should also give due consideration to small
arms and light weapons as the main cause of death in
armed conflicts.

In this regard, the Secretary-General's latest
report on small arms and light weapons (S/2015/289)
further reaffirms the need for concerted action on this
matter. The apparent ease with which small arms and
light weapons are obtained through illicit means has
continued to exacerbate and prolong armed conflicts
and post-conflict situations. The Council is no a
stranger to depressing narratives as it discusses distinct
regional situations, but we have to recognize that a
common thread lies in these discussions, namely the
prevalence of small arms and light weapons in these
conflict areas.

Malaysia is particularly concerned about the impact
of illicit small arms and light weapons on children,
who, as the Secretary-General has rightly noted in his
report (S/2015/289), are disproportionately affected by
hostilities. In the event that children in armed conflict
do not end up as victims of small arms and light weapons
themselves, they can also face abduction, displacement
and other forms of psychosocial distress. Even in
post-conflict situations, we should not underestimate
the danger posed to children by small arms and light
weapons, as seen in instances where children had been
killed or injured by playing with unexploded ordnance.

The proliferation of inexpensive and lightweight
small arms and light weapons in conflict regions has
also contributed to the recruitment of children as
combatants, whether forced or otherwise. As we are
painfully aware, there are many unscrupulous groups
which are willing to prey on this vulnerability and fill
a child's empty pair of hands with the instruments of
death. It cannot be denied that the illicit transfer of
small arms and light weapons serves to prolong conflict
and intensify its impact on children. Malaysia reiterates
the Council's call for relevant parties to take measure
to stem the illicit flow of small arms and light weapons,
including through resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612
(2005) on children in armed conflict.
In addressing the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons, the international community has
established relevant parameters and guidelines. The
2001 United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons are key elements of
that framework.

However, despite the adoption of those
instruments, the marking and tracing of illicit small
arms and light weapons continues to be limited and
difficult, particularly in conflict or post-conflict
environments. We therefore recognize the need for
more capacity-building to meet the requirements and
capacities of Member States related to the prevention
of illicit trading in small arms and light weapons. That
includes increased facilitation of technology transfer to
developing countries, upon their request, with respect
to physical security and stockpile management, as well
as marking and tracing capacities. We believe that
would significantly boost the implementation of the
Programme of Action at the national level.

The Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), which Malaysia
signed on 26 September 2013 and entered into force
in late 2014, also stands as a landmark instrument. As
countries begin to implement the ATT, they need to
hold fast to the principle of ensuring that they do so in
a consistent, objective and non-discriminatory manner.
That principle will ensure that all countries will be able
to work together to close any gap, remove any loophole
and bring interpretations and implementation closer to
the ultimate goal of establishing the highest possible
common international standards for regulating the
international trade in conventional arms. That applies
to today's discussion in the context of ensuring that the
implementation of national obligations will contribute
to reducing the human cost of the illicit transfer of
small arms and light weapons.

One element that my delegation considers to be a
future task for the Council is the linkage between the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the Security
Council. The PBC is well placed to play an effective
role in post-conflict disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) and could also work closely
with other United Nations entities to ensure that
peacebuilding processes effectively complement one
another. Going forward, we hope that the Council will
consider the merits of interfacing with the PBC, not only
on DDR, but also through country-specific initiatives
on community security and conflict prevention, which
can be more attuned to local concerns regarding small
arms and light weapons.

