Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I, too,
wish to welcome Deputy Minister Pahad and the
delegation accompanying him. He briefed us nearly a
month ago on the prospects of the delicate mediation
mission entrusted to President Mbeki by the African
Union in the context of efforts to bring peace to Cote
d'Ivoire. We are pleased to see Mr. Pahad here today
again following the conclusion of the Pretoria
Agreement, which has opened new prospects for a
peaceful settlement of the crisis prevailing in cote
d'Ivoire since September 2002. We take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the great wisdom
demonstrated by President Mbeki in the course of his
mission.

The Pretoria Agreement addresses all aspects of
the crisis, and we are particularly pleased that it has
forged a consensus on such delicate and fundamental
issues as the disarmament and dismantling of militias,
the implementation of a national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, the
membership and operation of the Independent Electoral
Commission, and the organization of elections. The
subsequent implementation of all the agreed steps in
the context of those aspects will be critical to the future
of the country, and we welcome the appropriate actions
undertaken in good faith by the Ivorian parties, which
clearly reflect their will to make peace and to
overcome their divisions. That will is especially
manifest in the parties' agreement to be bound by the
mediator's findings on the difficult question of
eligibility for the presidential elections. In that respect,
we call on all parties to make the necessary sacrifices
to allow Cote d'Ivoire to emerge from its present
difficulties.

Briefly, as was recently stressed by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Cote
d'Ivoire, we now need to disarm not only men, but also
spirits, hearts, microphones and pens. We hope that the
statement to be delivered tomorrow by the President of
Cote d'Ivoire will sustain the hope represented by the
Pretoria Agreement and give new momentum to the
country's march towards peace and stability. We call on
the members of Ivorian civil society to display a
heightened sense of responsibility in their assessment
of the situation in C6te d'Ivoire and the mediator's
recommendations in his letter to his Ivorian
counterpart, in particular on the issue of article 35 of
the Constitution. We are fully convinced of the
Ivorians' ability to assume with dignity their weighty
responsibility for the future of their country and the
West African subregion as a whole.

Given the situation, the Security Council must
reaffirm the international community's commitment to
accompanying the Ivorian parties on their march
towards peace. The new momentum injected into the
peace process by the Pretoria Agreement must be fully
supported by responsible work on the part of the
Security Council in establishing provisions allowing
effective action on behalf of the Ivorian parties in the
context of the peace process in their country.

The United Nations must therefore contribute, to
the extent possible and in an appropriate manner, as
called for in the Pretoria Agreement, to training
officers of a national police force for the Forces
nouvelles, and supporting the organization of elections
and the disarmament and dismantling of militias, not to
mention the other functions recently entrusted to the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI),
in conjunction with the Licorne forces, including
monitoring the arms embargo and supervising the
national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme.

From our perspective, the United Nations
commitment will be an important part of building the
confidence of the parties in the electoral process once
they have resolved the difficult constitutional issue of
article 35 of the Constitution. It will therefore be
necessary for us to revisit UNOCI's mandate and
consider the matter of strengthening its staff with
adequate resources and means to undertake the specific
and increased number of tasks which they have been
instructed to perform.

In analysing the factors that distinguish the
Pretoria Agreement from the other agreements reached
earlier by the Ivorian parties, we find the close follow-
up provided by the Special Representative and the
mediator to have been critical. It would be useful for
them to maintain their presence in helping the parties
to manage the details of implementing the Agreement
until the effective holding of scheduled elections in
October 2005. In that regard, the arbitration to be
undertaken in the preparatory process is extremely
sensitive and it is therefore essential to help the
Ivorians to rebuild the trust that has been lost between
them. Generally speaking, it is extremely important
that the necessary international follow-up measures on
the Pretoria Agreement be speedily applied so that the
parties can make judicious use of the brief time
remaining to prepare properly for the elections,
allowing them to be held on schedule in October 2005.

In conclusion, we reiterate our firm support for
the African Union mediator. We welcome his
committed efforts to achieve a peaceful resolution of
the Ivorian crisis. We can say that the resolution of that
crisis is within reach. The mediator deserves credit,
and so do the Ivorian parties, who in signing the
Pretoria Agreement demonstrated that they have faith
in the future of their country.

