Ms. Bekwa (South Africa): South Africa thanks
Special Representative Ghassan Salame, Ambassador
Sma'il Chergui, the African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security, and Ambassador Juergen Schulz
for their briefings.

My delegation commends Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres and Mr. Salame for their tireless
efforts in bringing together all parties and stakeholders
to reach an agreement on the peace process in Libya,
and extends its full support for their efforts. We
particularly commend the work of the African Union
Ad Hoc High-level Committee on Libya, under the
leadership of President Sassou Nguesso, and call for
greater cooperation and collaboration between the
African Union (AU) and the United Nations in finding
a lasting solution to the crisis and in support of a single
road map in pursuit of peace and stability in Libya.

South Africa remains concerned about the worsening
security and humanitarian situation in Tripoli. South
Africa calls on each of the parties to reduce tensions
and exercise restraint so as to prevent destruction and
loss of life in the capital and the continued suffering of
civilians and migrants. We reiterate that all parties and
stakeholders must commit to building durable peace
in Libya on the basis of inclusive political dialogue.
We particularly urge the parties to commit fully to the
ceasefire agreement reached in September 2018 and to
avoid any further escalation of violence. In that regard,
South Africa will continue to support the convening
of a Libyan national peace and reconciliation forum,
preceded by a national dialogue conference, in order
to unify the people of Libya. We are therefore deeply
concerned about the postponement of the process due
to the increased fighting in and around Tripoli. Where
could we be ifthings were normal according to the time
frames set?

We support the ongoing efforts of the AU through
its Peace and Security Council, the AU Ad Hoc High-
level Committee on Libya and the commitment of the
AU High Representative for Libya as they continue
to engage with the main stakeholders in the country.
The Security Council must support all efforts to bring
about a peaceful settlement of the dispute and promote
political dialogue.

In terms of the progress report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya, South Africa views sanctions not
as an end in and of themselves but rather as a tool to
accompany a political process towards peace and post-
conflict. While some elements of the sanctions may
assist in providing the necessary momentum towards
the desired outcome, the focus should be on creating
an enabling environment that promotes conditions for
a peace process and addresses the root causes of the
conflict. However, given the recent escalation in military
confrontation, South Africa views the implementation
of the arms embargo, renewed under resolution 2420
(2018), as an important part in preventing illicit flows
of arms into Libya, which increases the risk of arms
proliferation and further fuels instability in the Sahel.

We call on all parties supplying arms to the
protagonists in Libya to keep an inventory of such
supplies so as to fully account for them post-conflict.
We need to avoid the situation of the past whereby tons
and tons of weapons, ammunitions and explosives were
dropped to groups fighting the regime of that time.
Those arms have subsequently found their way into
the greater Sahel, resulting in what we are witnessing
today in Mali, Burkina Faso, Chad, Nigeria, Cameroon
and Cote d'Ivoire.

