Mr. Monteiro (Portugal) (spoke in French):
Please permit me, Sir, to express my pleasure at seeing
you presiding over the work of the Security Council
this month and to congratulate you on having organized
this historic debate.
(spoke in English)

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union-
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia 4 and the associated countries Cyprus, Malta
and Turkey, as well as the European Free Trade
Association countries members of the European
Economic Area- Iceland and Liechtenstein- align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union listened with great
appreciation to the briefing that Mr. Carl Bildt, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Balkans, gave the Security Council today. We welcome
this opportunity to take stock of the situation in the
area from a regional perspective. It is a given that for
peace and security to be restored in the region and for
democracy and respect for human rights to flourish,
they must do so in every part ofthe Balkans.

The European Union is, by far, the largest
contributor to the international efforts to help bring
peace and stability to the region. Between 1991 and
1999, the European Union has contributed more than
17 billion euros in development, budgetary and
humanitarian assistance to South-eastern Europe. The
European Union is offering stabilization and
association agreements to five South-eastern European
countries with the prospect of eventual membership of
the European Union. Allow me to draw the attention of
the members of the Security Council to a paper
prepared by the European Commission that has been
made available; it provides greater detail on the
European Union contributions to the Western Balkans
region.

There can be no doubt that the European Union is
committed - heavily committed - to efforts to bring
about a peaceful and prosperous Western Balkans. The
European Union considers the recent ethnically
motivated violence in Kosovo to be intolerable and that
it must be stopped. All Kosovars, irrespective of their
ethnic origin, must be able to stay in or return to
Kosovo, and to live there in peace without harassment
or intimidation of any kind. The leaders of all ethnic
communities, in particular the Kosovo Albanian
community, must take responsibility for achieving this
and must act vigorously and urgently to promote
tolerance and mutual respect in Kosovo.

This week, the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina was extended for
another year, demonstrating clearly the commitment of
the international community to making the Paris-
Dayton Peace Agreement work. Five years later, much
has been accomplished, but much still remains to be
done, as was made clear to the Council by the Special
Representative ofthe Secretary-General for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, only last week.

The recent Peace Implementation Council
meeting set priorities for a new, accelerated phase of
peace implementation in three key strategic areas:
economic reform, accelerated return of displaced
persons and functional and democratically accountable
common institutions.

A crucial aspect of the process of national
reconciliation in Bosnia, and in the Balkans as a whole,
is a sense among all communities that justice has been
served and, in this context, the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal (ICTY) for the Former
Yugoslavia must continue to be pursued vigorously.
The European Union urges that persons accused of war
crimes who are still at large be brought to justice. The
Bosnian authorities and all other relevant Governments
of the region must cooperate with the ICTY fully and
unambiguously to this end.

The peace process in Bosnia, and the prospects
for peace and security in the region as a whole, depend
very much on whether democracy will be allowed to
breathe in Serbia. The European Union is deeply
concerned at the continuing deterioration of the
political situation in Serbia and condemns the
escalating repression of the democratic opposition and
independent media by the Belgrade regime. The
European Union's policy is not directed against the
Serbian people, but against President Milosevie's
regime, which is violating basic human rights in the
most flagrant manner. The European Union is
committed to strengthening its dialogue with Serbian
civil society and to supporting democracy and freedom
of expression in Serbia; to continuing its support for
the democratically elected Government of Montenegro,
and to helping re-establish peaceful coexistence in
Kosovo.

The way forward has been shown by the people
of Croatia. The election in February of a Croatian
Government committed to comprehensive reforms
marked the beginning of a new era for the country, and
the European Union is committed to working very
closely with the Croatian authorities in their quest for
making Croatia a full-fledged member of the Euro-
Atlantic community. This surely is the ultimate goal for
all the countries of the western Balkans - to be
participating members of free and democratic Europe.
The peace, prosperity and stability of South-Eastern
Europe are a strategic priority for the European Union,
and its overall objective remains the fullest possible
integration of the countries of the region into the
political and economic mainstream of Europe.

After this brief look at the European Union's
positions on the current developments in the western
Balkans region, allow me now to pass the baton to
Mr. Javier Solana, High Representative for the
European Union Common Foreign and Security Policy
and Secretary-General of the Council of the European
Union. He will elaborate further on the leading role of
the European Union in replacing the Balkans' past of
war and destruction with a future of peace, prosperity,
democracy and human rights.

