Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): It is an
honour for me to address the Security Council on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) at this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine.

Since the last open debate (see S/PV.6950), despite
regional and international peace initiatives and efforts,
Israel, the occupying Power, has continued its policy of
the colonization of Palestine. The occupying Power's
settlement campaign reached a seven-year high in
the first quarter of this year alone, in violation of the
relevant resolutions and in grave breach of international
law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention.

Palestinian civilians have continued to be arrested,
detained and forcibly displaced. The occupying forces
have continued to use excessive force against Palestinian
demonstrators and to cause civilian casualties. The
blockade on the Gaza Strip has continued, inflicting
grave socioeconomic loss and humanitarian hardship.

And settlers have continued to attack and terrorize
Palestinians and their villages and properties, including
religious sites.

In addition to announcing plans to construct more
than 1,000 settlement units, in recent months more
Palestinian land has been seized by the occupying
forces and more Palestinian buildings have been
demolished, displacing several Palestinian families.
Acts of provocation have continued against Muslim
and Christian holy sites, especially in occupied
East Jerusalem, dangerously inflaming religious
sensitivities.

The ongoing Israeli settlement campaign and
other provocative and illegal actions underscore
the occupying Power's preference for occupation,
annexation and domination of the Palestinian people
and their land. It also starkly highlights the occupying
Power's unwillingness to respect international law and
to act in good faith for the sake of peace and stability in
the Middle East.

As a result, the recent period has witnessed the
deterioration of the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and the two-State
solution based on the pre-l967 borders remains in grave
danger. IfIsrael persists with such unlawful behaviour,
it will only undermine the current efforts being exerted
aimed at achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East and will further destabilize
the fragile situation, which threatens international
peace and security.

The international community must therefore act
to ensure that those efforts do not fail. That requires
that Israel, the occupying Power, be called upon to
cease forthwith all of its illegal measures and to abide
by international law and the spirit and long-standing
parameters of the peace process.

The Non-Aligned Movement therefore reiterates
its call for a halt to all the occupying Power's illegal
practices in the occupied Palestinian territory. Respect
for international law and United Nations resolutions,
including resolutions of the Security Council, is
fundamental for the realization of a just and peaceful
solution to the Middle East conflict. The continued
failure to comply with the law demands accountability.

NAM. stresses the need for the international
community to act urgently to redress the unjust and
critical situation being endured by the Palestinian
people under Israel's decades of military occupation.
The members of the Security Council cannot remain
onlookers, but rather must act to contribute to advancing
the efforts to resolve the prolonged, tragic conflict by
which the Palestinian people have been deprived too
long of their inalienable human rights, including the
right to self-determination and the right to return and
enjoy freedom in their independent State of Palestine
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

The Israeli Air Force has continued to violate
Lebanese airspace, intensifying its incursions into
Lebanon, including recent low-altitude flights over
Beirut. Such activities are a blatant violation of
Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, particularly resolution 1701 (2006).

They are also a clear infringement of the Charter of
the United Nations and the principles and provisions of
international law. NAM. calls on the Security Council to
condemn those violations in the strongest possible terms
and to prevail on Israel to end its violations of Lebanese
sovereignty - whether by air, sea or land - and to
fulfil all of its obligations under resolution 1701 (2006).

With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement is concerned about the Israeli military
fortifications in violation of the 1974 Disengagement
of Forces Agreement between Israeli and Syrian forces,
which could result in the risk of tension, escalation
and confrontation in the area. NAM. reaffirms that
all measures taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to
alter the legal, physical and demographic status of the
occupied Syrian Golan, as well as Israeli measures
to impose its own jurisdiction and administration
there, are null and void and have no legal effect. The
Non-Aligned Movement demands that Israel abide
by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967,
in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).

NAM. condemns in the strongest possible terms
the act of aggression committed by Israel against the
Syrian Arab Republic on Sunday, 5 May. NAM. requests
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities by
clearly condemning the Israeli aggression against the
Syrian Arab Republic, taking the necessary measures
to prevent its recurrence and holding Israel accountable
for that act of aggression.

I shall now speak in my national capacity to briefly
react to what was said by the representative of the
Israeli regime against my country.

With regard to the presidential election, I should
say that the Iranian nation is proud to have held a
democratic election with more than a 70 per cent
turnout, wherein Mr. Rouhani won a landslide majority
on 14 June. The high turnout once more showed the
vibrancy of the Iranian polity and society and the strong
potential that exists for dealing with any impediments
along the way towards the stability and enhancement
of Iran's international stature. That is a reality that the
Israeli regime cannot endure. That is why, in the days
remaining before the presidential inauguration, it has
already started its smear campaign to distort the facts
about Iran's election and elected officials. That reflects
its deep concern about any development towards
stability and tranquillity in the region.

On Iran's nuclear issue, which is exclusively
peaceful in nature and in full conformity with our
international obligations, I should say that we are not
only party to the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, but we are party to all major international
instruments banning weapons of mass destruction and
are fully committed to all the relevant legal obligations
under those treaties. The Israeli regime's non-adherence
to the international instruments on weapons of mass
destruction and its non-compliance with its related
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, however, are well-known facts.

Furthermore, the Israeli-regime's brutal practices
in killing innocent women and children, in particular
during the 33-day war against Lebanon and the 22-day
attack on Gaza, are also well-known facts. The regime's
terrorist operations all around the world, including the
assassination of Iran's nuclear scientists, are known to
the world as well. To cover up its terrorist nature, the
Israeli regime tries to pin the blame for terrorism on
others. That is partly because of the impunity that the
regime enjoys.

The European Union's indecision to condemn
Israel for all its State terrorism, on the one hand, while
putting Hizbullah's military branch on a terrorism list,
on the other, based on false and unjust accusations,
is a double-standard approach towards terrorism.
Hizbullah is part of Lebanon's socio-political fabric
and is respected and accepted by the people of Lebanon
as a legitimate resistance movement against the Israeli
regime's aggression. The European Union's decision
will not generate any doubts as to the popular character
of Hizbullah; rather, it will further complicate the
situation in the Middle East. The European Union
should live up to its responsibility in redressing the
situation and reconsider its decision.

In conclusion, our advice to the representative of
the Israeli regime is that instead of levelling baseless
allegations against others in the region, it would
do better to abide by the norms and regulations of
international law and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and to correct its behaviour for the
sake of peace and stability in the Middle East.
