Ms. Bannis-Roberts (Dominica): The Government
of the Commonwealth of Dominica wishes to express
its deep concern regarding the recent developments
in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the
worrisome consequences of those events. The
Commonwealth of Dominica strongly upholds the
principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of
any sovereign State.

Elections were held in the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela on 20 May, in accordance with its
Constitution. The election outcome returned President
Nicolas Maduro as the duly elected President of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. The Government of
the Commonwealth of Dominica, in its utterances and
by its actions, fully respects the will of the people of
any sovereign nation as exercised through the electoral
process. Following the accepted standards governing
outcomes of the duly held elections, the Government
ofthe Commonwealth of Dominica accepted the results
and recognizes the re-elected Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

The Commonwealth of Dominica is concerned
about the expressions of support for a transitional
Government in Venezuela and declarations of the
illegitimacy of the Nicolas Maduro Government. We
wish to place on record our opposition to such a position.
The recognition of a self-declared Government outside
of the electoral process is a clear repudiation of the will
of the people. There cannot be a parallel Government
in Venezuela.

Such recognition does not reaffirm the right of the
people of Venezuela to peace and democracy; rather,
it opens the door to confusion and civil strife. Instead,
the international community should expend efforts to
help build peace, promote reconciliation and help find
a solution that will not result in bloodshed.

We maintain that, in order to peacefully resolve
the situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
there must be dialogue between the parties. The
Commonwealth of Dominica stands ready, in
conjunction with other like-minded States, to offer its
good offices to assist in that regard. We therefore urge
Member States to exercise caution and let prudence
guide us.

