Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the pleasure to speak
on behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The following countries align themselves with this
statement: the candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia.

As close neighbours, Europe and Africa share
a common future. Never before have the European
Union's interests been so intertwined with Africa's.
The direct connection between Libya and the Sahel
and between the Horn of Africa and the Gulf, the Great
Lakes and Southern Africa, call for a more strategic
approach, while going beyond established formats.

We thank the presidency for organizing today's
debate. This is an opportune moment to revisit our
engagement and explore further avenues so as to better
adapt the partnerships between the United Nations,
the African Union and the European Union to the new
threats and challenges faced by Africa. The partnership
between the European Union and Africa encompasses
many aspects and many actions, at the continental,
regional, subregional or local levels. Allow me to focus
today, as we have been invited to do in the concept
note (S/2017/574, annex), on the ways in which the
international community can best support the African
Union.

At the political level, we welcome the strong signal
of commitment conveyed by the recent signing of the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. The
26 May report of the Secretary-General on options
for authorization and support for African Union peace
support operations (S/2017/454), and the accompanying
update from the African Union, are also very good
demonstrations of how cooperation and coordination
between the United Nations and the AU are being
strengthened in a sustained manner.

But the report also sheds additional light on how
the two organizations can best work together. It puts
forward concrete proposals for joint assessments of
the political, security, humanitarian and human rights
dimensions of missions from the outset, as well as
on the comparative advantage of the African Union
and the roles of other partners. Similarly, it details
how institutionalized approaches to joint planning,
mandating and financing could look.

The European Union is already cooperating closely
with the United Nations in all EU Common Security
and Defence Policy missions. The EU and the United
Nations are also working on joint programming and
coordination mechanisms in support, for example, of
security sector reform and the rule of law in the Central
African Republic, and starting pilot projects in Mali
and Somalia. Expanding this logic, such initiatives
could be widened to include the African Union in a
trilateral cooperation set-up. The EU stands ready to
identify, together with the United Nations and the AU,
areas to be addressed and deepen complementarity and
synergies among all stakeholders. In this context, one
of the proposals discussed with the AU and the regional
economic communities and regional mechanisms
during the recent senior officials meeting held in Addis
on 5 July was to establish a collaborative platform to
facilitate the sharing of information and to enhance
operational cooperation among the EU, AU and the
United Nations. More concrete suggestions on what
this might look like are expected in the lead-up to the
fifth African Union-EU Summit, which will take place
in the fall in the Cote D'Ivoire.

The Secretary-General's report also highlights the
importance of compliance and oversight, particularly in
the areas of human rights and conduct and discipline.
These are critical concerns in all peace operations. We
welcome the African Union's efforts to put in place
effective mechanisms to ensure respect human rights
in all of its missions and encourage further progress
in their implementation. Joint standards for reporting,
accountability and protection are critical to ensuring
the highest standards and robust oversight of missions.

Allow me to say a few words on funding.
Diversification of funding is critical. The African
Union and the continent have shown a strong sign of
ambition and ownership with the important decision
taken by the AU Summit in Kigali in July 2016 to
finance the African Union Peace Fund. We welcome
the significant steps since taken, under the leadership
of Mr. Kaberuka, to ensure the financing of 25 per cent
of the African Union peace support operations budget
by 2020. We encourage further sustained progress in
this regard. We are ready to continue to look at how the
EU, together with the United Nations and the African
Union, could contribute to progress in the discussion
on sustainable financing and the division of labour for
African peacekeeping.
All these issues require further debate and further
joint work, which are also in line with the call by the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations, to
have the United Nations embrace a future role of not
only working alongside regional organizations but
also enabling them to share the burden in peace and
security matters, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.

We look forward to the upcoming fifth AU-EU
Summit in Abidjan in the fall. It will be an important
moment to build on the results already achieved by the
partnerships with the United Nations and the AU by
emphasizing the importance of an equal, sustainable
and mutually beneficial relationship with Africa in
a spirit of shared ownership and responsibility, and
guided notably by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the 2015 Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, the African Union Agenda 2063, and the
European Union Global Strategy and European
Consensus on Development.

