Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me join others in
congratulating you and your team, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of November. We assure you of our firm
support. Let me also commend and very warmly thank
our colleague Ambassador Joy ngu for her able and
wise stewardship of the Council during the previous
month.

I would like to begin by expressing Germany's
sincere appreciation for all the efforts undertaken by
the International Criminal Court (ICC), and personally
by Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, to ensure the implementation
of resolution 1970 (2011), notably through the Court's
issuance of arrest warrants against Muammar
Al-Qadhafi, Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi. The warrants testify to the determination
of the international community not to let the
commission of atrocities go unpunished, but to identify
those individuals that are responsible under
international criminal law.

Germany remains ready to support the ongoing
investigations following requests for cooperation. We
are also very encouraged by the current efforts of the
Prosecutor to ensure the transfer of the remaining two
indicted persons to The Hague. Just as the death of
Colonel Al-Qadhafi marks the beginning of a new era
for Libya, obtaining justice, respect for human rights
and the rule of law must be at the forefront of our
minds. Just last week, by adopting resolution 2016
(2011), the Council confirmed the importance of
cooperation to ensure that those responsible for
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law or those who are complicit in attacks
targeting the civilian population are held accountable.

We call on the National Transitional Council to
ensure independent and impartial investigations to
establish the facts of the alleged human rights abuses
and war crimes committed by both sides to the conflict.
Transitional justice will be an important issue for the
Libyan authorities. Dealing successfully with the issue
will pave the way for national reconciliation.

At this time, we should also recall that the
Council took a historic decision by unanimously
adopting resolution 1970 (2011) and referring the
situation in Libya to the ICC. The protection of
civilians being its central idea, or leitmotif, the core
message of the resolution is to remind the world of the
responsibility of each and every State to protect its
population from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. The significance of the
message goes far beyond the context of Libya. It
should be heard in other places where gross violations
of human rights occur.
