Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the African Group, I should like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having taken the initiative of
organizing this second public debate relating to the
Security Council's ad hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa and for having
invited non-members of the Council to participate. The
African Group is particularly happy to see you
presiding over the Council's work. Your presence
illustrates once again your country's commitment to
peace, security and development in Africa.

We also welcome the presence of Mr. Ibrahima
Fall, who will soon assume his duties as Assistant
Secretary-General in charge of the United Nations
Office in West Africa, in Dakar.

Having placed Africa at the heart of its
millennium concerns, the United Nations rightly sought
to focus the international community's attention on that
continent, which, despite the commendable efforts and
the numerous reforms it has undertaken over
approximately the past 10 years, has had a hard time
finding its way on the path of development. Among the
reasons that explain that situation is the persistence of
wars and conflicts. The establishment of peace,
security and stability is, therefore, a prerequisite for the
economic development ofthe African continent.

We welcome the Council's opportune initiative to
establish an ad hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa. In that initiative,
the African Group would like to see a sign of the
Council's real and lasting commitment to put an end to
the cycle of violence in Africa and to accord equal
treatment to all humanitarian crises without exception.

The United Nations has placed the individual at
the centre of its concerns and considers the individual
as the ultimate purpose of its work. Since the Council
devotes more than 60 per cent of its deliberations to
Africa, the Working Group's mandate should contribute
to ensuring that the peace dividend for the benefit of
African people reflects that same proportion. Our
support for the ad hoc Working Group's programme of
work is therefore commensurate with the added value
generated in the Council's real commitment to Africa.
Our support, therefore, will be constant as long as the
ad hoc Working Group helps to strengthen the link and
the cohesion between the volume of activities that the
Council devotes to Africa and the effective
implementation ofits decisions.

Upon analysis, the African Group believes that
the programme of work presented to us falls within
collective efforts to examine and address
comprehensively the question of conflict prevention
and resolution. We therefore support the programme of
work. We also support the strengthening of interaction
between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council in order to consolidate peace through
development. Therefore, the Security Council needs to
better coordinate its African activities with those of the
Economic and Social Council in order to mobilize
international political support for peace-building in
Africa.

Mindful of the fact that it has the primary
responsibility for conflict prevention and settlement in
Africa, and in its desire to facilitate the resolution of
such conflicts, our continental organization - the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) - has sought to
redynamize its Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution. The OAU needs its
implementation of the outcome of this restructuring to
be accompanied by the establishment of closer and
better coordinated cooperation and by the contribution
ofthe Working Group, so that the Council can be better
aware of how Africa has evaluated conflict situations.

Accordingly, we very much hope that the
Working Group will develop close and regular
cooperation with the Ad Hoc Advisory Group of the
Economic and Social Council on African Countries
Emerging from Conflict in order to make the peace
dividend tangible for Africans and to ensure that the
economic situation of those countries will not pose a
threat to peace or exacerbate and ultimately destabilize
security conditions.
The nature of the Security Council's involvement
in Africa is becoming complex. It is no longer confined
to classic peacekeeping because the character and
consequences of conflicts have prompted the Council
to integrate civilian and police components into its
operations. With the break-up of institutions, we are
seeing the emergence of non-State actors. As a result,
civilians, and sometimes even United Nations
personnel, are used as shields and bargaining chips. We
believe that the ad hoc Working Group, because of its
informal nature and flexible functioning, could help
bring about innovation, adaptability to unusual
situations or experiment with exploratory measures in
the new type of intervention undertaken by the
Council. Generally speaking, the Working Group could
focus greater attention on prevention in its programme
of work. The Council, in its formal mode, has been
rather reactive in this respect.

With respect to conflict prevention, the Working
Group could in particular discuss the following points.

On the issue of institutional dialogue, it should
rely greater on operational early warning and
preventive diplomacy mechanisms of the Organization
of African Unity and regional African organizations.
This practice would help perpetuate such dialogue and
strengthen the synergy between the Council,
representatives of the Secretary-General in the field
and African organizations concerned. Ultimately, we
might contemplate an identical assessment or, at the
very least, a close reading of crisis situations by the
aforementioned stakeholders. In all cases, better
account could be taken of what precisely is at stake,
providing better opportunities to reduce tensions and
earning greater credibility for the Council.

As to election monitoring, the relevance of the
type of intervention we have seen to our objectives
needs to be redefined. In Africa today, voters, through
their political parties and civil society organizations
and thanks to new communications technologies -
particularly the mobile phone and rural radio
stations - are largely able to observe elections and to
assess their legitimacy. Furthermore, and thanks to
African non-governmental organizations, the practice
of using observers from other regions of Africa has
gained considerable ground.

On the other hand, the weak link in the chain of
the electoral process is and will remain the
establishment of reliable and permanent electoral roles.
Permanence in this context means a simple updating
rather than a complete recreation of such lists, in which
there is a possibility of manipulation every time an
election is held. Therein lie the sources of contested
elections that can lead to conflicts.

Reliable electoral roles require proper census-
taking, reliable and operational information about civil
status, credible inscription measures for electoral roles
and, finally, an independent election monitoring
structure. That is what is at stake, requiring
considerable financial and logistical resources and thus
increased and commensurate logistical and financial
capacity. The Working Group might also take up this
issue.

I take this opportunity to indicate that Benin,
currently chairing the follow-up committee on the
Fourth International Conference of the New or
Restored Democracies, plans to convene an African
workshop or colloquium to consider this issue and to
draw up an inventory of best practices and successful
experience on this subject. Through you, Sir, I urge all
people of good will to assist Benin in convening that
meeting.

With respect to conflict settlement, and in
particular the practice of establishing so-called groups
of friends, I would note that, from Africa's point of
View, we observe that only external friends are
summoned, while no account is taken of the many
internal friends - indigenous peoples who have no
choice but to love their country.

My point is that the Working Group should
consider ways to enable existing traditional
mechanisms, specific to each country, to help prevent
conflicts or their re-emergence. This could include
recourse to groups of elders, traditional or religious
leaders and women's movements. Such a commitment
from civil society in its broadest embodiment could
help to mobilize national or subregional energies to
promote peace and to re-establish trust and a sense of
belonging.

We are happy to note that the Security Council is
taking small steps in that direction. The dialogue held a
few weeks ago between the civil society of Kisangani,
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the
Security Council delegation was an encouraging
illustration of this. I would therefore encourage the
Council to commit itself resolutely to that approach.

I cannot conclude without commending the
engagement and perseverance of Ambassador Koonjul
of Mauritius, who has given body and soul to the
Working Group. I also wish to express our gratitude to
the other members of the Council for their ongoing
support for this project, a timely response to the
concerns of Africa in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts.

