Mr. Raimondi (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Poland and especially its
Foreign Minister, Jacek Czaputowicz, for organizing
this debate. I also thank the Secretary-General, the
Director-General of the International Committee of
the Red Cross and the Secretary-General of the Iraqi
Al-Amal Association for their briefings. Finally, I
thank all previous speakers for their statements.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/462). We appreciate his recommendations and
the three protection priorities he lays out. We must
once again deplore the fact that, according to the
report, civilians continue to be the primary victims in
conflicts. The failure to distinguish between combatants
and civilians results in civilian deaths, injuries and
displacement, as well as serious obstructions to and
even attacks on humanitarian assistance. The Security
Council must therefore remain committed to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict by promoting
full respect for international law, particularly
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law,
as well as the fight against impunity.

In that context, we must recall the obligations
arising from the four Geneva Conventions of 1949, their
Additional Protocols of 1977, the Hague Conventions
of 1899 and 1907, human rights law and refugee law,
as well as customary international law. It is also
essential to continue to include and enhance civilian
protection within the mandates of United Nations field
missions, and to ensure that they are clearly formulated
and that the operations have the resources they need
to function effectively and quickly. We also note the
importance of ensuring that peacekeeping operations
themselves comply with international humanitarian
law. The Council's authorization of robust mandates
and their implementation by peacekeeping operations
must not compromise the fulfilment of their core
mandate to protect civilians, or distract them from
their mission based on the fundamental principles
governing peacekeeping operations. Peacekeeping
operations must have clear mandates and the resources
to implement them effectively and in a timely manner.

With regard to humanitarian assistance, all parties
to a conflict must make every effort to ensure effective
and timely access to humanitarian aid, including
supplies and materials. Such assistance enjoys special
protection under international humanitarian law,
and it is therefore worrying that in many situations
humanitarian access is hampered or even denied. It is
also worrying that, as the Secretary-General's report
indicates, certain measures in the context of the fight
against terrorism continue to affect humanitarian
activities. In that regard, we reiterate the call made
by General Assembly resolution 70/291 for States to
ensure, in accordance with their obligations under
international humanitarian law, that counter-terrorism
legislation and measures do not present obstacles to
humanitarian activities.

Under international humanitarian law and Council
resolutions, attacks of any kind on civilians - especially
women and children - or other protected persons,
schools, cultural heritage sites or places of worship, as
well as the recruitment of children and the obstruction
of humanitarian access, constitute violations of
international law. We regret that two years after the
adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), we have to keep
reiterating that medical and hospital personnel must
not be targeted and condemn the many cases where that
has occurred. Argentina reiterates its call for resolution
2286 (2016) to be implemented as soon as possible,
and urges States that have not yet done so to adhere
to the Safe Schools Declaration, in support of which
my country had the honour of organizing the Second
International Conference on Safe Schools in March of
last year.

The Security Council must remain committed to
protecting civilians in armed conflict, as it has done
in special cases for children, women and journalists,
and to ensuring respect for international law and
ending impunity for grave violations committed
against civilians. In that context, we underscore the
role the system plays in the area of children and armed
conflict. The system must receive the necessary support
to carry out that task.

Argentina reaffirms the preventive role of
accountability mechanisms. Impartial mechanisms
are essential for the investigation of violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
law. In that regard, I would like to acknowledge the
work of the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission provided for in Protocol I to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949, as well as the central role played
by the International Criminal Court. We recall that,
in accordance with the Statute of the International
Criminal Court, the Court has jurisdiction over many
of the attacks on civilian populations mentioned in
the report.

Argentina believes it is essential to continue
the debate on the setting up of new mechanisms to
strengthen compliance with international humanitarian
law and to generate a constructive, transparent and
inclusive dialogue among States and other stakeholders.
We therefore support the work of the intergovernmental
process to strengthen respect for international
humanitarian law, facilitated by Switzerland and the
International Committee of the Red Cross.

The existing regulatory framework for the
protection of civilians must be translated into concrete
results in the field. The Council must strengthen its
efforts to find the best way to make that happen.

