Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Since the imposition of sanctions against
Libya, the Libyan Government has made significant
progress in responding to the demands of the Security
Council. I refer primarily to the provisions of resolutions
731 (1992) and 748 (1992) regarding the problem of
terrorism and the submission of information on this topic.

 

Thanks to Libya's cooperation, the investigation into the
incident involving UTA flight 772 has been successfully
completed. The statement just made by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Libya, Mr. Muntasser, stressed Libya's
willingness to continue to cooperate with the United
Nations. However, the resolutions of the Security Council
have not yet been fully implemented. The situation
regarding the Lockerbie case remains deadlocked.
The League of Arab States, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, the Organization of African Unity and
the Non-Aligned Movement have put forward well-known
initiatives for a compromise format for the holding of the
trial of the two suspects. We feel that these initiatives are
on the right track. The recent Judgments of the International
Court of Justice about its jurisdiction provide additional
material for an analysis of the legal aspects of the
Lockerbie case. We call upon the parties to show maximum
goodwill to find mutually acceptable solutions regarding the
question of the format for the trial.

The Security Council and the United Nations as a
whole have repeatedly proven their ability to seek
compliance with United Nations decisions by showing
firmness on the substance of their demands and flexibility
in the methods of attaining the goal. A speedy resolution to
the Lockerbie case would be of great importance for United
Nations efforts in combating the scourge of terrorism,
which the Russian Federation is constantly committed to
eradicating.

The families of those who perished in the skies over
Lockerbie, whose memory we honoured today in our
minute of silence, also await the trial for justice. We pay
tribute to the patience of the relatives of the victims of the
catastrophe and reiterate to them our most profound
sympathy. Nor should we forget the people of Libya, who
for many years now have suffered under sanctions. Russia
has consistently held that sanctions are not an aim in
themselves, nor are they a weapon to punish unpalatable
regimes, but a means to support political efforts aimed at
attaining a settlement of a given conflict. The process of
imposing, implementing, easing and, if necessary, tightening
sanctions should be closely and flexibly linked to the
political process. Unfortunately, in the Lockerbie matter,
this is not the case.

The serious humanitarian consequences of sanctions
for the Libyan people are attested to by the recent report on
the results of the mission of the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Petrovsky, which indicates, at least to us, the need to
create humanitarian exemptions to the sanctions regime.
The consideration of this report in the sanctions
Committee, started on the instructions of the Security
Council, should lead to the elaboration of
recommendations on measures to reduce the negative
humanitarian consequences of sanctions, particularly in
the light of the serious damage done to the public health
system, including to the supply of medicines and
provision of medical assistance to the people as well as to
the services sector and to agriculture.

The Russian delegation believes that the findings of
the report give sufficient grounds now to discuss the
adoption by the Security Council of humanitarian
exemptions to the sanctions regime. Primarily, we might
consider a simplified plan for medical evacuation
according to the simple notification procedure, given the
fact that in the receiving countries there is a well-honed
system which monitors medical flights from Libya.

It is high time to replace the four aging Libyan
planes authorized for medical evacuation purposes, as
their use poses a serious threat to the safety of the flights.
Restrictions should also be lifted on the import of spare
parts for agricultural aircraft, which is necessary for
supplying food to broad strata of the civilian population.

One of the most striking examples of the need for
humanitarian exemptions, and not only in the case of
Libya, are the pilgrimage flights. Given the approaching
Hajj season, this step would emphasize the willingness of
the Security Council to respect religious feelings and
respond to the specific humanitarian needs of the
population of individual States under a sanctions regime.
The recently issued sanctions Committee press release
contains the obligation of the members of the Committee
to consider all these questions. This obligation must be
complied with.

The Security Council must give an adequate reaction
to the positive steps already undertaken by Libya to
comply with the appropriate decisions of the United
Nations. While appealing again to the parties to speedily
attain a compromise on the basis of the Security Council
resolutions, we are, at the same time, in favour of the
immediate entry into force of the humanitarian
exemptions I listed before. We hope that all our partners
will be prepared to work constructively in this area, both
within the Council and in the sanctions Committee.

