Sheikh Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the delegations of
France and the United States for their recent efforts to
improve the language of the draft resolution submitted
by them to the Security Council on the situation in the
Middle East.

While thanking them for taking into consideration
some of the important points that we have raised
regarding the substance of the draft resolution, I

reaffirm our position that, for the sake of stopping the
bloodshed of innocents, the Security Council should
have adopted a resolution providing for an immediate
ceasefire from the very first day of the current
hostilities and should have dealt with other questions
subsequently.

However, that conviction does not necessarily
indicate our satisfaction with the adoption of a draft
resolution that lacks balance and overlooks the
accumulated, complicated historical, social and
geopolitical factors that have culminated in the current
situation in the region. The draft resolution fails to
adequately take into consideration the interests, unity,
stability and territorial integrity of Lebanon. Therefore,
we still have some comments regarding the draft
resolution.

The draft resolution does not clearly and
explicitly address the horrors of destruction caused by
the Israeli aggression against innocent civilians and the
Lebanese infrastructure. Moreover, it does not clearly
spell out Israel's legal and humanitarian responsibility
for that destruction or address in a balanced manner the
question of the Lebanese prisoners, detainees and
abducted persons in Israeli prisons, despite the fact that
the exchange of prisoners and detainees is the logical
and realistic way to settle this question.

Nevertheless, we have accepted the draft
resolution in its present form in order to stop the
bloodshed of innocents and to spare Lebanon and the
region further horror and destruction.

It is our understanding that, once the draft
resolution is adopted, it obligates both parties to halt
hostilities and provides for the immediate withdrawal
of Israeli forces from southern Lebanon, and that any
breaches committed between the end of hostilities and
the achievement of withdrawal and a ceasefire will be
governed by the April Understanding of 1996. In
addition, the draft resolution will lead to the reopening
of the Lebanese ports and airports and the return of the
displaced persons to their homes immediately upon its
adoption. It is also our understanding that the draft
resolution assigns sole responsibility to the Lebanese
Government for dealing with the armed phenomena in
the South and that the area between the Blue Line and
the Litani river is subject to the exclusive control of the
Lebanese Government.

We welcome the fact that the draft resolution is
limited to augmenting the United Nations Interim

06-4649]

Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), that its mandate will
continue to be subject to the provisions of Chapter VI
of the Charter, and that, as I have been assured by the
sponsors of the draft, any reference to international
forces in the draft resolution means UNIFIL. On this
occasion, we call upon the contributing States or those
States that intend to contribute to UNIFIL to dispatch
their forces promptly.

Furthermore, it is our understanding that the
Secretary-General will urgently take all the necessary
measures to settle the question of the Sheba'a farms in
accordance with the provisions of the seven-point plan
endorsed by the Lebanese Government in that regard.
We are convinced that it is still possible for the Council
to play an effective and substantive role in settling this
crisis. We will work with peace-loving States in
following up this question in the interest of security
and stability in Lebanon.

I would like to single out paragraph 18 of the
draft resolution, which stresses the need to achieve a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. Failure to deal effectively and objectively with
this crisis and its root causes has led to a great deal of
turbulence and tension in the region, and this has
manifested itself in the events unfolding in Lebanon
and in Palestine. We have all witnessed - and,
regrettably, continue to witness - the continued
aggression against Gaza and its inhabitants.

I wish particularly to inform the Council that the
Council of the League of Arab States has unanimously
adopted a decision to resubmit the question of the
Arab-Israeli conflict to the Security Council, now that
everyone has recognized the failure of the peace
process in its present form. All of the Arab States will
submit an official request for the convening of a high-
level meeting of the Security Council next September
in order to agree on a new track towards the
establishment of a just peace in the region within a set
time frame.
The Security Council bears a major responsibility
towards millions in the region whose lives and future
are threatened by the conflict, which is turning their
lives into an inferno. The Council must discharge that
responsibility effectively, justly and fully.

