Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We welcome the
adoption of resolution 2356 (2017), on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. The position of Kazakhstan
remains stable and consistent. We condemn, in the
strongest terms, any launches of ballistic missiles, as
they are in flagrant violation of all the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Such actions undermine our
common international efforts to strengthen regional
and, ultimately, international peace and security.

The denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula is a
key element in preserving broader security across Asia.
Possession of nuclear arms by the North Korean regime
will create a precedent that will undoubtedly lead to an
escalation of the regional arms race and may lead others
to further proliferation so as to balance the nuclear
threat of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

We urge the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to refrain from actions that have an impact on
the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation process
and pose a threat to both regional and global security.
My country's non-nuclear status is the most convincing
example that such an approach is the only promising
one. We call on the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to opt for the same. We are convinced that there is
no alternative to collective commitment to international
obligations under Security Council resolutions.

We would recall that Kazakhstan's principled
position is a firm condemnation of the use of weapons
of mass destruction by any party and the promotion of
conflict resolution through dialgogue. We call upon the
interested parties and all Member States to take balanced
and responsible actions that do not lead to irreversible
consequences. We also call on all the parties concerned
to refrain from any action that could increase the risk of
a military escalation and further tensions in the region.
My country strongly believes that, at this critical stage,
the Security Council - the single body entrusted to
maintain international peace and security - should
stay united on this important issue.

