Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to start by addressing my most sincere
thanks to you, Madame President, as well as the
delegation of Lebanon, for organizing this open debate
on Haiti. I would also like to congratulate President
Martelly on his electoral victory, and to wish him every
success in his term of office. I would also like to
welcome the new Special Representative of the
Secretary General, Mr. Mariano Fernandez
Amunategui, whom I thank for his presentation and
wish success in carrying out his important functions.

(spoke in English)

Today's debate is taking place at a very opportune
time. The transition of power from one democratically
elected President to the opposition is no small
achievement, and carries the potential for many more
democratic advances. Canada commends the efforts of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) for its vital contribution to the
maintenance of overall security and stability and to the
ongoing consolidation of State authority in Haiti. As
highlighted in the latest report (S/2011/540) of the
Secretary-General on Haiti, there has been some
progress on the ground, but daunting challenges persist
and recent security gains remain fragile.

Any changes to MINUSTAH's composition or
mandate should therefore be carefully considered to
ensure that Haiti's stability is preserved and that

political challenges are addressed. Canada therefore
strongly supports the renewal of MINUSTAH's
mandate for another year as recommended in the
report. The United Nations peacekeeping presence
needs to remain adapted to the needs on the ground.
Canada therefore shares the Secretary-General's
assessment that the Mission is in a position to begin the
process of returning to its pre-earthquake deployment
levels.

There is a continued need to support the Haitian
State in its most fundamental functions, including
maintaining public security, building democratic and
good governance and establishing the rule of law. The
Secretary-General recommends that the eventual
downsizing of the Mission be accompanied by
refocused efforts in support of the political process and
the consolidation of State authority, as well as by
assistance in building the capacity and accountability
of State institutions. This is a responsible approach that
should guide MINUSTAH's future.

(spoke in French)

Canada contributes to MINUSTAH through the
deployment of up to 150 police officers, 25 correctional
officers and 10 military officers. Canada's contribution
to security sector reform and the rule of law also
includes significant bilateral initiatives aimed at
strengthening Haiti's justice and security institutions.
Canada is actively supporting the Haitian National
Police through the construction of a new headquarters.
In that regard, we must underscore that the support
provided by Canada, MINUSTAH and other partners to
the Haitian National Police will only bear fruit if the
Haitian Government demonstrates its will to strengthen
its own police force. I therefore encourage the Haitian
Government to allocate adequate resources to the
Haitian National Police and to take the necessary
courageous decisions with respect to police force
staffing and the vetting of candidates to ensure their
integrity.
Canada is also funding a series of initiatives
aimed at reinforcing border security, addressing sexual
violence against women and girls, reforming the prison
system, improving detention conditions for prisoners,
increasing access to justice for vulnerable populations
and restoring the foundations of a functional justice
system in Haiti.

Furthermore, our country also takes pride in
supporting Haiti in other critical fields to address both
immediate needs and long-term recovery and
development.

The link between security and development in
Haiti is well known. However, our commitment to
continue our efforts in Haiti must now include a much
stronger emphasis on political will, good governance
and the rule of law. These aspects are crucial for the
success of all efforts, whether on the part of Haitians or
of the international community.

Canada recognizes that the new President is
driven by the political will and energy to achieve the
change that is needed so urgently given the insecurity
and impoverished economic and social conditions in
which most Haitians live. Despite eight United Nations
interventions and billions of dollars of international
assistance over two decades, Haiti is still one of the
poorest countries in the world.

Change does not occur overnight. All political
actors must commit to achieve sustainable progress.
While political challenges remain, we hope that the
new Government will soon be up and running. It is
crucial for the State to continue efforts to strengthen
democratic practices and institutions and to bring an
end to impunity and corruption. In that context, we
encourage political actors to enact constitutional
reform; work towards the creation of a permanent
electoral council; strengthen political parties; appoint
judges and a head to the Cassation Court; and establish
a Conseil superieur du pouvoir judiciaire. We also
recall that elected officials have a responsibility to the
population that chose them as their leaders with the
hope of seeing tangible results.

This assessment explains why Canada strongly
supports the Secretary-General's proposal for the
development of a rule of law compact. This could be a
major step towards improving governance and the rule
of law in Haiti. Canada intends to plan an active role in
the implementation of this initiative. Canada also
welcomed the fact that President Martelly included the
rule of law as a priority for his presidency. We stand
ready to support and assist him in this endeavour,
which sends a crucial and encouraging political signal.

(spoke in English)

As international partners, we need to hold each
other to account and make good on our promises to the
Haitian people. We also need to be clear about the
international community's expectations, and that
Haitian leaders will do the same.

