Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Like my colleagues, I too
will start by taking note of International Women's Day.
I am grateful to my Russian colleague for mentioning
Clara Zetkin, who originated the movement.

I think it is very timely that we are discussing the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and
the situation in South Sudan today, because the situation
of women there remains a nightmare. Our view on the
role of women is not limited merely to femininity and
tenderness, but also includes a focus on leadership,
equal rights and protection. The Chancellor of Germany
is a woman, as are our Defence and Justice Ministers.
Perhaps one day Clara Zetkin will be successful in
Russia, and it will have a woman President too.

To come back to the very serious issue of the
shocking level of sexual and gender-based violence in
South Sudan. In just one instance, in Bentiu, there were
a reported 134 cases of rape. What we heard today, of
course, is very positive, with 49 women standing their
ground and deciding to testify. I think it is a very good
sign that there was accountability and that results were
achieved. Of course, that is only a part of it. We must
continue our efforts and much more must be done.
Germany and Peru, with the participation of the United
Kingdom, co-chaired last week the first meeting of
the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security held on the situation in South Sudan. It was an
important sign from the Security Council because it is
an Informal Expert Group of the Council.

Let me repeat what I think are important elements.
With regard to accountability, the mobile court
initiative is very good but more has to be done. The
peace agreement calls for the establishment of the
hybrid court for South Sudan. With regard to the issue of
participation, I totally agree with the remarks made by
Ms. Angelina Jial, who spoke earlier on behalf of civil
society. The participation of women is important - not
only participation in which they merely sit at the table
but one that ensures they are listened to and that their
advice is heard. It is not enough that they have a chance
to participate. They should be part of the process.
The peace agreement sets the quota for women's
representation at 35 per cent and that has not been
achieved. I think that we should do everything possible
to ensure stronger women's participation. I wonder why
the percentage is only 35. Women make up 50 per cent
of the population in South Sudan and therefore 50 per
cent of those in Government and other groups should
be women.

With regard the UNMISS mandate, I think that the
protection of civilians needs to be at the centre. A total
of 1.8 million people or more have had to flee. It is the
third largest group of refugees after those from Syria
and Afghanistan. They need to be protected. UNMISS
should also focus on protecting women from sexual and
gender-based violence.

I would like to pay tribute to Special Representative
Shearer and his work, engagement and dedication and
to all peacekeepers. We believe that they need to stay.
The mandate should follow the recommendations of
the Secretary-General. The mandate is being respected
thus far. The freedom of movement of UNMISS is
guaranteed. With respect to Mr. Shearer's remarks about
support and the increased participation of UNMISS in
the peace process, Germany has contributed $5 million
to the trust fund that has been set up and we ask
delegations around the table to contribute to it.

I said that the protection of civilians is important.
I find it very encouraging that there is now a drive to
motivate civilians to leave the protection of civilians
sites. Mr. Shearer is absolutely right. The future is not
in protection of civilians sites. Refugees must return in
a safe, voluntary, well-informed and dignified manner.
The support UNMISS provides in order to give them a
chance to see where they must go is exemplary. Such
support should also be provided in Myanmar. It should
be continued as a main task performed by UNMISS.

With respect to the implementation of the peace
agreement, I can only echo what our American
colleague, Mr. Cohen, just said pertaining to the fact
that the commitment to the peace agreement has to
be very strong. It must be Government-owned. The
Government must also allocate funds in its budget
to implement the agreement. It must also uphold the
ceasefire and establish the hybrid court. With regard
to the remarks made by our Russian colleague, I think
it is important that the opposition is now in Juba,
although Riek Machar is still not there. I believe that
the strongest leader of the opposition and counterpart
to the President must be present in Juba.

Last but not least, I would also like to echo what
my American colleague said with regard to children in
conflict situations. Some have been rescued from the
militias, but we hear now that some of them have again
been recruited. That must be stopped. We must prevent
children from being involved in armed conflict.

