Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): I would
like to quote a statement that President Clinton made on
6 March:

"I would like to express my deep sadness at the
news that Shaikh Isa Bin Salman Al-Khalifa of
Bahrain has passed away. The prayers and
condolences of all Americans go out to the royal
family and the people of Bahrain. The Amir was a
good friend of the American people and a good
friend of peace. He shared our desire to see a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the region. I
take heart from the personal commitment to
forwarding the cause of peace the Amir expressed
during his recent June visit to the United States. The
Amir shared his heartfelt hope to see peace come to
his region in eloquent and passionate words."

I had the official as well as personal pleasure of first
meeting Shaikh Isa in 1975, when I had the good fortune
to be posted as a junior officer at the American Embassy
in Bahrain, and I can attest that Shaikh Isa was both a
wise and a very humorous ruler. He was accessible to his
people - in fact, he had an open-door policy which
encouraged any Bahraini citizen to meet personally with
him to express political or economic views or to seek
assistance in solving problems, and he always helped.

Shaikh Isa also found time to meet even with a very
junior diplomat to give him much-needed historical,
political and social background on the Gulf region and the
Middle East in general. He will indeed be sorely missed.

We meet today to vote on a draft resolution to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Observer

 

Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL). We take such action
against the backdrop of the terrible human tragedy and
untold suffering being endured by the people of Sierra
Leone.

The American Government and the American people
have viewed the unfolding crisis in Sierra Leone with shock
and dismay. Human rights abuses and atrocities on the scale
seen in Sierra Leone are appalling and unacceptable. Such
crimes against civilians are an affront to Africa and to the
international community. The authors of these crimes
against civilians must be brought to justice. We all must
intensify our efforts to bring an end to this terrible conflict.

The Security Council and the international community
must continue to take concrete and practical steps to
support the democratically elected Government of President
Kabbah. The international community must also remain
vigilant to ensure that existing sanctions on weapons
transfers are respected. States bordering Sierra Leone have
particular responsibilities in this regard as well as in
preventing their nationals from further intensifying the
fighting.

Now more than ever, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) needs our support. The United States has
contributed $9 million to provide logistical support to
ECOMOG, and we are seeking to do more. The United
Kingdom, the Netherlands, Canada and other Member
States have also contributed to helping ECOMOG. We
commend in particular the United Kingdom for its
leadership in contributing an additional 10 million pounds
sterling to assist ECOMOG, and we call on other donors to
provide matching funds. Now is the time for current and
prospective donors to consider contributing to ECOMOG,
either through the United Nations Trust Fund or bilaterally.
The Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Francis Okelo, has worked tirelessly to promote a peaceful
resolution to this conflict. We support his efforts to bring
the parties to the negotiating table. We regret that the
fighting in Sierra Leone has prevented UNOMSIL from
carrying out its full mandate. We hope that the slowly
improving situation will permit UNOMSIL personnel to
rapidly resume their duties.

ECOMOG's gallant efforts have restored a semblance
of order and security to Freetown following the recent rebel
offensive. The international community owes a great debt
of gratitude to those troop-contributing nations, including
Nigeria, Ghana, Guinea and Mali, which have provided
forces to promote peace and restore stability in Sierra
Leone. In particular, we commend Nigeria, which has
carried a disproportionate share of the burden in
defending the democratically elected Government of
Sierra Leone. We look to ECOMOG to stay the course as
Sierra Leone works towards the settlement of the conflict.
We will continue to support Sierra Leone and the
Secretary-General's Special Representative as they strive
to bring about a lasting and durable peace.

The people of Sierra Leone desperately need our
assistance and our support. We must ensure that their
future will be one of hope, not further suffering.

