Mr. Cohen (United States): I would like to
thank the representative of Kuwait, as Chair of the
Committee established, pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zerrougui for their briefings. We appreciate
their efforts to keep the Security Council informed of
progress towards elections in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

We would especially like to thank Ms. Masika
Bihamba for her presence in the Council Chamber
today. We were all moved by her testimony regarding
the threats against women in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and inspired by her courage in seeking
protection, care and justice for the survivors of
sexual and gender-based violence. We thank her for
her leadership.

Yesterday was an important day in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with the opening of the
candidate registration period. As we have repeatedly
stated, we expect President Kabila to abide by the
Constitution and the December 2016 agreement. He is

not eligible under Congolese law to seek a third term.
The United States regrets the fact that President Kabila
did not use his 19 July address to Parliament to resolve
the uncertainty with regard to his intentions.

Turning now to elections preparations, 23 December
is rapidly approaching. The Council authorized the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to
provide logistical support to the elections. We expect
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to take advantage of the support that MONUSCO
has offered. It is absolutely critical that the Independent
National Electoral Commission make detailed requests
for logistical support from MONUSCO in a timely
fashion. We have not yet seen evidence of how the
Electoral Commission would organize elections without
MONUSCO's assistance. The Mission cannot afford to
wait until the last moment to put a plan into action.

In addition, the Commission must take steps to
ensure that voters can cast their ballots via a mechanism
that is tested and trusted and guarantees the secrecy of
the vote, namely, paper ballots. Deploying more than
100,000 unfamiliar, untested and possibly unworkable
electronic voting machines for the first time during
a critical national election poses an enormous and
unnecessary risk. What do Congolese authorities plan
to do if those untested voting machines malfunction
on election day and jeopardize the credibility of the
results? Is there a back-up plan? If so, what is it?

We must also not lose sight of the violence we have
witnessed recently in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The United States commends MONUSCO's
quick response to clashes in Bijombo this month but
remains deeply concerned about reports of human rights
abuses, with tens of thousands of people fleeing the
violence. Ultimately, violence in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in other parts of the country
will not abate without genuine, credible, inclusive and
peaceful elections and without a commitment to holding
those responsible for such violence to account. We have
not forgotten the murders of United Nations experts
Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan, and we will not stop
pressing for those responsible to be held accountable.

The international community is united in those

concerns, as evidenced by last week'sjoint communique
with the African Union Peace and Security Council. We
urge other members of the Security Council to push for
well-planned elections, including through members'
bilateral conversations, and to consider the possibility
of targeted sanctions against those who threaten peace
and security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Congolese people have been waiting nearly two
years for an opportunity to cast their votes and choose
new leaders, as outlined in their Constitution. President
Kabila has committed repeatedly to respecting the
Constitution and to implementing the December 2016
agreement. We are a mere five months away from
election day. The time for posturing is over.

