Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): I should
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and also to
commend your predecessor, Ambassador Tafrov of
Bulgaria. I wish especially to thank the Secretary-
General for his thoughtful and far-sighted remarks to
the Council earlier this morning.

I would also like to thank Sir Jeremy Greenstock
for his excellent work as Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) and for his comprehensive
briefing today. My thanks go also to the three Vice-
Chairmen of the Committee and to all its members and
experts for their dedicated efforts to implement the
tasks assigned to the Committee.

The fight against terrorism remains a priority for
the international community. We have all emphasized
the central role of the United Nations, and we thus
acknowledge the important contribution of the CTC
during the first year of its work. I would like to
reaffirm that my Government is fully committed to
cooperate with the Committee and, in that context, is in
the process of finalizing its second report to the CTC.

Here, I wish to cite briefly a number of areas
where we have undertaken new measures. First, a
national coordination committee has been established
to facilitate the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001). Secondly, we have augmented
and intensified the practical arrangements to ensure,
among other things, the safety and security of civil
aviation; increased security at the borders with a view
to preventing the entry of terrorists into our territory;
and enhanced the anti-money-laundering mechanisms
in the banking system. Thirdly, the forces at our 900-
kilometre border with Afghanistan have been increased
in order to identify and to arrest individuals suspected
of being involved in terrorist activities.
Simultaneously, several large-scale operations to locate
and remove "safe houses" in the eastern provinces have
been carried out. As a result, some 150 suspected
individuals of many nationalities have been arrested
and handed over to the authorities of their respective
countries. Fourthly, a thorough study of existing
national laws has been carried out, with a view to
ascertaining whether the terrorist acts mentioned in
resolution 1373 (2001) are crimes under our domestic
laws. While many existing laws make terrorist acts
punishable, a comprehensive law on combating
terrorism is in preparation and will be submitted to our
Parliament in due course. Fifthly, bilateral
arrangements have been made with a number of
neighbouring countries, as well as with countries from
other regions, to deal with security matters and to
coordinate counter-terrorism measures.

The heinous terrorist attacks on 11 September
2001 created unprecedented global momentum to join
forces under the umbrella of the United Nations in
order to eradicate the menace of terrorism and to
prevent the recurrence of similar attacks against
innocent civilians. The CTC, which is an embodiment
of such a United Nations-led multilateral coalition
against terrorism, is doing a commendable job. Yet an
opposing unilateralist trend is on the rise that runs the
risk of arresting the momentum of that effort and by
shattering the universal consensus, undermining the
overall effective fight against terrorism.

We expected that the 11 September events would
lead to more understanding of the imperative of a fresh
and more nuanced approach to security - a value that
is indivisible and cannot be achieved at the expense of
others or through military might alone. Regrettably,
that expectation has yet to be realized. Moreover, a
year after the start of a new round of the war on
terrorism, the war faces the risk of being hijacked and
diverted towards other ends.

There is no doubt that terrorism is a crime.
However, oversimplifying terrorism without
objectively addressing the issue in its entirety does a
disservice to the cause of combating terrorism.
Contemporary history clearly demonstrates that
terrorist acts have roots in political issues, which
neither justifies the acts of its perpetrators nor
necessarily demonizes the cause they may embrace.
However, it cannot be denied that almost all terrorist
activities either directly originate from a conflict
situation or draw strength and recruits from it.
Terrorism is a response - however perverted and
barbaric - to injustice, exclusion and frustration
arising from powerlessness. We regret that there is a
remarkable inclination to overlook these more complex
historical and political dimensions and motivations,
which provide a fertile ground for terrorist activities.
We believe that, while efforts to combat terrorism and
to deprive it from funding and other support should
continue, it is also necessary to focus on the situations
that bring it about and sustain it. To do otherwise
would amount to cutting off its limbs and leaving its
roots intact.

There should be no doubt that efforts aimed at
hijacking the fight against terrorism and using it as a
means to suppress people and to repress their national
aspirations would lead to a decline in international
support for that fight. As a result, the international
coalition, which is indispensable for fighting terrorism,
would fall apart. Employing the fight against terrorism
as a means to bring pressure to bear on States that may
pursue a different political outlook is yet another
danger that threatens its integrity and support base.

The decisive stage in the war against terrorism is
capturing the minds and hearts of peoples. Thus, the
abuse of the fight against terrorism by demagogues to
spread hatred and bigotry among various cultures and
religions may in fact prove to be no less serious in its
consequences than terrorism itself. The international
community, and indeed the Council, need to analyse
the problem and to articulate and develop effective
mechanisms to arrest this ever-growing threat to
international security. Engaging in more sober
reflection, soul-searching and constructive dialogue
and less rhetoric, agitation and incitement is probably
the only credible way to ensure cooperation at the
international level - a global coalition for peace -
thus rendering the global environment less conducive
to terrorism. Undoubtedly, such an environment is a
sine qua non for the success of the CTC.

