Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
allow me to extend to you, Mr. President, a very warm
welcome to the Security Council. Your presence in the
Council is indeed a defining moment as Azerbaijan
assumes the presidency of the Security Council for the
first time in its history. I would also like to express our
deep appreciation to you, Sir, and to your delegation
for organizing today's meeting on this important
subject of threats to peace and security caused by
terrorist acts, and for chairing the meeting.
I would also like to acknowledge the participation
of ministers and high officials of Germany, Togo,
Colombia, Morocco and the Russian Federation in
today's meeting. Their participation and valuable
statements underscore the importance of the subject for
the international community. Our thanks are also due to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive and
insightful briefing.

Today, terrorism constitutes the most serious
challenge to international peace and security. Over the
years, the visible landscape of international terrorism
has changed vastly. In our globalized world, terrorists
are also globalized in their reach and activities and are
able to wage asymmetric warfare against the
international community. Terrorists have established
linkages with transnational organized crime, and their
veritable nexus with drug, human and arms trafficking
is now well established. Terrorist financing, illicit
money-laundering, drug trafficking and the illicit arms
trade remain intertwined in a complex web of toxic
relationships.

There is also a growing risk of weapons of mass
destruction of different kinds falling into the hands of
terrorists, which will only exacerbate the existing grave
security challenge to the international community. In
today's Internet-based age, there is also increasing
misuse of cyberspace and related technologies by
terrorists and their supporters for the purposes of
recruitment and training and the financing, planning,
preparation and incitement of their activities.

An effective counter-terrorism strategy therefore
requires greater international and regional cooperation
than the international community has so far been able
to achieve. International cooperation and concerted
action against terrorists and their sponsors, including
the complete dismantling of terrorist safe havens,
sanctuaries, training grounds and financial and
ideological support structures, are the critical
imperatives to defeat the scourge.

My own country, India, has faced the scourge of
terrorism for several decades. Indeed, our entire region,
South Asia, has been wracked by the activities of the
biggest terrorist actors in the world, be they Al-Qaida,
Lashkar-e-Toiba, Jamaat-ud-Dawa, elements of the
Taliban or others. Terrorism, extremism and
radicalization continue to pose a serious challenge to
peace, progress and prosperity in the region.
India condemns all acts, methods and practices of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
irrespective of the motivation that may be invoked to
justify them. We have been at the forefront of global
counter-terrorism efforts. India is part of the major
global initiatives against international terrorism,
including the Financial Action Task Force. We fully
support all efforts that strengthen international and
regional cooperation and that, most important, help to
ensure the effective implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions, including 1373 (2001)
and 1624 (2005), and a comprehensive and integrated
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

We also endorse the two consensus benchmarks
that are reflected in the outcome document adopted on
28 September 2011 by the special meeting of the
Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee, which
has been chaired by India since January 2011. The
outcome document (S/2011/689, annex) is a major
landmark in providing a strategic direction to the work
of the Committee aimed at strengthening the capacity
of States in their counter-terrorism efforts. It raises the
benchmark in the fight against terrorism to a higher
level, and urges all Member States to ensure zero
tolerance towards terrorism and to take urgent action to
prevent and combat terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations through the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and other
relevant international instruments. We urge all United
Nations Member States to strive to implement that
approach in their counter-terrorism efforts.

We believe that terrorism cannot be countered by
law enforcement means alone. Prevention is also
critical. Effective responses will necessarily include
other aspects of legal and social policy, among which
some of the key components are development,
education, social integration, tolerance, the rule of law
and respect for human rights. The United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General Assembly resolution 60/288) is a wholesome document that
incorporates various aspects in its four pillars and
provides guidance to Member States in implementing a
global strategy in a balanced and integrated manner.

Despite the various daunting challenges in the
fight against terrorism, significant progress has been
made over the past decade by strengthening
cooperation, enhancing solidarity and facilitating
dialogue among Member States in their efforts to
counter the terrorist threat. The United Nations has
played a seminal role in the capacity-building of
Member States. States need assistance to fulfil their
obligations under the United Nations anti-terrorism
conventions to which they are a party, as well as the
Security Council counter-terrorism and other relevant
resolutions. We commend the efforts and commitment
of the relevant United Nations agencies, including the
Security Council's subsidiary bodies, in developing the
capacities of countries in that regard.

While the Security Council has remained
steadfast in its fight against international terrorism, it
must further enhance the level of international
cooperation to counter the threat decisively. We
encourage the subsidiary bodies of the Council with
counter-terrorism mandates to continue to enhance
their ongoing dialogue with Member States, donors and
beneficiaries on the facilitation of technical assistance
for capacity-building at the national, subregional and
regional levels. We also welcome the recent initiative
of the Secretary-General for Member States to consider
the creation of a United Nations counter-terrorism
coordinator, and express our willingness to fully
engage in all deliberations aimed at further improving
the cross-institutional coherence and effectiveness of
United Nations counter-terrorism efforts.

India has long held the belief that the United
Nations also needs to strengthen its counter-terrorism
normative framework through the adoption of a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism. I
can only echo the call of the Secretary-General that the
time has come for such a convention to be adopted.

