The President: The Security Council will now
proceed to the election of five members of the
International Court of Justice, in accordance with
Article 13 of the Statute of the International Court of
Justice, to fill the five seats that will become vacant on
5 February 2012 on the expiry of the terms of office of
the following Judges: Judge Abdul G. Koroma (Sierra Leone), Judge Hisashi Owada (Japan), Judge Bruno
Simma (Germany), Judge Peter Tomka (Slovakia) and
Judge Xue Hanqin (China).

The list of candidates indicating the national
groups by which each candidate was nominated is
contained in document S/2011/453.

I should like to inform members of the Council
that I have received letters addressed to me by the
Legal Counsel, dated 4 and 9 November 2011
respectively, informing me, on behalf of the Secretary-
General, that after the established deadline for the
filing of nominations, namely 30 June 2011, several
national groups submitted nominations to the
Secretariat. I should like to draw members" attention to
the fact that all such additional nominations relate to
candidates already nominated by other national groups
and whose names therefore already appear in document
S/2011/453. The Legal Counsel recommended that, in
accordance with established practice, I inform Council
members orally on the day of the election about the
decisions of the aforementioned national groups. I am
also informed that the Legal Counsel made a similar
recommendation to the President of the General
Assembly.

The nominations of the aforementioned national
groups are as follows: for Ms. Tsvetana Kamenova,
Malta; for Mr. Abdul G. Koroma, Malta; for
Mr. Hisashi Owada, Colombia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, El Salvador, India,
Liechtenstein, Malta and Romania; for Ms. Julia
Sebutinde, Romania; for Mr. Peter Tomka,
Liechtenstein and Romania; for Ms. Xue Hanqin,
India, Liechtenstein and Romania.
2
The Security Council has before it a
memorandum by the Secretary-General contained in
document S/2011/452, describing the present
composition of the Court and setting out the procedure
to be followed in the conduct of the election.

I should like to remind the Council that, under
Article 10, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice,

"Those candidates who obtain an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly and in
the Security Council shall be considered as
elected".

The required majority in the Security Council is
eight votes.

If, in the first ballot, the number of candidates
obtaining an absolute majority is less than five, then
pursuant to rule 61 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council, the Council will
proceed to a second ballot on the remaining vacancies.
Balloting will continue in the same manner until five
candidates have obtained the required majority of
votes.

If, on the other hand, more than five candidates
obtain the required majority, according to established
practice and as set forth in paragraph 13 of the
Secretary-General's memorandum, a new vote will be
held on all the candidates. That rule will also apply to
any subsequent ballots if the number of candidates
obtaining the absolute majority is greater than the
number of vacancies remaining.

The voting will be held by secret ballot. When we
proceed to the vote, members of the Council will
receive a ballot containing the names of all the
candidates. No candidacy withdrawal will be accepted
once the ballot papers have been distributed. However,
it will be possible to withdraw between ballots.

Members of the Council will be requested to
place an "X" in the boxes next to the names of the
candidates for whom they wish to vote. Only those
candidates whose names appear on the ballot are
eligible for election.

I should like to remind members of paragraph 10
of the Secretary-General's memorandum, which
specifies that "[e]ach elector may vote for not more
than five candidates on the first ballot". Any ballot
11-58736
paper containing votes for more than five names will
be considered invalid.

I should like to inform Council members that, in
accordance with established practice, the ballot papers
in the Security Council will not be counted until it has
been verified that the ballot papers in the General
Assembly have also been collected. The Council will
remain in session pending the receipt of that
information.

Only when five candidates have obtained the
required majority of votes in the Security Council will
I communicate the result to the President of the
General Assembly. I will request the Council to remain
in session, pending receipt from the President of the
General Assembly of the result of the voting in the
Assembly.

The Council will now proceed to draw lots to
select two delegations to serve as tellers.

The delegation of China will not be considered to
serve as a teller because a candidate of that nationality
has been nominated. Because my delegation this month
occupies the Council presidency, it will also be
excluded from serving as a teller.

In this box are the names of the 13 other
delegations that can serve as tellers. I will now draw
two.

The names of the delegations of Nigeria and
Gabon have been drawn. I request each of those
delegations to appoint one of their members to serve as
teller.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Onanga
(Gabon) and Mr. Onowu (Nigeria) acted as
tellers.

The President: May I take it that the Council is
now ready to proceed with the election of five
members of the International Court of Justice?

It is so decided.

I request the Conference Officer to distribute the
ballot papers.

Members of the Council should place an "X" in
the boxes next to the names of the five candidates for
whom they wish to vote.

>l<>l<=l<
11-58736


The President: I take it that all the members of
the Council have now voted and I ask the Conference
Officer to collect the ballot papers.

*>l<>l<


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. I should like to remind Council members
that, in accordance with the established practice, the
ballots will not be counted until it has been verified
that the ballot papers in the General Assembly have
also been collected. The Council will remain in session
pending the receipt of that information.

>l=>l<>l=


The President: I have been informed that the
ballot papers have been collected in the General
Assembly.

The counting of the ballots in the Security
Council will now begin. The tellers will now count the
ballots. As agreed in our consultations, there will be
two independent countings of the ballots, one by each
teller. I should like to remind Council members that in
accordance with established practice, I shall wait for
the General Assembly to complete its count before I
announce the results of the voting in the Security
Council. The Council will remain in session.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows:

Number ofballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Number of abstentions: 0
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Giorgio Gaja 13
Ms. Tsvetana Kamenova 4
Mr. Abdul G. Koroma 10
Mr. Hisashi Owada 14
Ms. Julia Sebutinde 5
Mr. El Hadj i Mansour Tall 1
Mr. Peter Tomka 13
Ms. Xue Hanqin 15

Accordingly, the following candidates received
the required majority of votes in the Security Council:
Ms. Xue Hanqin, Mr. Hisashi Owada, Mr. Giorgio
Gaja, Mr. Peter Tomka and Mr. Abdul G. Koroma. I
3
have communicated the result of the voting to the
President of the General Assembly in writing.

I wish to inform members of the Council that I
have received the following letter from the President of
the General Assembly:

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
53rd plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing five
members of the International Court of Justice, the
following candidates obtained an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly:
Mr. Giorgio Gaja, Mr. Hisashi Owada, Ms. Julia
Sebutinde, Mr. Peter Tomka and Ms. Hanqin
Xue."

As both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have agreed on four candidates, the jurists
Mr. Giorgio Gaj a, Ms. Xue Hanqin, Mr. Hisashi Owada
and Mr. Peter Tomka have been elected to the
International Court of Justice for a period of nine
years, beginning on 6 February 2012. I should like to
congratulate them warmly and to wish them every
success in the high office to which they have been
elected.

As a result of the voting that has taken place in
the Security Council and in the General Assembly, four
members of the Court have been duly elected. In
accordance with Article 11 of the Statute of the Court,
the Council will now proceed to hold a second meeting
to elect a candidate by further ballots for the seat
remaining to be filled. Accordingly, I shall adjourn this
meeting, and call to order the second meeting to elect a
candidate by further ballot, after a brief recess to allow
for the preparation of new ballots.

The meeting rose at 11.45 am.
11-58736

