Mr. Mukerji (India): I will shorten my statement
in the interest of time and circulate the full text for
reference.

India shares traditional and strong bonds of
friendship and kinship with small island developing
States (SIDS). With a coastline extending more than
7,500 kilometres and with several groups of islands
located far away from our mainland, India is deeply
conscious of the special challenges faced by SIDS.

As part of the South-South cooperation, India
has been privileged to share its developmental
experience and expertise as well as technological
resources with SIDS. Our cooperation with SIDS has
emphasized human and institutional capacity- building,
infrastructure development, climate change adaptation,
agriculture and food security, among others. Prime
Minister Narendra Modi initiated the Forum for India-
Pacific Islands Cooperation (FIPIC), in 2014 in Fiji, to
enable regular dialogue and interaction between our
two sides. The next meeting of FIPIC will be hosted in
India next month.

The very useful concept note circulated by New
Zealand for this debate (S/2015/543) disaggregates
the topic into four broad headings. In all these areas,
it is clear that effective international cooperation has
been most viable outside the confines of the Security
Council. We must look beyond the Security Council in
redressing the concerns outlined in the concept note.

For example, though piracy was taken up by the
15-member Security Council in resolutions 1851
(2008) and 1918 (2010), it has been through a much
wider grouping - the 60-member Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia - that the security and
economic concerns related to piracy have actually been
addressed. This democratic and transparent approach
commends consideration of broadening effective
international cooperation to tackle piracy, under the
framework of the General Assembly and taking into
account the concerns expressed by SIDS.
The General Assembly devoted decades of
discussion and negotiation to enable the adoption of
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Seas
(UNCLOS) in 1982. That has been a major achievement
of the Assembly, and UNCLOS today is the platform
from which issues of concern to Member States,
including SIDS, with regard to the illicit exploitation
of natural resources, including illicit fishing, are most
effectively addressed. We need to provide more attention
in the General Assembly on how to enable SIDS to use
the provisions of UNCLOS more effectively.

As the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) is poised to conclude its
current negotiations in Paris in December this year, we
advocate that the concerns of SIDS on climate change
must be reflected in the outcome document that will be
adopted in Paris. SIDS are at the front line of the threat
from climate change and sea-level rise and suffer the
most from a global problem they did not contribute to.

Adaptation to climate change remains one of the
highest priorities for SIDS. Long-promised financial
support under UNFCCC from developed countries must
reach the SIDS expeditiously. The Green Climate Fund
must also prioritize disbursement of funds to SIDS for
their urgent adaptation priorities.

We are poised to adopt the post-2015 development
agenda at the forthcoming special session of the
General Assembly in September this year. It is worth
emphasizing the importance of sustainable development
goal 14 in the context ofthis debate. Goal 14 reflects the
active participation of many Member States, especially
SIDS, in both identifying and addressing the concerns
related to development in the area of oceans, seas and
marine resources.

Before concluding, Mr. President, I must thank your
delegation for pointing out in the concept note that as
many as 37 Member States are small island developing
States. While SIDS have participated effectively in the
universal platform provided by the General Assembly
to address their specific concerns, it is a pity that the
restricted and undemocratic nature of the Security
Council has so far prevented SIDS from contributing
their unique perspective as developing countries to the
Council's deliberations.

That situation cannot be sustained for much longer.
We therefore call on you, Mr. President, to include in
your proposed non-paper a strong endorsement of the
call of a majority of Member States for urgent and
early reforms of the structure of the Security Council,
expanding its membership in both categories in order
to allow the voices of developing countries, especially
those of SIDS, to be acted upon more regularly and be
heard more often in the Council Chamber.

