Mr. Dauth (Australia): Australia welcomes this
opportunity to again address the Security Council on an
issue of fundamental importance to the international
community. As members know, on 12 October 2002 a
terrorist attack on the Indonesian island of Bali took
the lives of more than 200 innocent civilians from
some 21 countries; 88 Australians were killed in that
brutal attack, which, together with the attacks in
Mombasa, Moscow and Bogota, demonstrated all too
clearly terrorism's global reach and the threat it poses
to peace and security. Those heinous attacks have only
strengthened the Australian Government's resolve to
protect Australian citizens and to confront the threat
posed by international terrorism in our region and
internationally. That was underlined, I should say, in
our recently released foreign policy white paper. If
anyone is short of bedtime reading, I will be happy to
share a copy with him or her.

Australia's approach to combating terrorism is
comprehensive, covering bilateral, regional and
multilateral activities, as well as political, economic,
diplomatic, legal and, where appropriate, military
initiatives. Bilaterally, we have concluded formal
counter-terrorism arrangements with Indonesia,
Malaysia and Thailand. We are close to finalizing
similar arrangements with other friends in our region,
including the Philippines and Fiji. Those arrangements
promote stronger cooperation in the fight against
terrorism in key areas such as intelligence exchange,
law enforcement, anti-terrorist financing and border
controls. The excellent cooperation between Australian
and Indonesian police in investigating the Bali
bombings has been facilitated by our arrangements
with Indonesia, which have also served as a foundation
for counter-terrorism capacity-building activities.

At a regional level, Australia has been active in
supporting counter-terrorism initiatives and
programmes. Australia is strengthening its own and the
Asia-Pacific region's defences against terrorism,
working with our Asian and Pacific-island neighbours,
and also with the United States and the United
Kingdom and others. In cooperation with New Zealand
and the United States, we are assisting Pacific island
countries to implement their obligations under
resolution 1373 (2001). In December, Australia and
Indonesia co-hosted a regional conference on
combating money-laundering and terrorist financing in
Bali. The conference raised awareness of the problem
of terrorist financing and encouraged action to cut off
funding of terrorist groups. Within the Regional Forum
of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
(ASEAN), planning is well advanced for a workshop
that Australia will be co-hosting with Singapore on
managing the consequences of a terrorist attack. In the
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
association, we are exploring options to help countries
in the region implement their commitments under
APEC's Secure Trade in the APEC Region initiative,
which will help secure the flow of goods and people.

Globally, the United Nations must continue to
play a key role in denying terrorists the opportunity to
commit their appalling crimes. That is especially the
case in relation to efforts to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. There is no greater
danger for the international community than that of
weapons of mass destruction finding their way into the
hands of terrorists, who, with such weapons, would
have the capacity to kill tens or hundreds of thousands
of innocent people.

Against that background, we welcome and
endorse the ministerial declaration on terrorism
annexed to resolution 1456 (2003), which highlighted
the importance of tight controls over the use of and
access to nuclear, chemical, biological and other deadly
materials. The declaration also emphasized the need for
full compliance with existing legal obligations in the
field of disarmament, arms limitation and non-
proliferation. In that context, we would recall that, as
we stated in the Council on Tuesday, 18 February,
Australia considers that this body should act decisively
and resolutely to deal with Iraq's disarmament.

Australia remains a strong proponent of the draft
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
We have made substantial efforts to achieve consensus
on the convention, leading informal negotiations to
resolve outstanding issues in relation to its scope. We
welcome the encouragement in the ministerial
declaration for the conclusion of the convention.

It would be entirely remiss of me not to mention
the valuable work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) under the really quite exemplary, transparent
and consultative leadership of Ambassador Greenstock,
who in this area has demonstrated the great skill in this
area that he brings to all the work that he does at the
United Nations. In that context, I am pleased also to
note that he is to be succeeded by another extremely
able colleague of ours, the Permanent Representative
of Spain. The CTC has played, and continues to play, a
crucial role in global efforts to fight terrorism.

We also commend the excellent work of the
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1267 (1999), whose consolidated list is a
key counter-terrorism tool. We encourage more
proactive listing of terrorists and terrorist entities under
resolution 1267 (1999). Australia welcomes the steps
being taken by the CTC and the 1267 sanctions
Committee to better coordinate their activities and to
improve the exchange of information.

Australia is acutely aware that winning the fight
against terrorism will take long-term commitment. For
its part, Australia will continue to shoulder its counter-
terrorism responsibilities and can be counted on to
support the efforts of the United Nations.

