Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. Minister, for presiding once again over the
Council's deliberations. We thank the Polish delegation
for having convened today's debate on the challenges
to peace and security in the Middle East. My
delegation also appreciates the insightful briefing of
Ms. Viotti, Chef de Cabinet in the Executive Office of
the Secretary-General.

We also welcome the Secretary of State of the
United States and the State Secretary of the Federal
Foreign Office of Germany to the Council and thank
them for their statements.

South Africa welcomes the debate on the threats
and challenges to peace and security in the Middle East,
and we wish to emphasize that there is no one-size-fits-
all solution to those challenges, given the diversity of
the challenges facing each of the countries in the region.
The destruction of property and infrastructure caused
by bombings in the Middle East is unprecedented
and devastating. The satellite pictures of the region
show destruction resembling the kind of ruins last
seen during the Second World War, 74 years ago. The
unprecedented human suffering and the destruction of
physical and social infrastructure should be stopped.

Millions of women and children have perished
and been permanently disfigured. Millions have been
internally displaced and millions more made refugees
in faraway lands - some since childhood. They have
never known peace. The upsurge in the radicalization
of young people and terror-linked insurgent groupings,
which are causing havoc in the region and beyond, are
of great concern to South Africa.

South Africa firmly believes that the question of
Palestine and Israel remains the core issue and that
its resolution will have a positive impact on the entire
region for many generations to come. South Africa is
deeply concerned about the humanitarian cost of the
various conflicts in the Middle East, which remains the
most acute of any other region, as can be illustrated
by the prolonged and continued suffering of refugees,
internally displaced persons and those caught up in
the midst of armed conflict in Syria, Iraq, Yemen
and elsewhere.

We call on the international community to pay
equal attention to Yemen, which remains the worst
humanitarian crisis in the world, and call on the
parties to the Yemeni conflict to respect international
humanitarian law, including the Stockholm Agreement.

South Africa regrets the withdrawal of the United
States from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA). We continue to urge our friends in the United
States of America to reconsider their position in that
regard. The JCPOA is the most important diplomatic
achievement in the area of nuclear non-proliferation in
a very long time. It is a significant multilateral success
that contributes to the maintenance of international
peace and security. We also urge Iran to continue
abiding by its obligations under the JCPOA.

South Africa believes that in order to address the
root causes of the peace and security challenges in the
Middle East, the Council needs to display the necessary
political will and good faith to resolve long-standing
and festering conflicts such as the question of Palestine,
which has been a source of tension in the region for
many decades.

South Africa believes that only multilateral
and collective action and a continued commitment
to preventive diplomacy and inclusive dialogue, as
opposed to confrontation and conflict, will reduce such
tensions, culminating in a more peaceful and prosperous
region that is rich in diversity, culture and civilization.

In conclusion, we would also like to emphasize
the importance of the implementation of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and of the
objective of achieving a nuclear-free Middle East. In
Syria, the Geneva agreement should be implemented.
In Yemen, the Stockholm Agreement should be
implemented. The peace process between Israel and
Palestine should be relaunched. The zone of peace and
stability and the economic boom enjoyed by the Gulf
countries could be utilized to stimulate an environment
of peace across the Middle East, and perhaps begin a
grand debate about the future of the Middle East.

