Mr. Covie (Serbia and Montenegro) (spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): First
of all, I would like to greet the Council on behalf of the
Council of Ministers of Serbia and Montenegro and of
the Republic of Serbia and express my appreciation for
being able to participate in today's meeting of the
Security Council on Kosovo and Metohija. I would
also like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report.

Time and again, I have tried to draw the attention
of the Security Council to the difficult position of the
Serbian and other non-Albanian communities in
Kosovo and Metohija, which has not often been
properly addressed in the official reports coming from
the province. In recent talks with international
officials, I have been told that the world is tired of
repeatedly coming back to this issue, that Kosovo and
Metohija will never be like Switzerland in terms of the
standards of a modern democratic society, and that it is
necessary for Belgrade to change its approach in order
to board the train which is leaving the station, with or
without us.

Even at the risk of being reproached again, I
cannot but repeat that the conditions of life of Serbs
and other non-Albanians in the province are
unacceptably poor. The Secretary-General has also
unambiguously noted that fact in his latest report on
the situation in Kosovo and Metohij a. On this occasion
as well, I would like to express my appreciation to the
Special Representative who, despite the aggressive
Albanian and international campaign to portray the
achievements of the newly-elected Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in a more favourable
light than the actual situation warrants, has consistently
insisted that none of the standards was even close to
being fulfilled.

The pretext for such a situation should be sought
neither among the Kosovo Serbs nor in Belgrade, but
in the general environment prevailing in the province,
characterized by a lack of political maturity on the part
of the leaders of the majority community. Let me offer
some examples that convincingly illustrate the reality
in Kosovo and Metohija. The Parliament and
Government of Kosovo and Metohija are not truly
multi-ethnic. There is no protection for non-Albanian
communities from being out-voted. There is no
strategy to resolve the massive unemployment or to
embark upon economic recovery. There is a lack of
opportunity for Serbs and other non-Albanians to find
employment in the public sector, and a lack of
elementary security for Serbs and other non-Albanians,
whose freedom of movement is limited to the
"humanitarian bus service" and the "freedom of
movement" train. The ongoing illegal privatization
serves as a basis for the further ethnic cleansing of
Serbs and other non-Albanians by economic measures.
The constant attacks and incidents against Serbs are
neither isolated, nor condemned, nor countered by
efficient measures by the local political leadership.

Serbs and other non-Albanians are deprived of all
linguistic rights. Serbian property continues to be
looted without any protection by the local authorities
and police. There have been no returns of expelled and
displaced persons nor any efforts to encourage returns.
No municipality in Kosovo and Metohija has worked
out a plan or a strategy for returns.

No efforts have been made to reconstruct the
Serbian cultural heritage, and the Serbian Orthodox
Church has been falsely blamed for that.

All forms of organized crime continue to thrive in
Kosovo and Metohij a, not only multi-ethnic but also
multinational. The Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) is a
training ground for Albanian extremist groups
committed to violence; the KPC is preparing to become
an army, in direct violation of resolution 1244 (1999).

Serb and other non-Albanian national
communities have practically no confidence in the
political and administrative system in Kosovo and
Metohija; they are totally prevented from taking part in
all political processes, having been fully marginalized
as second-class citizens.

Since October 2000, Pristina and Albanian
leaders have been consistently evading the necessary
dialogue with Belgrade, shifting the blame to Belgrade.
The media in Kosovo and Metohija are promoting hate
speech on a regular basis and are broadcasting
falsehoods about Serbian and other non-Albanian
communities; they have been engaged in a campaign
for the province's independence, and carry hardly any
Serbian-language broadcasts. There is no rule of law,
and Serbian and other non-Albanians do not have
access to the judicial system.

Despite such a situation, an inappropriate
decision to open the question of the future status of
Kosovo and Metohija has been made under the pretext
that the perpetuation of the status quo is no longer
possible. Understandably, no one is in favour of
perpetuating the status quo in Kosovo and Metohija,
least of all Belgrade. But we should be aware that the
implementation of key provisions of resolution 1244
(1999) would be a major step forward, a move away
from the status quo.

Clearly, with regard to the most sensitive issue
related to Kosovo and Metohija - the preservation of
its multi-ethnic character - not only has there not
been any headway in the implementation of the
resolution, but the situation has worsened. For almost
six years now, the new reality of Kosovo and Metohija
has been that one national community, the Serbian one,
has been disappearing under pressure from, and violent
acts by, the majority community. If this is an important
yardstick for measuring the standards in the
implementation of the rule of law, democracy and
minority protection, not only do we have a status quo
in Kosovo and Metohija, we have a general regression.
These facts cannot possibly be hidden in any way. In
light of these facts, how can we contemplate the
perspective of a future status of Kosovo and Metohija
at all?

Since their deployment in the province in June
1999, the international forces have been trying to put in
place the standards of a modern multi-ethnic and
democratic society. Three years ago, that approach to
the resolution of the problems of Kosovo and Metohija
was defined and officially called "standards before
status", which Belgrade supported. Despite the
negative assessment of the implementation of these
standards - also indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General unjustifiably optimistic
assessments were made that after six years of poor
results, a turnaround and major progress would occur
in just a few months, thus creating the conditions for
negotiations on the future status of the province.

At the same time, there are suggestions that the
"standards before status" will be reformulated into a
"both standards and status" policy, which actually
implies the recognition of the failure on the part of the
international community and a search for a quick exit
strategy, deliberately embracing a detrimental
compromise as regards the creation of a truly multi-
ethnic and democratic society in Kosovo and Metohij a.

I would like to take this opportunity to emphasize
that since the democratic Government took over in
October 2000, Belgrade's approach has remained the
same. We have been sincerely trying, as partners with
the international community, to contribute to the
establishment of a multi-ethnic society and to
confidence-building. Immediately after the democratic
changes took place in Belgrade, in 2000 and 2001, with
the assistance of and in partnership with the
international community, we jointly achieved great
success in defusing the crisis in the south of central
Serbia. However, when we tried to apply a similar
approach in Kosovo and Metohija, we were blocked
and all our initiatives were immediately rejected, since
they came from Belgrade.

We are firmly committed to helping in a
constructive manner so that the months-long deadlock
in relations with Pristina are overcome as soon as
possible. I would like to recall that this deadlock was a
consequence of a mass organized pogrom against the
Serbs carried out by the Albanian extremists in March
last year. We believed then, as we do now, that the
question of the survival of the Serbs is directly
connected to more efficient and more reliable
institutional protection for them as a community in
Kosovo and Metohija. That is why we have focused
our activities on decentralization as a crucial issue of
security and institutional transformation of Kosovo and
Metohija. In doing so, we did not want to diminish the
importance of the so-called technical issues. However,
in conditions of physical endangerment of the Serbian
national community those issues were objectively less
important. We do not believe that by placing some of
these technical issues back on the agenda, the problem
of decentralization has lost its crucial importance in the
province.

In view of the above, we raised the issue of
revitalizing the working groups for missing and
abducted persons and for energy with the Special
Representative, and we sought to initiate the process of
reconstruction of the churches and monasteries
damaged or destroyed in last year's wave of violence.
The meeting of the working group for missing and
abducted persons will be held in Belgrade on 10
March, and we hope that it will contribute to the
resolution of this sensitive and, above all, humanitarian
issue.

Some steps have also been taken in order to start
the work of the high-level group on security, as well as
of working groups for decentralization, transport and
returns. We hope that initial results will already be seen
in the next few weeks. I would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate that Belgrade stands ready to
participate fully in all processes in Kosovo and
Metohija - however, on an equal footing, from
beginning to end of each individual process, including
the process of decentralization.

Let us return, in the end, to the popular metaphor
that has been often used recently to describe the
unfolding of the process in Kosovo and Metohija.
Where is the train - which I mentioned at the
beginning of this statement - heading? If the final
destination is Europe rather than it being a local train,
the train should allow us to travel steadily towards the
full implementation of all standards of modern
European States and to full membership in the
European Union. There should be no stops at side
stations, where bad compromises are made in reaching
for the standards of a truly multi-ethnic society and
where the borders of a mono-ethnic State are drawn. If
its destination is Europe without compromises,
Belgrade will be on that train.

