Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his thorough
and in-depth report on Timor-Leste. I also want to say
how pleased I am to see Kamalesh Sharma, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), at the Council table. He is a very
experienced diplomat and it is truly encouraging to see
the Secretary-General represented in Timor-Leste by
someone of his calibre. I wish to thank him for his very
interesting presentation on the report of the Secretary-
General.

As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement to be made by
Denmark on behalf of the Union. I would therefore like
to make some comments in my national capacity.

I would like to say that my delegation welcomes
the fact that in the first five months since Timor-
Leste's declaration of independence there has been
tangible and lasting progress in the establishment and
strengthening of nascent State institutions. The security
situation is improving, good-neighbourly relations are
continuing to be developed, in particular with
Indonesia, and the new State is becoming increasingly
integrated into the international community and
regional organizations. Such success would not have
been possible had it not been for both the efforts of the
new Government and the indispensable assistance of
concerned States and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs).

We should recognize the remarkable progress
made in the transfer of functions from UNMISET to
the new Timorese Administration, including the police.

We support UNMISET's efforts to implement its
mandate under Security Council resolution 1410 (2002)
within the established time frame. Bulgaria welcomes
the effort to optimize the international presence in
Timor-Leste by downsizing administrative personnel
and better coordinating the international assistance
received by the country.

Good-neighbourly relations are at the very heart
of the stability and economic development of Timor-
Leste and of its becoming a part of the international
community. We have already welcomed the creation by
Timor-Leste and Indonesia of the Joint Ministerial
Commission for Bilateral Cooperation to take up
remaining problems between the two countries, inter
alia, delimitation and demarcation of the border and the
return of Timorese refugees. We welcome the decision
to maintain the Joint Border Committee, and we call
upon the parties to continue their efforts to reach
agreement on delimitation and demarcation of the
border as soon as possible.

My country also welcomes the decision by the
Timor-Leste Government to sign a communique
identifying 11 human rights goals. This is a clear
commitment by political leaders to shoulder their
responsibilities in defending human rights and
developing democracy in the young country.

The progress in the country's management is
without question a good beginning for Timor-Leste, but
serious, unresolved problems remain: there is a
shortage of administrative capacity, particularly
affecting the judiciary system; a truly modern
infrastructure is lacking; and social stability remains
fragile and the country faces the problem of the
reintegration of ex-combatants and the return of
refugees.

My country highly appreciates the active role and
personal commitment of the Secretary-General in the
effective coordination of activities of the United
Nations system in Timor-Leste.

I would like to conclude by once again paying
tribute to Ambassador Sharma and his team for the
work they have done. I thank them all for their
excellent work. I convey my deep sympathy to the
families of peacekeepers who were victims of the
terrorist attack perpetrated in Bali.

