Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): First of
all, allow me to thank the French presidency for
convening this important meeting. Let me also take this
opportunity to thank Mr. Antonio Maria Costa,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, for his dedicated work and for his
briefing.

The rapid growth of criminal networks,
transcending national borders and regional boundaries,
dangerously affects today's global peace and security.
Poorly governed countries, especially those emerging
from post-conflict situations and humanitarian crises,
are the most vulnerable, and unstable situations are
fertile ground for the development of criminal and
terrorist activities and corruption. The clear cause-and-
effect relationship between poor social and economic
situations and a lack of the rule of law on the one hand
and rising crime and corruption on the other makes
development unsustainable and affects domestic,
regional and international peace and security.

To be able to provide an efficient response to the
scourge of transnational organized crime, the
international community should first undertake further
efforts to make developing countries less susceptible to
organized crime, by addressing the root causes of
widespread poverty, investing in health and human
development and ensuring systematic law enforcement
and institution-building. Through such preventive
activities, the international community will enable
developing countries to fight organized crime by
themselves, to the benefit of all States and of the
international community as a whole.

In order to create a common assessment of rising
crime and corruption trends, which is indispensable for
identifying policies and for creating effective counter-
activities, the United Nations and its relevant agencies,
through the "One United Nations" concept, should
further improve coherence in the collection and sharing
of information and in strategic data analysis. In that
context, we would like to encourage the further
development of substantive software applications such
as the United Nations National Drug Control System
(NDS), the Pre-Export Notification System (PEN On Line), goAML and other tools specifically conceived
for national and international control and the fight
against organized crime.

My delegation joins those who acknowledge the
seriousness of this problem and points out that, given
its nature, it is clear that no single country acting alone
can address this problem successfully. While building
the proper judiciary and police systems in individual
countries is of paramount importance, cooperation at
the subregional and regional levels is equally
important. Regional strategies and the conclusion of
bilateral and multilateral agreements tailored to
national and regional specificities can provide a
comprehensive legal framework for cooperation and
successful counter-activities and could increase the
national, regional and overall global capacity to
effectively respond to international threats posed by
organized crime, drug trafficking and corruption.

I would also like to take this opportunity to state
that my country has undertaken important legislative,
judicial and structural reforms aimed at strengthening
our drug control system and fighting illicit trafficking
and related crimes. Furthermore, Bosnia and
Herzegovina attaches utmost importance to bilateral
and regional cooperation in combating these threats to
global peace and security and is fully committed to
working closely with neighbouring countries and the
relevant regional and international organizations.

We believe that it is crucial to cooperate,
exchange information and experiences and promote
good practices in confronting this issue. In that regard,
Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the efforts that
have been made jointly by the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and other relevant United
Nations organs and agencies in facing numerous
security risks caused by drug trafficking in many
countries and regions.

Lessons learned in one place can often be of great
use and help in another. In that context, the knowledge
and expertise of UNODC are exceptional value, and
Member States should benefit from them.

