The President (interpretation from Russian): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion
Without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Misic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from Russian): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on the agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1026 (1995), contained in documents
S/1995/IO31 and Add.1.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1995/ 1049, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/l995/1049) before it. Unless I hear any objection, I
shall now put the draft resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Botswana, China, Czech Republic,
France, Germany, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy,
Nigeria, Oman, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President (interpretation from Russian): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1035 (1995).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 7.10 pm.

