Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation wishes to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting of
the Council on Somalia. We think it is timely that the
Council revisit the subject in this Chamber for an in-
depth exchange of views on the situation in that
country with the participation of the larger membership
of the Organization. We would also like to thank Sir
Kieran Prendergast, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his succinct yet comprehensive
briefing. We have also benefited from the equally
useful briefing by the Permanent Representative of
Djibouti, Ambassador Roble Olhaye, to whom we
express our appreciation.

For far too long, the international community has
become disengaged from the tragedy in that part of the
Horn of Africa, perhaps because of its past
disenchantment. Today, Somalia remains a
dysfunctional or failed State. This state of no-war and
no-peace prevailing in Somalia cannot be accepted on a
permanent basis. As an expression of our support and
solidarity with the hapless people of Somalia, we must
make every effort to explore avenues for a political
settlement of the conflict in that unfortunate country.
Our sense of fellowship with the people of Somalia
demands that we become fully engaged once again
with their country.

It is true that our experience of involvement in
the affairs of Somalia has largely been negative. We
may want to forget the experience, but we should not
discard the lesson. Drawing from the lesson of the past,
our re-engagement with Somalia should be aimed, this
time around, not at imposing a solution, but to working
with the Somali people to find a solution that is viable
and acceptable to them - a solution which they have a
hand in crafting.

In this regard, my delegation warmly welcomes
the peace initiative by the President of Djibouti. We
commend President Ismail Omar Guelleh for his bold
and timely initiative and his tireless efforts in
promoting it out of his sincere concern at the situation
in his neighbouring country and his commitment to
bring a lasting political settlement of the conflict there.
The initiative by Djibouti deserves the strong and
unqualified support of the international community.
Initiated by a concerned and close neighbour of
Somalia, it is virtually home-grown. As Sir Kieran put
it, it is "Somali-owned". It pursues a "bottom-up"
approach, the approach preferred by the international
community, focusing on the people, who really matter,
and not on the so-called leaders and warlords who,
with their vested and selfish interests, have destroyed
the Somali nation.

We are gratified to note that the efforts of
President Guelleh have born some positive results and
that with the support of members of Somali civil
society there is now a glimmer of hope that at long last
the civil war in Somalia can be brought to an end,
thereby enabling Somalia to recover from a crisis of
exceptional complexity which had led to the collapse
of the State and had destabilized the entire region of
the Horn of Africa. It will allow the reintegration of
Somali society and a restoration of the traditional
Somali culture of tolerance and accommodation, of
which we have often been reminded.

We are encouraged that the Somalia National
Peace Conference has now moved into its second
phase. Malaysia welcomes this development and hopes
that it will pave the way for substantive talks among
representatives of all sectors of Somali society on the
question of the political future of their country. We also
hope that it will lead to an agreement on the formation
of a transitional arrangement that would safeguard
Somalia's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and at
the same time prepare the ground for a peaceful and
lasting settlement. We are heartened to hear that in the
past month or so, Somalis from every walk of life have
been increasingly involved in the Djibouti-initiated
peace process. They must be further encouraged by a
manifestation of strong political and material support
by the international community. This point was
particularly underscored by Sir Kieran just now.

My delegation believes that a peaceful resolution
of the Somali question would have a far-reaching
stabilizing effect in a region mired in conflict. The loss
of human life in the Horn of Africa on account of
conflict and famine has been enormous. The escalating
cost of providing humanitarian assistance continues to
divert resources, which are always in short supply,
from more productive development efforts. It is
therefore critical that all diplomatic means be
exhausted in support of the Djibouti initiative. We
would urge all Somalis to join and support the peace
initiative. We are fully cognizant of the fact that the
journey towards full and final reconciliation and
durable peace in Somalia is likely to be unpredictable
and arduous.

We note that, although the Somalia National
Peace Conference is a significant step forward, it has
been overshadowed by the conspicuous non-
participation of some faction leaders who continue to
disagree with the objectives of the meeting and the
process of reconciliation which it has launched,
presumably because they are no longer at the centre of
the process. Clearly, the main stumbling block in the
peace process is the continued intransigence of the
faction leaders. These leaders should realize that they
have had their chance to resolve the conflict but have
failed miserably and that the people's patience is at an
end. They can no longer hold Somalia's destiny to
ransom.

Nevertheless, because no lasting peace would be
possible without internal reconciliation, every effort
should be made to bring these leaders on board the
peace initiative. They must be urged - indeed,
pressured - both internally by the people themselves
and externally by influential actors - to put aside their
personal and parochial ambitions and to join the peace
process in the larger interest of the Somali nation. This
remains a major challenge confronting the international
community.

As part of this challenge, it is imperative for the
international community to deny these leaders of the
means to wage war, by continuing to maintain and to
more vigorously enforce the arms embargo on Somalia,
as established by resolution 733 (1992). We should be
mindful that the civil war could not have been
prolonged without the illegal flow and easy availability
of arms into Somalia, and we should remind ourselves
of our continuing responsibility in this respect.

Malaysia continues to be deeply concerned about
the dire humanitarian situation in Somalia and has
expressed its appreciation to the efforts of international
aid agencies and other relief organizations which have
provided succour to the people of Somalia. We
condemn the continuing acts of violence against
humanitarian personnel and call on all armed groups to
fully cooperate with humanitarian relief efforts and
guarantee the safety and freedom of all aid workers.

My delegation believes that it is fitting and timely
for the Council to pronounce itself once again on the
issue of Somalia and to reiterate its strong support for
the efforts for a political settlement made by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and to endorse and support the Djibouti peace
initiative. Its unambiguous support of the peace
initiative will be a clear manifestation of the Council's
and the Organization's commitment and active
involvement in the important area of peacemaking,
which we feel should be pursued in the current state of
no-war no-peace in Somalia so as to prevent the
recurrence of a full-blown war.

That window of opportunity may not last long.
We need to manifest the Council's willingness to
assume its responsibilities under the Charter and
reinvigorate its role in partnership with the regional
actors, such as IGAD and the Organization of African
Unity. We should not allow the Somali people to
succumb to despair and a sense of helplessness. We
must give them renewed hope and confidence for the
future and strengthen their will to support the peace
initiative without intimidation from their leaders. We
must generate support for the dynamic that has been
created by the Djibouti peace initiative and encourage
and support its initiator and facilitator, President
Guelleh, in his commendable and determined efforts.
We cannot afford to be half-hearted in our approach. It
is time for the international community to get out of
the "Somali syndrome" that has affected us for so long,
for we cannot let the people of Somalia down.

