Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2304 (2016) today, Friday, August 12, which
marks the end of the current mandate of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). In doing so,
the Security Council is responding to the earnest pleas
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) Plus Extraordinary Summit, which, in
paragraph 11 of its communique, urged the Security
Council to immediately extend the UNMISS mandate
with a revised mandate that includes deployment of a
regional protection force. We therefore answered the
appeal, and the Council has done its job.

The excitement that accompanied the independence
of South Sudan gave way to tragic events, including
internally displaced persons and the loss of human
life, thereby making the civilian population the main
victims of a conflict that has overwhelmed them. That
turn of events had previously led the Security Council,
in resolution 2155 (2014), to place the protection of
civilians, in particular women and children, at the
heart of the UNMISS mandate. The same applies
to the subsequent resolutions 2223 (2015) and 2252
(2015). Therefore, the resolution we have just adopted
extends the mandate of UNMISS until 15 December by
adding a regional protection force, established for an
initial period that would conclude in December. That
is certainly a sign of our collective commitment and
sustained attention to following up the political and
security situation of that great country, South Sudan.

Senegal voted in favour of the resolution in order
to respond to the appeals of the Heads of State and
Government of the States members of IGAD to support
the resolution. The African Union Peace and Security
Council also endorsed IGAD's decision, and the
penholder of the resolution, the United States delegation,
recalled the Secretary-General's impassioned appeal
along these lines when he addressed the Council.
Through our vote, Senegal also helps the civilian
population of the sister Republic of South Sudan. The
resolution allows UNMISS to carry out its mandate
to protect civilians and commits the countries of the
region, the African Union Peace and Security Council
and IGAD to work together with the authorities of the
Republic of South Sudan to resolve this political crisis
and ensure the swift deployment of the force.

To conclude, the delegation of Senegal stresses the
key role of regional actors in achieving the objectives
of the peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions
established by the Council.

