Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me, Mr. President, to congratulate you and
the People's Republic of China on presiding over the
Security Council this month and to express my thanks
for the efforts you are making to organize the Council's
work. I would also like to thank the State of Bolivia
for its efforts during its presidency of the Council
last month.

It is my pleasure to welcome the briefing of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), Mr. Jan Kubis. I commend his tireless and
sincere work and that of his team. We are especially
grateful for his efforts and excellent leadership of the
work of UNAMI throughout the past years, which have
been full of challenges. I also would like to congratulate
his successor Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert. We look
forward to expanding bilateral cooperation with her to
serve the interests and needs of Iraq pursuant to the
mandate of UNAMI. We underscore our country's full
support for her.

My Government also wants to thank His Excellency
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for accepting
our request to extend the mandate of Mr. Kubis until
mid-January. We further thank the members of the
Security Council for supporting our request, which will
contribute to the continuation of the successes achieved
by the formation of the Government.

Iraqis have successfully concluded their
parliamentary elections. The political blocs and the Iraqi
Council of Representatives were an exemplary model
of democracy and peaceful transfer of power through
the election of His Excellency Mr. Barham Salih as
President of the Republic, as well as the formation of the
Government with Mr. Adil Abdul-Mahdi as the Prime
Minister, in addition to the selection of the Speaker
of the Council of Representatives Mr. Mohammad
Al-Halbousi within the time frame set out by the
Constitution. Those three events this year reflected a
desire to form an inclusive Government that represents
Iraq's social and political unity - a Government that
is able to meet the aspirations of the Iraqi people in the
upcoming phase.

The newly elected Government has adopted a
comprehensive ministerial plan based on security,
economic and social pillars, which will serve all Iraqi
citizens. I would like to summarize this plan in the
following points.

First, the Government will attach special attention to
the provision of basic services in the Basra governorate,
liberated areas and other Iraqi governorates. We will
give more attention to resolving pending issues with the
Kurdistan region, in particular with regard to issues of
oil and financial management. We will work to enhance
national identity and promote community participation
and the protection of human rights in order to achieve
social peace, stability and security.

Secondly, we will work to achieve development
and economic goals. We will implement a policy of
economic reform and carry out a transition from a
revenue economy to a market economy through the
implementation of development plans that target vital
economic sectors that directly influence citizens'
lives. We will provide support for the private sector
so that it will contribute to economic growth. We will
diversify our resources so that we do not rely heavily
on oil revenues.

Thirdly, we will establish a system of good
governance in Iraq through the implementation of
the good governance compact adopted by the Cabinet
in 2017, which stresses the importance of improving
our financial and operational performance and the
provision of services to citizens. In this regard, we hope
that friendly States will invest in the process of national
capacity-building.

Fourthly, we will continue to work hard and
with resolve, in cooperation with all actors, to fight
corruption in all its forms and manifestations, as it is
one of the main obstacles to good governance in Iraq.

Fifthly, we will work to strategically allocate
financial resources based on a programme that
prioritizes the reform of public financial management,
which is one of the Iraqi Government's main priorities.

Sixthly, we will follow up on the outcome of the
International Conference for the Reconstruction of
Iraq, hosted by the sisterly State of Kuwait. We urge
friendly States to fulfil their pledges, as we have high
hopes for that outcome. The reconstruction of Iraq is
no less important than fighting terrorism. We call on
the international community to support Iraq and its
Government in the reconstruction of infrastructure in
all Iraqi cities. That is an important and crucial element
in achieving economic prosperity in the country.

Iraq is at the threshold of a new phase following
our victory in the justified war against the terrorist
gangs of Da'esh. This requires support and cooperation
so that we can tackle the challenges of the post-Da'esh
phase. Iraq has natural and human resources that will
enable us to become a developed country. We should
therefore focus on achieving political, economic,
security and social stability as a prerequisite for
achieving sustainable development, promoting rights
and freedoms and achieving social justice.

My Government is stepping up its efforts to
eliminate all terrorist cells and to prevent their return in
any form or under any name. Therefore, we will attach
special importance to the ongoing capacity-building
of our armed forces in all its categories, including
the army, the police, the counter-terrorism apparatus,
Peshmerga and the popular mobilization forces. We
insist on prohibiting any military or armed formations
outside State control.

We are coordinating with the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. In that connection,
this month my Government launched several counter-
terrorism projects, including youth capacity-building,
providing employment for youth, combating the
financing of terrorism and violent extremism through
strategic contacts, and prohibiting weapons of mass
destruction. Those projects meet 4 of the 16 priorities
that were identified by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and adopted by the Government of Iraq
in 2015.

The awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to Nadia
Murad, an Iraqi citizen, is an acknowledgement by
the world of the tragedy of Yazidis and all victims
of terrorism and takfiri discourse in Iraq. The award
honoured her courage and perseverance to defend the
usurped rights, as well as the steadfastness of Iraqis in
countering terrorism and extremism.

Iraq derives strength from its cultural, religious
and ethnic diversity, as well its rich history. We need all
strata of society to rebuild and achieve stability in the
post-Da'esh period so that we can maintain the unity
and stability of the country. Since 2003, successive
Governments have worked to uphold and protect those
principles, which we have done by adhering to our
Constitution and applicable laws created to guarantee
protection and decent living standards for all.

In this context, we find it odd that the Secretary-
General includes strange references to racial
discrimination in his report (S/2018/975). Racial
discrimination does not exist in Iraq. These references,
particularly in the light of the delicate circumstances
in which my country finds itself, constitute a serious
precedent that could undermine social peace. All
Iraqis enjoy their civil and political rights, which are
guaranteed by the Constitution and national legislation.
There is no discrimination against any social group.
Discriminatory discourse does not exist in Iraq.
The new Government will continue to apply the
same approach to humanitarian solutions for the return
of the families of Da'esh terrorist gangs. We are giving
priority to their psychological and mental rehabilitation
and their reintegration into their communities, once we
are sure that they have been rehabilitated. In this regard,
competent authorities in Iraq are considering a plan of
action to prevent the recruitment of children that has
been submitted by the United Nations country team.

We are fully aware that we must not overlook
the important role of Iraqi women and their efforts
to restore stability and achieving community
reconciliation in the liberated areas. A conference was
held in Baghdad to launch the Iraqi national action
plan on resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security. The national action plan will enhance the
role and responsibilities of Iraqi women in support of
post-Da'esh peacebuilding. We are working to include
women in the new Iraqi Government at all levels and to
the greatest extent possible.

My country faces many difficulties and challenges,
primary among which is the lack of medical and
technical capacity to clear landmines and unexploded
ordnance, which remain among the principal hindrances
to the return of internally displaced families to the
liberated areas. In this regard, we stress once again the
urgent need to support the work of the United Nations
Mine Action Service. We urge donor States to continue
to support Iraq in mine-clearance.

My Government believes that certain countries,
including Iraq, that have suffered from terrorism and
serious crimes committed by criminal groups and
terrorist gangs turn to capital punishment as one element
of achieving justice for the victims and their families,
in accordance with article 6.2 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. It is a sovereign
right of those States to do so. Capital punishment in
Iraq is related to terrorist crimes. We apply fair and
thorough trial procedures, taking into consideration the
right of the accused to defend themselves and appeal.
In that regard, we note that Iraq's penal code does not
include provisions that cover international crimes, such
as war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
We are working hard to finalize draft legislation on
those particular crimes. This legislation would apply to
the crimes committed by the Da'esh terrorists.

My Government is working to establish strategic
partnerships with regional and international actors
based on common interest in order to promote Iraq's
status in the international community and resolve
pending issues with neighbouring countries and
others. We look forward to achieving peace, security
and development. We enjoy a relationship of joint
cooperation with the riparian States so that we can
achieve a fair and equitable sharing of benefits based
on the principles of international law. That would avert
regional tension and instability. In this regard, Iraq
expects UNAMI to play an active role, in accordance
with its mandate.

In connection with enhancing bilateral relations
with neighbouring States, Iraq looks forward to
reaching an equitable joint formula for water-sharing
quotas with those States, as a result of the great pressure
exerted on the Tigris and Euphrates basin by climate
change, competition and inequitable use of joint water
resources. A large percentage of Iraqi land is under
the threat of desertification due to climate change and
water scarcity, which would clearly have a negative
impact on the fertility of the land.

Iraq underscores once again that we will not accept
the use of our territories by groups, whether they reside
in those territories or are merely passing through, to
launch attacks against neighbouring countries. In
return, we hope that those States will act in accordance
with international law and the Charter of the United
Nations while respecting our sovereignty. We hope that
future reports of the Secretary-General will include
elements on the impact of unilateral measures and
violations by certain States that would lead to political
and security instability in Iraq.

We would like to stress once again the good
fraternal relations we enjoy with the State of Kuwait. My
Government is working to improve this relationship at
the political and economic levels. It is worth mentioning
that the President of the Republic of Iraq, Mr. Barham
Salih, chose Kuwait as the site of his first official visit
outside the country, on 11 November. This attests to the
importance of Kuwait to Iraq. We are working to close
the files pending between the two States, including the
Kuwaiti National Archive, and submitted a package of
television archives to Kuwait on 12 November.

My country is committed to making every effort
to progress on the file of Kuwaiti prisoners and
missing persons. We are striving to honour in full our
commitments under resolution 2107 (2013), including
by determining the facts surrounding the remaining
Kuwaiti prisoners and missing persons and third-country
nationals. Most recently, the Ministry ofDefence called
on all Iraqi citizens to provide information on the
remains of Iraqi or Kuwaiti citizens who went missing
in the 1991 war, in addition to Kuwaiti property. We
have also run advertisements urging them to provide
such information.

I note that the mechanism is pursuing excavation
and exploration work under the supervision of the
International Committee of the Red Cross. We thank
France, the United States and the United Kingdom for
providing the mechanism with maps. We hope that the
United Nations will allow the mechanism to use ground-
penetrating radar and provide technical support, despite
the obstacles pertaining to the mechanism's limited
budget.

In conclusion, the new Government of Iraq
is determined to implement the ministerial plan
identifying the national and social priorities of Iraq and
its citizens We hope that the international community
will continue to support us as we seek to ensure the
stability and prosperity of Iraq and its people.

Finally, we reiterate our thanks to Mr. Kubis for
his years of service and wise leadership of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. We are grateful for
the work of his team in Iraq and New York to assist Iraq
within the mandate of the Mission. We look forward to
working with Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert and wish
her and her team every success.

The meeting rose at 12.05 pm.
