Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Mr. Haile Menkerios, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, and Mr. Raisedon
Zenenga, Director of the Africa II Division of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, for their
briefings. I welcome the presence of Mr. Efthimios
Mitropoulos, Secretary-General of the International
Maritime Organization, and thank him for his briefing.
In addition, I welcome the Permanent Representative of
Somalia and the Permanent Observer of the African
Union (AU) and thank them for their briefings.

China is following closely the developments in
Somalia. We appreciate the earnest efforts of the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) to promote
political reconciliation in Somalia. Not long ago, the
TFG and the Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia
(ARS) held negotiations and reached an agreement in
Djibouti. We welcome that development and highly
appreciate the efforts of Special Representative
Ould-Abdallah in that regard.

The priority now is to ensure swift
implementation of the agreement. We earnestly appeal
to all relevant political factions in Somalia to heed the
Somali people's aspirations to peace, to place national
interests above all other considerations and to strive to
truly put the political reconciliation process on a
substantive track at an early date.

We are deeply concerned at the grave security
situation in Somalia. The international community
must work vigorously to help Somalia improve its
security situation while supporting the country's peace
process. China highly appreciates the important role
played by the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) in improving the security situation in
Somalia. Whether AMISOM. can perform its duties
smoothly under the current circumstances is crucial to
the security situation.

In his report (S/2008/709), the Secretary-General
calls on Member States that have committed to sending
troops to AMISOM. to fulfil their commitments as soon
as possible. He also calls on the international
community to provide financial and logistical support
to AMISOM. China appreciates and supports his
appeal. In 2007, at the request of the AU, China
provided $300,000 to assist AMISOM. in its
peacekeeping operation in Somalia. China will
continue to give positive consideration to such requests
from the AU.

China consistently maintains that the United
Nations should be actively engaged on the Somali
issue. We call on the Security Council to heed the
strong appeal of the Somali Government and the AU
and to send United Nations peacekeeping troops to
Somalia as soon as possible to take over from the AU
peacekeeping Mission there. In that regard, we call on
the Secretariat to put forward a concrete plan and
submit it to the Council. At the same time, we call on
all factions in Somalia to work actively to create
conditions in the country that would support the early
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation.

We have taken note of the ongoing consultations
between the Secretary-General and the affected
countries on the deployment of an international
stabilization force to Somalia. If constituted promptly,
such a force could serve as a transition to the United
Nations peacekeeping operation and could contribute
to our response to the security situation in Somalia. We

08-6107]
encourage the Secretary-General to continue his efforts
in that regard.

Piracy off the coast of Somalia is increasing and
poses a grave threat to the security of international
navigation and the delivery of international
humanitarian assistance. Since the beginning of the
year, the Security Council has adopted resolutions
1816 (2008) and 1838 (2008) on the issue. That not
only shows the international community's sense of
urgency in its resolve to combat piracy with concerted
efforts, but also lays the legal foundation for the fight
against piracy off the coast of Somalia.

As piracy is a challenge to all countries, meeting
that challenge requires strengthened international
coordination. China expects the United Nations to play
a leading role in that regard. We also believe that the
piracy issue is merely a symptom of Somalia's deep-
seated political and social crisis.

Piracy cannot be effectively eliminated unless the
domestic crisis in Somalia is resolved. The
international community's concern about the piracy off
Somalia's coast should not distract our attention from
the root cause of the increase in piracy. The
international community should continue to work to
find a comprehensive solution to the question of
Somalia.

