Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would like to express
our deep appreciation to our colleague, the Permanent
Representative of Brazil, for his skilful leadership of
the Security Council mission to Haiti - although I was
not present in the mission - at this particularly
important junction in Haiti's long quest for security,
political and social stability and development. It was
both appropriate and necessary that the international
community, through the Security Council, conveyed to
the people and the leaders of Haiti its long-term
commitment and continued support to their legitimate
dreams and aspirations.

We wish to extend our thanks to the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
We commend it for its stabilizing role and for the work
it carries out under extremely difficult circumstances.
At the same time, we unequivocally condemn all
attacks against it and against other international
personnel, especially those with a humanitarian task.
Last but not least, we should not forget the tireless
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Valdes.

The report before us (5/2005/302) accurately
reflects the Security Council's thoughts and
observations with respect to the situation in Haiti and
the way forward. I shall make only three short points.

First, the political landscape in Haiti is highly
complex. A truly representative and legitimate
Government and the smooth transfer of power on
7February 2006 are crucial first steps towards the
normalization of the situation and the stabilization of
the country. Elections must take place according to the
established timetable, and they must be free, fair,
democratic and open to all political parties that
publicly renounce violence.

Secondly, the problems faced by Haiti are huge
and deeply rooted. Solutions are not easy. No one is
expecting those problems to be miraculously solved by
an election process, a political dialogue or international
assistance alone. Institutional reform and development,
especially in the judicial and penal sectors; respect for
human rights and the rule of law, especially with
respect to impunity and the implementation of the rules
of due process; dealing with ecological disasters;
addressing urgent and basic humanitarian needs; and
pursuing development goals: these demand long-term
hard work and commitment.

Thirdly, poverty has led to violence and
instability, which cannot be reversed without injecting
massive, immediate aid. We therefore appeal to all
donors, big and small, to disburse the funds pledged at
the International Donors Conference on Haiti, held in
July 2004, and at the Cayenne follow-up meeting.

As we have said before, MINUSTAH is in Haiti
for the long term, and its main role is not limited to
security but includes helping, along with United
Nations agencies in the country, to foster economic
development in the framework of the international
community's long-term commitment to the people of
Haiti.

