Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased that this meeting, devoted to the
situation in Guinea-Bissau, is being held under your
dynamic leadership, Madam President. We appreciate
your vision of the problems that concern us now,
particularly problems of cooperation and development
assistance. My delegation also wishes to congratulate
your country's delegation on having taken the initiative
to hold this meeting.

I should also like to welcome the presence of the
important delegation of Guinea-Bissau, led by the
Vice Prime Minister.

Members will recall the tireless efforts made
during the first crisis that occurred in Guinea-Bissau by
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Community of Portuguese-
speaking Countries to put an end to the civil war and to
restore normal constitutional life in that country. These
efforts, which were supported by the rest of the
international community, have allowed the restoration
of peace and the holding of democratic elections in the
country in November 1999 and January 2000.
However, we must stress that Guinea-Bissau has been
totally exhausted by this ordeal, with a chaotic
economic situation, weakened institutions and
thousands of refugees outside the country.

It is precisely at a time when the international
community has been trying to find solutions to
consolidate the fragile peace obtained and to ease the
suffering of the fraternal people of Guinea-Bissau that
new events have occurred, thus aggravating the very
disquieting situation of the country. The former junta's
refusal to accept the newly established institutions is
clear for all to see. Just a few days ago these people
who sparked the initial events tried once again to call
into question the already precarious political
equilibrium in the country. For the Government of the
Republic of Guinea, the situation that Guinea-Bissau is
experiencing must be taken into account by the
Security Council in its concern to ensure stability in
West Africa, an area already severely affected by many
internal conflicts.

This is also, and above all, an opportunity to
implement the relevant recommendations of the
Brahimi report, a report which I welcome and which,
since its approval, has already been the subject of in-
depth study by the Security Council for its effective
implementation. The latest events in Guinea-Bissau
should be understood as an indication of the need to
fully take into account all stages of conflict settlement,
particularly disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and the necessary parallel measures. My
delegation is pleased that this View is shared by several
other delegations.

Consequently, all appropriate measures should be
considered by the Council to restore and consolidate
peace and security in Guinea-Bissau, particularly
neutralizing the troublemakers and adopting effective
parallel measures to promote national reconciliation,
pursue political dialogue and relaunch the economy,
which has already been hit hard by this series of
unfortunate events. The achievement of all of these
objectives will require the effective engagement of the
international community, in particular the international
economic and financial institutions. In this context, I
should like to welcome the presence of the
representative of the World Bank.

The Republic of Guinea, which is linked by
history and geography with Guinea-Bissau, will
provide its full support for the achievement of the
objectives of national reconciliation in that country.

