Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like once again to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Jan Egeland, for the complete
briefing, his third, on the humanitarian situation in
Africa, which clearly shows the critical situation facing
many populations in that continent.

Given the seriousness of the situation, we need to
ask ourselves the source of this recurring humanitarian
crisis and why it takes place repeatedly. While it is true
the reasons are deeply rooted in history relating to the
continent as a whole, today they are also related to
political elements that have been made worse by
climatic disasters, famine, long-standing diseases such
as malaria and cholera and newer pandemics such as
HIV/AIDS that still have no immediate solution.

Unfortunately, Mr. Egeland's report reaffirmed
the existence of continuing humanitarian crises in,
among other areas, the Great Lakes region, Zimbabwe,
Malawi, Niger and, as we have heard on a number of
occasions, Darfur.

In this regard, we wish once again to stress the
need for the Council to bear particularly in mind the
human dimension of conflict. We cannot remain
indifferent to the suffering of innocent civilians or to
violations of human rights or international
humanitarian law. We, therefore, affirm that no security
consideration can override the obligation of all States
to comply with those norms.

Similarly, we believe it vital to emphasize that
parties to a conflict also have a direct responsibility to
ensure respect for international humanitarian law,
whatever the circumstances may be.
In the light of Mr. Egeland's comments, we
would like to raise the following points. First of all, we
are particularly concerned about the relationship
between recent incidents affecting the safety of
humanitarian staff and the difficulties encountered by
those humanitarian workers in gaining access to needy
populations.

In that context, we should not underestimate the
seriousness of the attacks against humanitarian workers
in recent months in northern Uganda and Darfur, as
well as their practical impact on access to affected
peoples. In addition to the criminality of those
attacks- which fall under the purview of the
International Criminal Court - we should recall that
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, the Court's Prosecutor, referred
to the issue last Monday during his briefing to the
Council. We must underscore the fact that, in
resolution 1296 (2000), the Council expressed its
readiness to adopt appropriate measures in cases where
assistance to civilians is obstructed, including
evaluating situations in which impeding free access
may constitute a threat to international peace and
security.

Secondly, we are closely following with great
attention and concern the situation of various groups of
refugees and internally displaced persons. We realize
the sensibilities that raising the issue of displaced
persons may arouse, but we cannot forget that
populations of displaced civilians are among the most
vulnerable groups in conflict situations. It should be
recalled that the Council has a subsidiary role to
protect those people.

With regard to the specific situations mentioned
by Mr. Egeland, we would also like to know his views
regarding a possible agreement in the context of the
Abuja process, including how he believes that could
affect the critical humanitarian situation in Darfur and
its possible impact on northern Africa.

In conclusion, we would like to say that
establishing a new body within the United Nations may
help to resolve, or at least alleviate, humanitarian
situations, in particular on the African continent.

We would also like once again to express our
gratitude to Mr. Egeland for his efforts to improve the
situation for civilian populations. We reiterate
Argentina's support for his ongoing work to provide
protection for civilians in armed conflicts.

