Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We are
pleased by the presence, at this Security Council
meeting on West Africa, of the French Minister
Delegate for Cooperation and Francophonie,
Mr. Pierre-Andre Wiltzer, and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Ghana, Nana Akufo-Addo, and the other
officials who have taken the floor, including the
Executive Secretary of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS).

Cross-border regional problems generate
instability and tend to perpetuate tension and the
effects of conflict. In West Africa, these problems have
proven to be resilient even after the critical phase of a
conflict is over. Cross-border regional problems in
West Africa go beyond the aspects that were addressed
in the presidential statement of 25 July 2003
(S/PRST/2003/12). Indeed, the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons and the use of child soldiers
and of mercenaries, which are subjects of the
Secretary-General's recommendations and which we
are discussing today, should be added to other matters
which are equally critical for the region's stability,
such as HIV/AIDS, massive refugee flows and human
rights violations.

All the recommendations that are formulated in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2004/200) have
something in common: they require a coordination of
efforts. We believe that the international community's
role in this area is one of facilitation and support, since
it cannot supplant the role of the States that are directly
involved, which hold the greatest responsibility for
tackling these problems. This is especially relevant in
the light of the regrettable acts of violence that have
recently taken place in Cote d'Ivoire, involving the
very sectors of that country that must ultimately
implement the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.

We are in the initial stages of a process that must
incorporate those States that are directly concerned, the
regional and subregional organizations, the United
Nations and civil society. We must pursue a
comprehensive regional approach that incorporates
preventive action to counter these cross-border
problems. A central element in dealing with regional
cross-border problems is the coordination that must be
carried out by the United Nations Operation in cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI), the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL) and the United Nations Office for
West Africa. This point has already begun to be
incorporated in Security Council mandates.
Coordination between the United Nations and
ECOWAS should also be considered as part of this
effort.

Among the Secretary-General's recommendations,
I would like to highlight the importance placed on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes and on the need for these programmes to
tackle cross-border problems as part of a regional
strategy. Increasingly, DDR programmes are a central
component in designing peace agreements. For that
reason, DDR must be a priority instrument in tackling
cross-border regional problems.

Lastly, we underscore the fact that, in order to
tackle the basic problems involved in cross-border
matters, there must be a greater involvement of
regional and subregional organizations within the
framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter. The African
Union, ECOWAS and the Mano River Union should
assume a dominant role in this area.
