Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Allow me, on behalf of the
Jamaican delegation, to say how pleased we are to see
you, Sir, the Foreign Minister of Bangladesh, presiding
over the deliberations of the Security Council. We also
wish to thank the Secretary-General for his statement, in
which he set the framework for this debate and our future
action on the humanitarian aspects of issues before the
Council. We particularly welcome this open debate, as it
provides opportunities for Member States to express their
views, and we believe that this will provide a valuable
input into the Council's work.
It has become increasingly clear that while severe
suffering among civilian populations may be a
consequence of armed conflict, such large-scale suffering
can pose a serious threat to international peace and
security. In fact, almost all the situations before the
Security Council for consideration have a humanitarian
dimension either in a direct or indirect manner. The
Council must therefore address these issues with the
greatest degree of urgency.

The tragic situation emanating from deliberate
attacks against civilians, humanitarian workers and other
non-combatants rests at the heart of today's discussions
and demonstrates a clear need for the Council to continue
to strongly insist upon full respect at all levels for the
principles of international humanitarian and human rights
law. The Council must focus on the question of impunity
by emphasizing the need for States to bring to justice
those who target civilians, and we must continue to
cooperate with the international criminal tribunals, which
constitute important mechanisms for deterring gross
violations of international human rights and humanitarian
law.

 

It is unfortunate that the practice of impeding
humanitarian access to civilians and the deliberate targeting
of humanitarian personnel have increased in several areas
of conflict. The denial of humanitarian access by parties to
armed conflict is unacceptable and should be condemned in
the strongest terms. The attention given to this issue by the
Council during our discussions last month was therefore
very timely. While States have the primary responsibility to
protect and provide for civilians within their territory and
to ensure the safe, unimpeded access of humanitarian
workers to civilians in need, the Council has a critical role
to play in helping to create a secure environment for such
assistance.

The role of peacekeepers in preventing and containing
humanitarian crises, collaborating with humanitarian
agencies in providing safe environments for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, monitoring ceasefire agreements
and separating combatants from non-combatants has been
vital in assisting with the protection of civilians. This role
requires close cooperation between the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the representatives of
all the funds and programmes and the special
representatives of the Secretary-General. In this regard, we
wish to note the progress that has been achieved with
regard to the actions taken following the Secretary-
General's reform initiatives.
For humanitarian assistance to be effective, we must
be able to count on the cooperation of the parties involved
in the conflict.

The effectiveness of humanitarian action by the
Security Council related to humanitarian situations hinges
on several factors, including the complete neutrality and
impartiality of humanitarian workers while respecting the
laws and customs of the countries in which they operate,
the proper training of humanitarian staff and peacekeeping
personnel, the provision of adequate financial resources, of
which the Secretary-General made mention, the need to
ensure the protection of humanitarian personnel, the
continued provision of assistance to populations in need and
the inclusion in relevant peace negotiations and agreements
of specific humanitarian elements which take account of the
needs and special circumstances of civilian populations.
This will help to advance the process of reconciliation,
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration of armed
personnel and the resettlement of refugees and internally
displaced persons.

Action on humanitarian grounds must not be seen as
a substitute for action to resolve conflicts at the political
level. Humanitarian action on its own cannot resolve
conflicts which, by their nature, arise from political
differences. Humanitarian action that is not complemented
by diplomatic or political solutions can, in fact,
undermine the effectiveness of humanitarian activities and
may even make the situation worse.

In this regard, there are several considerations that
must be given priority attention. First, there is no doubt
that the elimination of humanitarian crises will enhance
efforts by the Council to address the root causes of
conflicts, which give rise to these complex humanitarian
emergencies.

Secondly, greater attention to our role in conflict
prevention is essential. The Council must react promptly
to deploy preventive peacekeeping missions, where these
are appropriate, and cooperate with other organs of the
United Nations in order to adopt more integrative
approaches to prevent the escalation of conflicts.

Thirdly, the link between the economic, social and
developmental aspects of conflicts is crucial.

Fourthly, the Council must develop better
coordination with relevant bodies within the United
Nations system and the Bretton Woods institutions for
continued post-conflict reconstruction, rehabilitation and
peace-building efforts to ensure sustainable peace. There
is also a need for the Council to support moves from
humanitarian action to addressing long-term economic and
social development.

Fifthly, the Council must bear in mind that, while
sanctions can be an effective tool to punish those who
deliberately violate international law, they can also have
a severe impact on civilians. The Council's attention to
the application of smart sanctions, which punish those
they are intended to punish while not resulting in serious
humanitarian consequences, is therefore important to our
debate.

In conclusion, my delegation again wishes to thank
you, Mr. President, and the Permanent Representative of
Bangladesh, for the timely initiative in convening this
debate and for the preparation of the draft presidential
statement which the Council will adopt later today. We
are confident that the Council will redouble its efforts to
address those humanitarian aspects of armed conflicts
which continue to pose a threat to international peace and

 

security and that we will do our best to ensure an
appropriate response in the interests of humanity.

