The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

It is a huge honour to preside over a Security Council
meeting at a time when we have a unique opportunity
to bring peace and stability to the lives of so many. I
am grateful to the Special Representative and Special
Envoy for their words to the Council this morning. I
would like to pay particular tribute to Mary Robinson
for her determined and dedicated pursuit ofpeace in the
Great Lakes region. We are fortunate that we have such
an excellent replacement in Mr. Said Djinnit. I also
thank Martin Kobler for his tireless work to implement
the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and I endorse his words on
the killings at Mutarule. The protection of civilians is
central to MONUSCO's work and it is vital that United
Nations peacekeepers fulfil that responsibility.

We have all often said that there currently exists a
rare opportunity to break the cycle of violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. But
it is worth reminding ourselves why that moment of
opportunity exists.

In February 2013, in Addis Ababa, when the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
was signed, few imagined the progress we see today:
progress against armed groups, where over 4,000
individuals have come forward for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; progress by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
towards implementing its commitments under the
Framework, including a national dialogue to build
broader engagement; and progress on preventing sexual
violence in conflict, with the implementation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo national action plan
led by the President's personal representative. That
progress has been led by the region.

I want to be clear and to emphasize the importance
I attach to the region leading the work and my gratitude
for the progress that has been delivered thanks to the
commitment and energy within the region.

Today, because of the progress made so far and the
moment of opportunity we now have, we can imagine
a position in two years time where all armed groups,
including the Forces democratiques de liberation du
Rwanda (F DLR), are no longer a threat and there is an
end to impunity; the completion of the electoral cycle
in accordance with a Constitution in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is achieved; and where
MONUSCO'S drawdown is a realistic proposition, with
the Congolese security forces taking an ever greater
responsibility for the country's security.

But to seize the opportunity with the determination
and vigour it deserves and to make progress at the
speed it deserves, what we need to achieve by the end
of the year is clear: the full and swift implementation
of the Kampala dialogue - particularly the status
of repatriation of former Mouvement du 23 mars
combatants and the full and swift disarmament of the
FDLR. As the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2014/450), they continue to pose a significant threat.
We have mandated MONUSCO to use unilateral force
to neutralize all armed groups. We should be prepared
to use it if the disarmament process fails to be swift
or credible, in the same way we have used it to secure
progress against other armed groups that pose an equal
threat to the protection of civilians. There should
also be the full and swift implementation of national
commitments, including the wider reforms needed in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to consolidate
the progress made so far.
We will have lost this opportunity if in two years
time we cannot look back to further, real and tangible
progress. Despite the excellent progress achieved, the
report of the Secretary-General is clear that in many
instances progress is too slow and extremely fragile.

We must stay strong in pursuit of peace. Three
principles should underpin our work for the next two
years, so that the opportunity becomes reality: first,
support for the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo as it undertakes a programme of reform
and implements its national commitments; secondly,
support for the regional processes as they cooperate
across borders; and, thirdly, support for MONUSCO as
it continues to transform and become more effective at
fulfilling its mandate.

The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the wider region and MONUSCO bear a
huge responsibility for progress upon their shoulders
as do, indeed, all members of the Council. Through
the interventions that will be made during the debate, I
hope they will know that they have the full support of
the Security Council. When the Council next reviews
progress, I hope that it will be to hear how progress has
been full and swift.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

