Mr. Llorenty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes to congratulate
you once again, Sir, as well as the Permanent Mission
of Kuwait, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February.
We are also grateful for the briefing provided by the
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu. We also
wish to acknowledge the letter sent by the Secretary-
General (S/2018/84) concerning the periodic report
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW).

Bolivia believes that there can be no justification
for the use of chemical weapons, regardless of
circumstances and by whomsoever committed, as such
use is a serious violation of international law and poses
a grave threat to international peace and security. We
therefore categorically condemn the use of chemical
weapons or substances as weapons, as we deem this an
unjustifiable and criminal act, wherever, whenever and
by whomsoever committed.

In that context, we express our grave concern about
the ongoing reports of the use of chemical weapons
in the Syrian Arab Republic, especially in eastern
Ghouta. Ifthat is confirmed, the Council should remain
united in order to ensure that the perpetrators are held
accountable and brought to justice, so that there is no
impunity for their actions.

We commend the coordination between the OPCW
and the United Nations Office for Project Services in
all of the arrangements aimed at making possible the
destruction of the two remaining facilities as well as
the preparedness of the Syrian Government to achieve
this end. We call on the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to cooperate with the OPCW on this initiative,
as well as during the second inspection of the Syrian
Scientific Studies and Research Centre.

We encourage the Fact-finding Mission to continue
its investigation so that, in accordance with its mandate,
it can investigate, in the most objective, methodical
and technical manner, reports of the use of chemicals
weapons on Syrian territory. In that regard, we highlight
the latest visit to the city of Damascus during January,
and we will await the results thereof.

We call on all parties involved to cooperate fully
as well as to provide viable and reliable information,
so that an effective investigation of all of the ongoing
cases can be conducted as soon as possible.

Concerned about the reports of the use of chemical
weapons, we deem it essential to establish as soon as
possible an independent, impartial and representative
mechanism to carry out a full, reliable and conclusive
investigation of the cases referred by the Fact-finding
Mission that will make it possible to identify those
responsible for such acts. Nevertheless, if we want to
create a new, transparent accountability mechanism,
we have the major challenge and the responsibility
of not instrumentalizing the Security Council for
political ends.

In that vein, we view the Russian proposal as a
new and positive opportunity to reach this goal. We
therefore call on the members of the Council to commit
themselves to a process of purposeful negotiation, and
we echo the words of the Secretary-General in his letter
transmitting the current report, calling on the Security
Council to demonstrate unity on this issue, which is so
vital for the international community.

Finally, we reiterate that the only option for
resolving the conflict in Syria and prevent more people
from becoming victims is through an inclusive political
transition led by and benefiting the Syrian people
that respects their sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.
