Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2319 (2016) today, which renews the Joint
Investigative Mechanism for another year. I pay tribute
to Ms. Power for all her efforts and those of her team to
bring the Security Council together on such a vital issue.

I would also like to thank the members of the
Joint Investigative Mechanism for their tireless work,
which has so often been undertaken in very difficult
circumstances. We know without a doubt that the
Al-Assad regime and Da'esh used toxic chemicals as
weapons against civilians in Syria. Because ofthe Joint
Investigative Mechanism, we know that barrel bombs
loaded with chlorine were dropped by the regime on
unsuspecting men and women and children in Talmenes,
Sarmin and Qmenas, that sulfur mustard was used by
Da'esh against innocent people of Marea in August last
year, and that those responsible for war crimes remain

free and unpunished to this day.

Tragically, there is even more work ahead for the
Joint Investigative Mechanism. Despite all our efforts
and despite the pledges made by the Syrian regime
to destroy all of its stockpiles, these barbaric acts
involving chemicals continue. At least four cases are
currently being investigated by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), so today's
renewal is sadly necessary, and it will allow the Joint
Investigative Mechanism to continue its vital work
attributing responsibilities for these latest attacks.

It is not enough to know, however, that chemical
attacks have occurred, nor is it enough to know who
carried them out. What we need now is justice - for the
people of Marea, for the people of Talmenes, Sarmin and
Qmenas - and with thatjustice, an end to the impunity
that surrounds the perpetrators of those horrific attacks.
The OPCW and the Joint Investigative Mechanism have
been clear. It is now time for the Security Council to step
up and do its part. The continued use of chemicals as
weapons is in clear contravention of international norms
and laws and in clear violation of numerous resolutions
of the Council. If their use does not constitute a threat
to international peace and security I do not really know
what does.

We therefore have to act. Today we have taken a
valuable first step. We have shown welcome unity. We
have shown that we can find common purpose on this
matter. Let us use this momentum in the coming weeks
and months to ensure that those responsible for the use
of these weapons finally face justice.

