Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): The
situation in Somalia once again has the attention of the
Security Council, which has devoted today's debate to
that issue. First of all, Mr. President, I would like to
congratulate the United Kingdom on its accession to
the presidency of the Council for the month of March. I
also thank your delegation for choosing the situation in
Somalia as the subject of the first debate under its
presidency. I also welcome the presence in New York
of Under Secretary of State Bellingham in order to
preside over this debate. As well, I would like to thank
the Secretary-General and Ambassador Mahiga for
their very informative statements.

Taking place a few days following the holding of
the international conference on Somalia in London, on
23 February, this debate is testament to the
commitment and desire of the United Nations and the
international community to pursue their efforts aimed
at restoring peace and security in Somalia. We should
recall that the outcome of the conference provides a
guarantee of support for the federal transitional
authorities in the effective implementation of the road
map for the end of the transition, scheduled for August.
Togo believes that this dynamic of solidarity vis-a-vis
Somalia on the part of friendly countries and other
bilateral and multilateral partners will undoubtedly
have a positive impact on the future of a country that
has been ravaged my many years of war.

On 22 February, prior to the holding of the
London conference, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2036 (2012), which authorized increasing
the numbers and necessary logistical support for the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). Quite
clearly, the adoption of the resolution is a sign of
support for Somali officials, but it is also a signal to
them to shoulder their own responsibilities. It is
important that Somali officials continuously bear in

mind the fact that the numerous efforts made by the
international community are but support for the efforts
that they must themselves carry out to achieve the
broader goals in the areas of security, humanitarian
assistance, reconstruction and the economic
development of their country.

With regard to the process of promoting peace
and reconstruction in Somalia, my country believes
that the emphasis should be on strengthening the
capacities of national security forces so that they can
themselves ensure security and stability in the long
term, in cooperation with AMISOM. and after its
departure. Togo therefore encourages the
implementation of the specific programmes under way,
with the support of various State and institutional
stakeholders. In that regard, particular emphasis should
be placed on reforming the security, judicial and
humanitarian sectors.

With regard to the latter, given the number of
displaced persons, the needs are estimated to be quite
significant. Togo also urges the international
community to better coordinate humanitarian
assistance so that it can reach those in greatest need in
a timely manner and cover the entirety of the country.

Piracy along Somalia's coasts and in the Gulf of
Aden continues to post a serious threat to maritime
security and the economic development of the
countries of the region. Although the number of
successful acts of piracy has decreased significantly
owing to the specific measures taken, it is nevertheless
worrying to note that there are still many instances of
pirate attacks and hostage-taking, and that those now
extend beyond Somalia's coasts.

The resolve to adopt effective measures to
address those challenges, as called for in presidential
statement S/PRST/2012/4, just adopted by the Council,
sends a message of resolve on the part of the
international community to the armed groups and
perpetrators of acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea,
who must be dealt with without delay. Togo believes
that, within the range of appropriate responses that
must be brought to bear in the fight against that
scourge, there also needs to be a vision for a long-term
solution that will take into account the deeper causes of
the phenomenon. We therefore hope that the
international conference on Somalia that the
Government of Turkey has proposed to host in Istanbul
will explore those issues in greater depth.

To conclude, Togo congratulates the United

Kingdom for initiating the presidential statement

(S/PRST/2012/4) just adopted, which constitutes an

additional milestone in the actions taken by the United

Nations as part of the process of restoring security,
peace and stability in Somalia.

My country expresses its deep gratitude to the
countries of the subregion, in particular those that
contribute troops to AMISOM. We also thank the
partners of the African Union, especially the European
Union, which has provided AMISOM. with financial
and logistical support.

