Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): My delegation welcomes
you back to the Council, Mr. President, and we would like
to express from the outset our appreciation for the
important and, in a sense, ground-breaking role you are
personally playing in promoting and developing the
important issue that we are discussing today. I should also
be remiss if I did not acknowledge the important and
tireless work being done in this field by the General
Assembly, your Government, Sir, and the Governments of
Germany, the United Kingdom and Switzerland and other
institutions. Just this morning, we were able to participate
in an interesting and educative discussion on the
effectiveness of sanctions, which was organized by the
International Peace Academy.

Important as the process that we are studying today is,
my delegation cannot but have a sense that it is coming
almost too late, given the important function that sanctions
play in the arsenal of the Security Council in its role of
maintaining international peace and security. We firmly
believe that as time passes and situations change, so our
methods should change. When opportunities present
themselves which would allow us to improve our work, we
should be vigilant and ready to accept them immediately.
At the same time, if things are not working well, we should
be bold enough to admit it, and we should also be bold
enough to make the necessary changes to improve the
situation. Without a continuous and attentive evaluation
process, the Council will be found unprepared and unable
to effectively fulfil its mandate under the Charter.

As I said earlier, sanctions remain one of the most
important tools available to the Security Council in the
exercise of its mandate, but the range of sanctions regimes
in place today have had mixed effects and results so far.
Once the Council decides to adopt measures to impose
sanctions, it demands strict compliance by all States to
ensure effectiveness. However, deciding whether to
continue to enforce sanctions becomes a moral dilemma
when the unintended adverse humanitarian impact and the
damage and losses caused to third parties begin to
outweigh the political goals to be achieved. It is therefore
essential that the design of sanctions regimes should rest
on a clear policy framework and contain definite and
precise conditions for the maintenance or lifting of
sanctions. Not so long ago, in this very Chamber, during
the discussion on the humanitarian situation in Iraq, the
Secretary-General cautioned that, in that situation, the
United Nations runs the risk of losing the propaganda
battle as to who is responsible for the suffering of the
Iraqi people - the Iraqi Government or the United
Nations.

My delegation therefore fully supports the
establishment of a Security Council working group to
develop recommendations on how to improve the
effectiveness of United Nations sanctions. We strongly
believe that all aspects of sanctions should be considered
and evaluated by the working group to enable the
Council, in the end, to comprehensively address the issue.

Some of the important elements to be considered
should include the capacity of the United Nations
Secretariat, since its serious and sustained involvement
can enhance the effectiveness of sanctions. While it
already provides invaluable support to sanctions
committees, some areas need to be strengthened. Its staff
capacity needs to be dramatically strengthened to enable
it to effectively cope with the tasks at hand. Another area
is its ability to financially and logistically support visits
by Chairmen of sanctions committees to affected regions.
These visits have proved to be crucial in efforts to
enhance the effectiveness of sanctions. The visits by
Ambassador Fowler to southern Africa and Europe are
prime examples in this regard.

Furthermore, recommendations with regard to
humanitarian assessments before, during and after the
imposition of sanctions, to determine the potential
humanitarian impact and other negative unintended
consequences, should be developed. In addition, practical
measures to address the third-party impact of sanctions
should be developed. These parties should be heard by the
Council under the terms of Article 50 of the Charter, but
the solutions should include the provision of special
assistance to compensate for economic losses and adverse
social impact, if such parties are to be expected to fully
cooperate with United Nations sanctions.

 

The imposition of humanitarian exemptions would also
be of significant importance and immediate remedial value.
Such exemptions should apply to children, mothers and
other vulnerable groups, and take account of religious
considerations.

I have highlighted some of the aspects that, in my
delegations's opinion, can improve the effectiveness of
sanctions. However, history and numerous studies to date
have proved that sanctions failures are caused by a
combination of a wide range of factors.

Indeed, a review of the implementation of the
sanctions against UNITA reveals very limited success, and
this situation can be attributed to several factors. The
Council will be asking the working group to investigate
some of them. In retrospect, it can be seen that, in addition
to being intransigent, UNITA deceived the Council many
times through lying and false undertakings to abide by its
obligations under the Lusaka Protocol. In this way, it
effectively persuaded the Council not to implement wider
sanctions earlier. On the other hand, non-implementation of
sanctions by States and individuals presents a huge
challenge to the Security Council.

A better monitoring and enforcement regime could
have avoided this. Furthermore, a better and more reliable
data collection system, earlier in the process, with regard to
the huge influence of diamonds on the continuation of the
war, could have helped the process. Assistance to Member
States in the implementation of sanctions, in this and other
sanctions regimes, would also greatly contribute to the
effectiveness of sanctions.

Finally, my delegation believes that, with the
information and strategies available to us today, the Council
can obtain a better and more effective result with the
implementation of sanctions. This is even more relevant
since we intend to adopt a draft resolution on Angola,
hopefully tomorrow, which will be aimed at strengthening
the effectiveness of sanctions against UNITA.

