The Secretary-General: Before I turn to the
subject of this meeting, let me say a few words about
the appalling underground nuclear test conducted by
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

I strongly condemn Pyongyang's reckless act,
which shows outright disregard for the repeated call of
the international community that it refrain from further
provocative measures. The test is a clear and grave
violation of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council.

Together with the rest of the international
community, I have repeatedly called on the new
leadership in Pyongyang to give up its pursuit of
nuclear weapons, to address international concerns
through dialogue, and to start building confidence with
neighbouring countries, particularly the Republic of
Korea, and the international community. I have also
appealed to Pyongyang to focus its energies on ensuring
a better future for the country's people by addressing
the dire humanitarian and human rights situation.
Regrettably, my appeals have fallen on deaf ears.

I am profoundly concerned about the negative
impact of this act on regional stability. It is deplorable
that Pyongyang has chosen the path of defiance. This
third nuclear test by Pyongyang is a serious challenge
to global efforts to curb nuclear proliferation. The
Democratic People's Republic of Korea is the only

country that has carried out nuclear tests in the twenty-
first century. The authorities in Pyongyang should not
be under any illusion that nuclear weapons will enhance
their security. To the contrary, as Pyongyang pursues
nuclear weapons, it will suffer only greater insecurity
and isolation.

I am encouraged by the swift and overwhelming
international condemnation of this wanton act. This is a
direct challenge to the Security Council. It is absolutely
essential that the Council act and speak with one voice
and engage with the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea in a unified manner. I welcome the press
statement just issued by the members of the Council
in that regard. I will remain in close contact with all
concerned parties, and I stand ready to support their
efforts.

I thank the Republic of Korea for convening
today's debate and His Excellency Mr. Kim Sung-
hwan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Korea, for coming to participate in this very important
meeting.

Since the Security Council last addressed this issue
(see S/PV.6790), civilians have remained subject to
unacceptable threats to life and dignity in conflict zones
worldwide. Warring parties have continued to violate
human rights and international humanitarian law with
impunity. And the efforts of United Nations and other
humanitarian actors to provide assistance and protection
have been hampered by Violence. Every day, civilians
are killed or maimed in targeted or indiscriminate
attacks. Women, girls, men and boys are raped in front
of their families. Children and youths are abducted,
held in sexual slavery or compelled to take up arms and
inflict abuses on their own communities - scarring
them for life. Families are forced from their homes into
a state of desperation and dependency from which they
may never escape.

In Syria, every day provides a searing reminder
of the human cost of war. Four million people are in
urgent need of humanitarian assistance. More than
2 million people have fled their homes. Many lack even
the most basic services. Sexual violence is a constant
threat. The volatility of the security situation, logistical
challenges and bureaucratic constraints are hampering
the response effort. The international community needs
access to all areas so we can reach more people in need.

The situation in Syria is particularly acute and
intractable, but in Afghanistan, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mali, Myanmar, Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan and
elsewhere, civilians continue to suffer and die as parties
to conflict ignore their obligations to protect.

But, let us remember that the obligation does not rest
solely with warring parties. We all have a responsibility
to protect. Failure to protect civilians in armed
conflict can contribute directly to the commission
of atrocity crimes. Violence against civilians is also
unquestionably abetted by the free flow of weapons.
This underlines the importance of next month's arms
trade treaty negotiations. We urgently need a robust
and comprehensive agreement that addresses the
humanitarian impact of the poorly regulated trade in
arms.

My internal review panel on United Nations action
in Sri Lanka raised important issues concerning how
the United Nations and Member States could strengthen
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The
recommendations are undergoing internal review, and I
will report on them later this year.

In previous reports to the Council, I have welcomed
the informal experts group on the protection of civilians
as an important forum for keeping the Council informed
of protection developments on the ground. I encourage
this practice to continue and the Council to explore
ways to make greater use of the Group. My reports have
also recommended steps for enhancing the protection
of civilians that I would like to emphasize again.

First, all parties to conflict should avoid using
explosive weapons with wide-area effect in populated
areas. This includes roadside bombs, heavy weapons and
artillery, and air strikes. I urge the Council to recognize
and act on this fundamental humanitarian issue. My
next report will provide concrete recommendations for
consideration.

Secondly, the Council must emphasize that States
bear the primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians. Where there are peacekeeping missions, the
United Nations will do its utmost to support States to
fulfil their obligations, in line with our Human Rights
Due Diligence Policy. I urge the Council to take a strong
and visible lead in protecting civilians and pursuing
accountability for violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law. In this regard, I welcome
the debate triggered by the call of some Member States
for the Council to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.

Thirdly, States should recognize the need for
consistent engagement by humanitarian actors with all
relevant State and non-State actors. This is essential
to ensuring improved compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law, as well as safe
access to populations in need.

Fourthly, all relevant authorities should expedite
administrative, visa, travel and customs procedures
to facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of
relief consignments, equipment and personnel to
people in need of protection and assistance. We need
accountability for grave denials of access and for
attacks against humanitarian workers.

Fifthly, I urge the Council to make greater use
of commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions
mandated by the United Nations to investigate and verify
alleged violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. It is important for accountability,
justice and protection to support timely follow-up on
their findings.

Finally, the Council must ensure that peacekeeping
operations mandated with protecting civilians have
adequate resources. It is particularly important that
they be equipped to respond to conflict-related sexual
violence. States that contribute military and police
personnel to missions should be supported to ensure
that they are trained to be proactive in addressing the
unique vulnerability of women and children. That
includes partnering with human rights and other
civilian components to prevent and respond to human
rights and humanitarian law violations.

Next month, the Commission on the Status of
Women will address conflict-related sexual Violence as
part of its theme of "Ending violence against women".
I count on Member States to use the meeting to make
practical commitments to ending sexual and gender-
based Violence in all its forms.

Today's debate is an important opportunity for the
Council and Member States to reflect on the impact of
armed conflict on civilians and on the actions that need
to be taken to increase compliance with international
law and fulfil the Council's commitment to protection.
The Council's continued and consistent discussion of
this issue is essential. I urge Council members to bring
all their considerable powers to bear on reducing the
unacceptable toll that conflict is taking on civilians
every day.

