The President: I thank Ambassador Urbina for
his briefing.

I will now give a briefing in my capacity as
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities.

Ten years after the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1267 (1999), the threat posed by Al-Qaida
and the Taliban persists worldwide, and especially in
South Asia. At the same time, over the years this threat
has evolved considerably and we must ensure that the
existing sanctions regime against Al-Qaida and the
Taliban remains a relevant and effective tool in
countering terrorism. The current review pursuant to
resolution 1822 (2008) is an effective instrument to
ensure that the Committee's consolidated list of
individuals and entities associated with Al-Qaida and
the Taliban remains dynamic and accurately reflects the
current threat.

As the Council is well aware, in paragraph 25 of
resolution 1822 (2008) the Security Council directed
the Committee to review all the 488 names that were
on the consolidated list at the date of the adoption of
that resolution in order to ensure that the information is
as accurate as possible and that the listings remain
appropriate. The review process is one of the key
priorities of the Committee and a main focus of its
work.

In my last briefing to the Security Council in May
(S/PV.6128), I outlined the procedure for review.
Today, I would like to report on the progress achieved
so far, as well as on the current status of the review
process in the Committee.

As of today, the Committee has initiated the
review of 422 names, which were subdivided into four
groups, by sending these names to the respective
designating States and States of citizenship and/or
residence for review. The remaining 66 names will be
sent to reviewing States in the coming days. Once all
replies from reviewing States for a particular name on
the consolidated list have been received, and following
a one-month period in which each member of the
Committee and the Monitoring Team can provide
further input, the name is placed on the Committee's
agenda. When reviewing names in a Committee
meeting, each name is introduced by the Monitoring
Team and the Committee subsequently conducts a
thorough discussion of that entry. In particular, the
Committee evaluates all available information and
considers whether listings remain appropriate. It does
so on the basis of the "associated with" criteria for
listings set out in relevant resolutions. The Committee
also considers updating the consolidated list and/or the
narrative summaries.

During the review process, the need for further
information or clarification occasionally becomes
apparent, and the Committee and the Monitoring Team
use that opportunity to engage with reviewing States in
an effort to resolve any questions that have arisen.
Such follow-up discussions reinforce the review
process and also serve to improve the quality of the
list.
At the time of my last briefing, the first five
names had been placed on the Committee's agenda. As
of today, the Committee has discussed a total of 71
entries. In 50 cases, the listing was confirmed to
remain appropriate, while eight names, including well-
known cases such as Vinck, Sayadi, Nada and
Barakaat, have been de-listed as a result of their review
pursuant to resolution 1822 (2008). For 13 names, the
review is still pending as the Committee is of the view
that further information is necessary for it to conclude
its considerations.

In order to be able to successfully complete the
review process by 30 June 2010, the Committee very
much depends on the active cooperation and assistance
of Member States. Prompt replies are crucial, since the
review of a particular name in the Committee can be
undertaken only after the replies from all reviewing
States have been received. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank all States that have provided the
Committee with information, and I would also like to
call upon all reviewing States to do their utmost to
provide their valuable information in a timely manner.

It is my personal commitment to ensure that the
review process is conducted seriously and thoroughly.
The experience of the past several months has shown
that all members of the Committee share this
commitment and devote great efforts to this task, and I
am grateful for that.

In the spirit of transparency, I intend to continue
to regularly update Member States and the broader
public about the progress of the review, including
through periodic briefings, press releases and updates
on the Committee's web page.

I now wish to say some words on the narrative
summaries of reasons for listing. With the assistance of
the Monitoring Team, the Committee continues to
make narrative summaries of reasons for listing of all
entries on the consolidated list accessible on its web
site. Since the beginning of this year, a total of 164
narrative summaries have been approved for
publication on the Committee's web site. The
Monitoring Team has prepared the first drafts of
another 294 narrative summaries, which are currently
being reviewed by the designated States.

As of today, the consolidated list has 504 entries:
397 individuals 255 associated with Al-Qaida and
142 associated with the Taliban - and 107 entities
associated with Al-Qaida. Since my last briefing, the

 
10
Committee has added to the list the names of five
individuals associated with Al-Qaida. During the same
period, the Committee approved the de-listing of nine
entries - five individuals and four entities - of which
eight were in the framework of the review. I would like
to underscore that, apart from the review pursuant to
resolution 1822 (2008), listed individuals and entities
continue to have access to the focal point for de-listing.

Despite considerable progress, several challenges
regarding the consolidated list remain. There are
numerous entries that have very few identifiers and do
not contain sufficient information to allow for the
positive identification of the party concerned. For
example, for a number of individuals there is no full
name and no date of birth. For those entries, the
application of the sanctions measures is very difficult.

Another challenge concerns deceased persons.
The Committee knows about several individuals who
are reported or believed to be dead but who are still on
the list. In 27 cases the information about the death is
published on the consolidated list. The Committee is
currently discussing the possibility of a more flexible
procedure for the de-listing of deceased persons where
no assets are identified. At the same time we are
addressing the question of how best to ensure that the
remaining assets of deceased persons will not fall into
the hands of other listed persons. The review is an ideal
opportunity to check those entries, add additional
identifiers and remove from the list names for which
listing is not considered appropriate anymore.

In addition, in the last years, the sanctions regime
established under resolution 1267 (1999) has also
encountered increasing criticism by a number of States
and individuals because of procedural and human
rights concerns, especially regarding the right to be
heard and the lack of a review mechanism of, or
possibility to appeal against, the Committee's
decisions. National and regional courts are confronted
with a growing number of lawsuits. Currently there are
about 30 court cases around the world. The Committee
is aware of those challenges and, as mentioned in
resolution 1822 (2008), is committed to continue
improving its procedures in order to introduce more
elements of fairness and transparency in placing
individuals, groups and entities on the list and for
removing them, as well as for granting humanitarian
exemptions.
09-606 12
I would also like to draw attention to the ninth
report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team (S/2009/245) and the Committee's
position on the recommendations contained therein,
which was submitted to the Security Council in August
and has been posted on the Committee's website (see S/2009/427). In particular, the Committee focused
great attention on recommendations on how it might
improve the fairness and transparency of its
procedures, as well as on those recommendations
seeking to enhance the rapid dissemination of
information, required for the effective implementation
of sanctions measures. The Committee believes that the
implementation of these recommendations can further
improve the credibility, effectiveness and efficiency of
the sanctions regime.

The tenth report of the Monitoring Team
(S/2009/502) was submitted to the Committee at the
end of July. The Committee is currently considering
the Team's latest 21 recommendations and will, in due
course, submit a report to the Security Council with the
Committee's position vis-a-vis those recommendations.

Following the practice of previous Chairmen of
the Committee, I held an informal open briefing for all
interested Member States on 18 June. That briefing
offered an excellent opportunity to interact informally
with Member States, who are the Committee's most
important partners in improving implementation of the
sanctions measures.

On 28 October, the Committee met with
Mr. Martin Scheinin, United Nations Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms while countering
terrorism. The members of the Committee had a
constructive exchange of views with Mr. Scheinin on
issues related to the fairness and clearness of the
Committee's procedures, in particular regarding listing
and de-listing.

Since my last briefing, I have made two trips in
my function as Chairman of the Committee. In June
2009, upon invitation by the Russian Federation, I
participated in the eighth Meeting of Special Services,
Security Agencies and Law Enforcement
Organizations, held in Irkutsk, Russian Federation. On
8 and 9 October, I visited the European Union
institutions in Brussels, Belgium, where I held
consultations regarding the implementation of the
sanctions measures by the European Union and its
27 member States. The visit was an excellent
opportunity to discuss the challenges that the
implementation of the sanctions regime is currently
facing in European Union member States, in particular
following recent rulings of the European Court of
Justice.

Following my visit to Brussels, I also participated
in an international workshop of national counter-
terrorism focal points which took place in Vienna,
Austria, on 12 and 13 October. The conference was
attended by more than 100 representatives from
Member States and representatives of about 40 national
and international organizations, and it provided a
useful opportunity to increase awareness about the
work of the Committee.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
reiterate that the Committee welcomes the Security
Council's encouragement, set forth in paragraph 30 of
resolution 1822 (2008), for Member States to send
representatives to meet the Committee for more in-
depth discussion of relevant issues or for voluntary
briefings on their efforts to implement the sanctions
measures. The Committee is ready to listen to ideas
and concerns and looks forward to continuing its
cooperation and dialogue with all Member States.

Before concluding, I would like to take the
opportunity to thank the members of the Monitoring
Team, and in particular the Team's coordinator,
Mr. Richard Barrett, and the secretariat of the 1267
Committee for their invaluable contribution to the
work of the Committee, especially in the light of the
enormous additional workload created by the review
process and the drafting of narrative summaries.

Since I last briefed the Council, the review of the
consolidated list pursuant to resolution 1822 (2008) has
begun to bear fruit: not only, as I said, have eight
names been removed from the list as a direct result of
the review, but the review has also led to the
improvement of the quality of a number of entries
remaining on the list. This exercise has served to
refocus the commitment and energy of reviewing
States, which have responded to a mammoth task with
both seriousness and enthusiasm.

The full implementation of resolution 1822
(2008) constitutes an important stage of the
Committee's work, and I believe that the current
review process will also induce the Committee
members to look at existing procedures and practices
in a new light and to consider further steps towards
both improving due process and strengthening the
regime. It is essential to continue to improve the
Committee's procedures in order to make the 1267
sanctions regime a stronger and more effective tool.
The successor resolution to resolution 1822 (2008),
which is due at the end of this year, will provide the
next opportunity to take further steps towards ensuring
fair and clear procedures, improving the working
methods and thus strengthening the regime. It is to be
hoped that the new resolution will seek to address the
current challenges of the regime and reflect some of
the lessons learned during the review. We fully count
on the support of all Member States involved as the
Committee moves on to the next stage of its work.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council.

