Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Let me start by
expressing my felicitations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and on your very able handling of the Council this
month. I would also like to remember and thank my
colleague the previous President, Mr. Claude Heller,
for his excellent work last month.

I would like to thank the Chairmen of the
Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) for their
briefings today. These are valuable briefings that give
us a good opportunity for direct interaction between
Member States and the Committees.

The threat of terrorism today has become a reality
of the century. I have to say, regretfully, that as this
particular menace assumes a new dimension every
year, we must face the scourge with ever increasing
ferocity. But it is not something that we consider to be
new. In the annals of history, very often we see that, as
States become more civilized and make further
progress and as civilization assumes a far wider
foundation, there is a threat that arises from those who
cannot keep pace with it or accept the decency, values
and laws of civilized nations. Today, when we take a
look at what surrounds civilized countries and those
who aim to further civilize their countries, we can only
say that terrorism has the most obscurantist face that
any "ism" can have in this world. But today, we must
recognize the fact that it is also an international
challenge which, unfortunately, will not go away. It
deserves our unequivocal condemnation in all its forms
and manifestations.

The Government and people of Pakistan - our
leadership, political parties and everyone else,
including the common man on the street - are today
facing and confronting the dilemma of terrorism in
Pakistan. For too long, we waited for the norms of
normal people and normal Governments and laws that
are all-pervasive in their naturalness to take over and
for these people to realize that what they are doing is
not only condemnable, but is rending asunder the
fabric of our nation.

For too long, we hoped and stood and tried to
remedy by international norms what these people were
doing to the country, and today, Council members must
be well aware that a few weeks ago the people of
Pakistan, demonstrating in the streets of most of the
country, proclaimed not only their opposition to those
terrorists, but also forced their Government to take
final action to terminate what those people had started
in Pakistan.

Today, as all are aware, in one of the most
important valleys of the north-West Frontier Province
of Pakistan, the Pakistan Army is confronting the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and any other terrorists that have
made the lives of these people very difficult. There is a
common misconception that the terrorists are locally
supported. Well then, those so misinformed have not

heard of the floggings, the executions, the slitting of
throats, the taking away of youngsters of
indeterminable age from various parents, or of
anything else that could be considered barbaric.

The Pakistan Army has moved. Unfortunately,
there has been a very heavy dislocation of people in the
process, and today over 2.5 million people, more than
those displaced at the start of the Afghan situation,
have unfortunately been forced to leave their homes
and come down from the valleys into a blistering
Pakistani summer on the plains, with temperatures
varying from 45 to 50 degrees centigrade. It is a
difficult situation, with widespread illness and disease,
including stomach ailments and so much more,
including death caused by heat.

The problem is that the people had to move in
order to save themselves from being used as human
shields by the Taliban and the terrorists. A large
number of the people have moved into camps. I am
very grateful to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, and
Mr. Khalikov of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, who took immediate cognizance
of the situation and are in Pakistan already. The
announcement by the Secretary-General and the
Department of Political Affairs are, for my delegation,
a significant contribution and step forward, and with
such measures the international community can help us
regain some sanity in rehabilitating those people.

In November 2006, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) visited
Pakistan. The team interacted with the representatives
of relevant ministries, departments, law enforcement,
security agencies and immigration authorities in Pakistan.
The team, with its focus on capacity-building - which I
think is the core of what needs to be done - and on
implementation of Security Council resolutions,
prepared a comprehensive report on the visit. The
mission and the CTED are still interacting with us on
the outcome of that visit.

The Government of Pakistan has advanced quite
substantially since then. We have initiated legislation.
An anti-money-laundering law has been put into effect
and has had substantial impact. A financial monitoring
unit has been established in the State Bank of Pakistan -
our central bank. So far, I am pleased to inform the
Council that 128 bank accounts and 747.08 million
Pakistani rupees have been frozen on the instructions
of that institution. We are implementing the
comprehensive international standards embodied in the
40 recommendations and nine-special recommendations
of the Financial Action Task Force. Money-laundering
has been made an extraditable offence. This was a very
important matter that needed to be addressed.

We are an active member of the Asia/Pacific
Group on Money Laundering and we have also decided
to shortly become a party to the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism. We are also working on other important
recommendations of the CTED, although some legal
recommendations would require further studies to
understand in terms of our own laws.

On the same account, the CTED had promised to
assist Pakistan in the capacity-building area. Our law
enforcement agencies are in dire need of basic counter-
terrorism equipment, including safety vests, night
vision equipment, communications equipment, wireless
interceptors and monitors. So far, not enough has been
done in that regard. We trust that the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the CTED, under the able
leadership of Ambassador Mike Smith, will soon be
able to help us further in that area.

The Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee
and its Monitoring Team have been assigned a difficult
job. Some difficulties arise from the exclusive nature
of the mandate, as there are tendencies to compare the
successes of the 1267 sanctions regime with the
failures of the resolution 1566 (2004) initiative. We
hope that one day the Security Council will
contemplate combining different initiatives into a
comprehensive counter-terrorism sanctions regime.

Since the adoption of resolutions 1735 (2006) and
1822 (2008), a lot has been done to improve the
Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime. The
Committee has done a good job by adding additional
identifiers to the listing requirements. That will be
helpful to ensure the effective implementation of the
sanctions and will also reduce chances of mistaken
implementation.

The biggest challenge to the sanctions regime,
however, comes from the increasing number of court
cases. The preventive nature of the sanctions makes the
listings very simple and enforcement-friendly.
However, the legal community is more inclined to
favour verifiable evidence that could be acceptable in a
court of law. It also raises the questions of due process
and effective remedy. A number of listings have been

challenged in Pakistani courts. The publicly releasable
case statements, comprised mainly of questions raised
at the time of listing, might not be sufficient to win
those cases. We will have to consider exclusive sharing
of the verifiable evidence with the courts and the
fixation of a time limit for the effectiveness of a listing.

In Pakistan, we are doing our best to ensure the
effective implementation of the sanctions regime. The
democratic Government has left no stone unturned to
ensure that those on the sanctions list are subjected to
the assets freeze, travel ban and other sanctions
elucidated in the relevant resolutions and domestic law.
We have also benefited from the visits of the Al-Qaida
and Taliban Sanctions Monitoring Team to ensure
effective implementation of the sanctions.

Pakistan was a member of the Security Council
when resolution 1540 (2004) was adopted. We joined
the consensus because we concurred that there was a
gap in the international rules relating to the acquisition
and illicit transfer of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors. We also agreed that the matter was
important and urgent enough to be addressed in an
exceptional manner. However, we hoped that the
arrangement would not be perpetuated at the cost of the
revival and effectiveness of the multilateral
disarmament machinery.

In conclusion, I would once again underscore the
evolving nature of the counter-terrorism challenges we
are facing and the usefulness of briefings such as those
we have had today.

