Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
The United Nations estimates that some 2 million to 5
million anti-personnel land-mines are deployed each year,
added to the 100 million already laid in the ground. We
are becoming more aware of the devastating consequences
of these devices in terms of death and injury, and this

 

awareness, to a large extent, results from the leadership of
the United Nations in raising public awareness.

The economic and social impact of land-mines is also
becoming better known: land-mines destroy infrastructure,
contaminate agricultural land, make it impossible for
refugees and displaced persons to return home and place an
unsustainable burden on social assistance services in States
emerging from the upheavals of war.

Less well known to the public is the pernicious impact
that land-mines can have on peace-keeping operations. We
are grateful to you, Mr. President, for drawing attention to
this aspect, among others, of the land-mine crisis by taking
the initiative to hold this open meeting of the Security
Council.

Canada has adopted a two-track approach to putting an
end to the tragedy of land-mines. The first track addresses
the immediate problem of land-mines already in the ground,
causing injury and death each day, as we have just heard.
We have set up an active programme of demining
assistance and victim rehabilitation in a number of
countries. We are also looking for ways to enhance our
efforts through fostering the development of Canadian
capabilities in this field in order to deal with the many
challenges facing mine-affected countries in, for example,
Central America. The second track of our approach relates
to the longer term, but ultimately more important, need to
halt the deployment of new mines. That is why we, along
with many other countries, are promoting an agreement to
ban anti-personnel mines worldwide.

Canada has a deep and long-standing commitment to
the international-security vocation of the United Nations
and has participated in all major United Nations peace-
keeping operations to date. It is always risky to send young
soldiers abroad to secure and maintain peace. However,
those soldiers ought not be exposed to the additional risk of
encountering the random horrors of land-mines in such
circumstances. In recent years Canadian Blue Helmets,
along with those of other countries, have risked their lives
in the always dangerous task of mine-clearance - in Kuwait,
Cambodia, Croatia, Bosnia, Somalia, Rwanda and
elsewhere. In the last five years, two Canadian peace-
keepers have been killed and 22 seriously injured by mines.

Moved by its deep concern over the economic and
social repercussions of land-mines and by the belief that
mine-clearance is an essential component of humanitarian
reconstruction, Canada has taken steps. Expert personnel
from the Canadian Armed Forces have been instrumental in
developing independent mine-clearance capabilities in
Afghanistan, Angola and Cambodia. Indeed, the Mine
Action Centres in Angola and Cambodia, which owe their
existence to Canadian and other advisers, provide a model
for the development of indigenous mine-clearance
capability in other parts of the world.

(spoke in English)

Since 1993 Canada has provided more than
$6 million for United Nations-sponsored mine-clearance
activities in Afghanistan, Angola and Cambodia, through
the Canadian International Development Agency. Canada
announced in June that it would also provide financial
assistance to the mine-clearance programme of the
Organization of American States (OAS).
In addition to providing financial assistance for
country-specific or region-specific mine-clearance
programmes, Canada has also provided an initial
contribution of $200,000 to the United Nations Voluntary
Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine Clearance and funding
to the International Red Cross for medical treatment,
including rehabilitation and artificial limbs for victims of
land-mines.

If we are to have real impact in addressing the
economic and social cost of land-mines, and if we are to
confront successfully the challenges they pose for peace-
keeping operations, we have no option but to seek urgent
action by the international community to eliminate these
weapons and ban their use. We know we are not alone in
arriving at the conclusion that we must now move to a
global ban on these weapons. Nor are we alone in
appreciating how difficult it can be for countries to come
to view the costs and benefits of these weapons from a
different perspective in order to weigh their military value
against the devastation they cause among civilian
populations.

There are those within the international community
who for many years have been challenging States to view
these weapons from a different perspective. In this regard,
it would be remiss of me not to acknowledge the roles the
International Committee of the Red Cross and, most
importantly, its forceful, convincing and dynamic
President, Cornelio Sommaruga have played in
highlighting the need for countries to take urgent action
at the national and international levels to eliminate the
scourge of anti-personnel mines.

 

To move this international effort forward and to build
upon the important international meetings and negotiations
that have taken place to date, most recently in Copenhagen,
Canada will host an international strategy session in Ottawa
from 3 to 5 October, drawing together the growing
community of States, international agencies and non-
governmental organizations that are committed to a global
ban. The meeting will seek to integrate the efforts of these
various communities in developing a comprehensive
approach to the land-mine issue so that our efforts to assist
victims, to clear mines and to control the use of mines
become mutually reinforcing.

We hope that the States that join us in October will,
among other things, endorse an Ottawa declaration and
action plan that will establish a set of commonly agreed
strategic objectives in order to move the international
community closer to a ban on anti-personnel mines.
Specifically, we hope that they will agree upon a series of
concrete actions to be taken at the global, regional and
national levels by Governments, international agencies and
non- governmental organizations to achieve these objectives.

The Ottawa meeting will provide an opportunity to
work towards a resolution for the fifty-first session of the
General Assembly to express the commitment of Member
States to support a global ban on anti-personnel land-mines;
to implement national moratoriums or bans on the
operational use and export of anti-personnel mines; and,
most importantly, to position us to move quickly to
negotiate an international agreement to ban these mines.

But the Ottawa meeting will be only the first step. To
maintain momentum on this issue, we will also work with
partners to establish a programme of activities in the
coming year, including a follow-up conference to the
Ottawa meeting to review and to lock in our progress in
achieving a global ban on these weapons.

Global momentum is building. All Members of the
United Nations have endorsed the eventual elimination of
anti-personnel mines. Many have gone much further. More
than 40 countries have called for a comprehensive ban on
anti-personnel mines; almost 30 countries have already
moved to impose unilateral restrictions on the operational
use and export of anti-personnel mines. We expect to see
these numbers grow further by the time we get to the
General Assembly.

Regional organizations are leading the way in seeking
to address the land-mine crisis. In June the General
Assembly of the OAS adopted a resolution which commits
the members of that organization to act on this issue. The
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Regional Forum, the Organization of African Unity, and
the G-7 are among other multinational bodies that have
taken action on the land-mine issue.

Our hope is that all Members of the United Nations
will be able to take practical steps to demonstrate a
commitment to the achievement of a global ban on anti-
personnel mines.

The Ottawa conference will, we anticipate, be an
important step in this direction. We look forward to
working with all partners in pursuit of a world free of the
menace of anti-personnel mines.

