Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I want to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your country's accession to
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We trust in your wisdom and leadership in successfully
leading the Council this month. We also wish to convey
our thanks to your predecessor, the Ambassador of the
Russian Federation, for a job well done last month.

I also wish to thank all members of the Council,
through you, for responding very swiftly to our call,
the calls of the League ofArab States, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, the Non-Aligned Movement
and the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, and, I believe, the call
of the Secretary-General for convening this meeting
very quickly. We are grateful that you have done so,
and we hope that the Council will find the political will
to act to bring this aggression against our people to an
immediate end.

Let me also thank the Secretary-General for his
personal involvement yesterday and today, for his
contact with leaders in all corners of the globe, for
being with us today, and for his contribution to this
discussion. I hope that his efforts among all Council
members will produce the needed call for an immediate
ceasefire and for an end to the carnage and attacks on
the entire civilian population of Palestine in all parts of
the occupied territory, especially the Gaza Strip.

I come before the Security Council, on the
instructions of the Palestinian leadership under
President Mahmoud Abbas and with the support
of the Arab Group, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, to urgently appeal to
the Security Council to uphold its Charter duties for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We call upon the Council to act immediately to protect
civilian lives, which are being destroyed and lost with
each passing minute of the Israeli military aggression
being waged against the Palestinian people in occupied
Palestine, in particular in the Gaza Strip. I speak
on behalf of the suffering and grieving Palestinian
people, who are enduring yet another barrage of
death, destruction, trauma and terror, which is being
perpetrated willfully and maliciously against them
by the Israeli occupying forces, before the eyes of the
world, as it persists with its nearly five-decade long
belligerent military occupation.

This illegal, inhumane Israeli occupation is
unjustifiable in any context and contravenes all
principles of international law, human decency and
moral conscience. It is an occupation - including
armed forces and terrorist settlers i that intentionally
perpetrates the murder, burning and maiming of
children; the killing and wounding of women, men and
elderly persons; extrajudicial executions; the destruction
of homes; the theft and colonization of another people's
land; the forced displacement and dispossession of
civilians, rendering them homeless and impoverished;
the desecration of holy sites, especially in occupied
East Jerusalem; and the abduction, imprisonment and
detention of thousands of civilians, including children.
It is an occupation that proves, again and again, its
racist, aggressive, expansionist agenda and lack of
respect for the sanctity of life and the rights of the
Palestinian people, who history has condemned to the
misfortune of suffering under this occupation.

Yet, absurdly and offensively, the Israeli
Government perpetrating this criminal occupation
claims to be the only so-called democracy in the Middle
East and to have the "most moral army" in the world,
even as that Government is composed of members
openly advocating and inciting the killing and ethnic
cleansing of the Palestinian people and engages in such
ruthless military attacks against a defenceless civilian
population.

I come before the Security Council to say: enough
of the bloodshed of the Palestinian people, enough of
their oppression under the Israeli occupation, enough of
this injustice and enough of this violence and conflict,
which is inflicting so much suffering on innocent
people on both sides and undermining regional and
international peace and stability.

In the past few weeks, I have conveyed many formal
letters to the Council drawing urgent attention to this
crisis, with barely any reaction, with the exception of
the press statement of 2 July regarding the heinous
killing and burning of the Palestinian youth Mohammed
Abu Khdeir by Israeli settler terrorists in occupied East
Jerusalem. In those letters, I have detailed the illegal
actions being committed by Israel in grave violation of
international humanitarian law, particularly the Fourth
Geneva Convention, human rights law and international
criminal law, namely, the provisions of the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. There is no doubt
that the occupying Power is systematically committing
human rights violations, war crimes and State terror.

For days, Israel has persisted with its relentless
attacks, launching hundreds of airstrikes and artillery
bombardment against civilian areas in the Gaza Strip,
terrorizing our people, killing dozens of civilians and
injuring hundreds. The critical humanitarian situation
in Gaza, long-suffering under Israel's occupation and
blockade, is rapidly deteriorating and, in this holy
month of Ramadan, life there has come to a standstill,
with fear and panic widespread. As the majority of the
civilians in Gaza are refugees, and camps continue to
be among the targets of Israeli military attacks, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East has declared an emergency
in Gaza.

In the West Bank, Israeli military raids continue
daily in Palestinian cities, towns, villages and refugee
camps, and casualties are continued to be caused by
the excessive, lethal force of the Israeli occupying
forces against Palestinian civilians, including peaceful
demonstrators. Homes have been demolished. Since
the start of the recent crisis, on 12 June, more than 850
Palestinians have been arrested or detained, bringing
the total number of Palestinians captive in Israeli jails
to more than 6,000, including children, women and
elected officials. Moreover, settler violence, terrorism
and incitement against Palestinian civilians, especially
children and farmers, and acts of destruction against
Palestinian homes, orchards and religious sites continue
unabated under the protection of occupying forces,
which the Israeli Government illegally transferred to
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem.

At this moment, the Palestinian death toll stands
at more than 80 people 4 in fact, it could be above
90. Today, an entire family of eight was decimated as
a result of the heinous attacks and aggression by the
Israeli occupying forces against our people in Gaza.
Hundreds more civilians have been wounded by Israeli
airstrikes, tank shelling, live ammunition, rubber
bullets, stun grenades, tear gas canisters and beatings.
Many are in critical condition.

Children, who in Gaza constitute over half of
the population, are suffering disproportionately and,
similar to Israel's military savagery of December 2008
to January 2009 and November 2012, are among the
many victims. Deepening the trauma, families also
continue to bear multiple tragedies, with some families
being decimated by Israeli attacks. Among the family
of eight people murdered today were five children. We
bear witness to their suffering and recall here some
of the many lives that have been lost to this insane,
inhumane Israeli brutality.

(spoke in Arabic)

From this forum, I should like to salute the people
of Gaza and to reiterate that the Israeli aggression
will not alter the determination of our people, which
is stronger than any measures of collective punishment
or reppression by the occupying authority against the
Palestinian people, in particular against the 1.7 million
citizens of our beloved Gaza. We recall the memory of
our martyrs killed as a result of the current aggression.
On behalf of the entire Palestinian people, the
Palestinian Authority and others around the world who
love peace and justice, we honour their memory, which
will remain with us in heart and spirit. We will not
forget our beloved children who have been the victims
of settler acts and the Israeli occupying authorities.

No act in self-defence can justifty the killing of
children or the oppression of the Palestinian people
in the occupied territories. I should like to mention
just a few of the Palestinian children who have been
martyred by the occupation: Mohammed Abu Khdeir,
16; Ghanim Abdelgafoor, 1; Mohammed Malaki, 2;
Mohammed Khalaf Al-Nouassrah, 4; Nidal Khalef
Al-Nouassrah, 5; Siraj Abdel-al, 8; Bassim Qawareh,
10; Mohammed Ashour, 13; Hussein Qawareh, 14; and
the child Abdullah Abughazel, 4, who died today.
(spoke in English)

We reject the audacious claims by Israel that the
Palestinian civilian population in Gaza is being used
as a so-called human shield, while it knowingly and
intentionally strikes at densely populated civilian areas.
We also reject the claims of self-defence by Israel,
while, despite the prohibition under international law,
it deliberately carries out reprisals and collective
punishment against the Palestinian people in declared
retaliation and revenge, directly called for by the Israeli
Prime Minister himself, for the killing of three Israeli
settlers, which the Palestinian leadership has clearly
condemned.

We recall that Israel abruptly suspended the peace
negotiations in April in response to the reconciliation
of the Palestinian Liberation Organization and
Hamas - a legitimate and necessary step long called
for by our people, as well as by the international
community. We also recall that Israel has publicly
declared its opposition to the Palestinian national unity
Government and has used every baseless pretext to
provoke and undermine the Palestinian Government
with the aim of forcing its collapse, including through
the latest military aggression. We condemn such
cynical tactics, provocations and illegal behaviour and
call on the international community also to condemn it.

There can be no justification for the killing of
innocent civilians, no matter where, when or by whom.
All pretexts suggesting otherwise must be rejected.
Instead, all efforts must be exerted to bring a halt to the
violence and terror that are being perpetrated against
civilians, including through measures to uphold and
to enforce respect for international law. The Security
Council cannot remain paralysed and marginalized
as Israeli war crimes continue against the Palestinian
civilian population in the Gaza Strip and in the rest
of the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and a new cycle of violence consumes
everything in its path. The Council must shoulder its
responsibilities. It must act to protect civilian lives,
de-escalate the current crisis and salvage the prospects
for peace and security in our troubled region. If it fails
to do so, it will further diminish its own credibility and
will be complicit in allowing innocent children, women
and men to die and the situation to further destabilize,
with far-reaching consequences.

We call in particular for the protection of the
Palestinian people. Israel has clearly violated and
abdicated its responsibility as an occupying Power
to ensure the safety and well-being of the civilian
population under its occupation. The international
community, in line with its legal obligations - and I
stress the obligations of the high contracting parties
to the Fourth Geneva Convention - must therefore
ensure the protection of our people until the end of the
military occupation. In that regard, I wish to inform the
Council that President Abbas has officially conveyed
to Switzerland, the depository, a request to convene
the high contracting parties to consider measures to
uphold their obligations, under common article 1 and
article 146, on penal sanctions for grave breaches,
and to enforce the Convention in occupied Palestine,
including East Jerusalem.

The Palestinian people, whose resilience and
steadfastness we honour and praise, look to the Security
Council at this critical moment to uphold its resolutions
and abiding principles first and foremost to save lives
and to safeguard the prospects for a just and peaceful
settlement of the conflict on the basis of the two-
State solution and the pre-l967 borders, on which the
international community is united but which has been
so gravely undermined by Israel. A firm message must
be sent by the Council to Israel to immediately cease its
aggression against the Palestinian people and to abide
by its obligations under international law. Moreover, it
is high time that Israel, the occupying Power, be held
accountable for its countless human rights violations
and war crimes, including the killing of Palestinian
civilians, the wanton destruction of Palestinian property
and the malicious colonization of Palestinian land.

We call on the Security Council to act now to stop
the bleeding in occupied Palestine, including the latest
Israeli war on Gaza, and to revive our dying hope in the

prospects for an and to the occupation and the tragic
conflict, the achievement of peace and the realization
of the aspirations of Palestinians for their freedom,
rights and justice, which have too long been denied.

