Mr. Louliehki (Morocco) (Spoke in French): After
submitting my final report to the Council a few days
ago in my capacity as Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1373 (2001), more commonly known as the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, it is now incumbent upon me
to report to the Council one last time on the outcome
of the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2048 (2012) concerning Guinea-Bissau.

That Committee's mandate, as defined by the
Security Council, was to monitor implementation of the
measures envisaged in paragraph 9 ofthat resolution. The
Committee is the most recent to have been established
by the Council and the only one concerned exclusively
with interdicting travel. The Committee to deal with
the Central African Republic has been created, but has
not yet been established. The Committee concerning
Guinea-Bissau was established following the events
of 12 April 2012, which ended the electoral process in
that country. The Committee imposed a travel ban on
all individuals seeking to prevent the restoration of the
constitutional

"seeking to prevent the restoration of the
constitutional order or taking action that
undermined stability in Guinea-Bissau, in
particular those who played a leading role in
the coup d'etat of 12 April 2012 and who aimed,
through their actions, at undermining the rule of
law, curtailing the primacy of civilian power and
furthering impunity and instability in the country"
(S/2012/627, p. 4).

During the period in question, the Committee
held informal consultations, maintained channels of
communication among its members, and facilitated
discussions and decision-making within the
Committee's framework. Examples of decisions taken
include the implementation of the sanctions regime,
the expansion of the list of individuals subject to the
travel ban, and the conclusion of an agreement with
INTERPOL on Interpol/Security Council Special
Notices, aimed at strengthening measures adopted by
Member States.

Themaindifficultyfaced duringtheperiodwas quite
clearly access to information, and the communication
of that information by the members of the Committee.
The Committee is one of the rare, one of the very few
committees, alongside the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1518 (2003) concerning Iraq
and Kuwait and the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1636 (2005) concerning Lebanon, not to
have a panel of experts available to it. Nevertheless, the
Committee tried to discharge its mandate in cooperation
with the members of the Security Council and of course
all the other Members of the United Nations. Thus,
through an exchange of communications with Senegal
and Cote d'Ivoire, the Committee was in a position
to detect a Violation of the travel ban by one of the
individuals subject to the ban.

Despite the very low number of reports
received - fewer than 20 - I would like to urge all
Member States that have not yet done so to report to
the Committee measures undertaken to implement the
provisions of paragraph 4 of resolution 2048 (2012).
In the next few days, a note will be addressed to the
Member States to assist my successor in launching his
term of office with an updated list of data that would
enable the Committee to continue to discharge its
mandate.

The 2048 Committee is one of the levers available to
the Security Council to address the situation in Guinea-
Bissau. It is an instrument of information, coordination
and deliberation that can assist the Security Council's
work regarding the many challenges facing that African

State. For my part, I am gratified by the growing interest
shown by the Security Council in that country, and by
the Council's commitment to assisting it in its current
transition phase and contributing to stabilizing it, side
by side with the Economic Community of West African
States, the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau and the bilateral partners of
Guinea-Bissau. I cherish the hope that the momentum
will continue to grow in the coming few years.

Finally, like all my predecessors, I would like
to convey my gratitude to all the members of the
Committee for their assistance and their cooperation
during the Moroccan chairmanship, and to pay tribute
to the high level of professionalism and availability on
the part of the Secretariat in facilitating the work of the
Committee and its Chairman.

