Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset,
Mr. President, to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council this month. I
would also like to thank your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Japan, for his efforts
during Japan's presidency in the month of April. Our
thanks also go to Mr. Ad Melkert, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, and
his team in Baghdad and New York for their vigorous
efforts to assist the Iraqi Government and people.

My delegation takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/240) and the work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
and would like to present the following comments.

On the political and security level, although
Mr. Melkert expressed some concerns about the delays

in the political process of setting up an Iraqi
Government, we believe that there is effective
deliberation going on now between the various
political groups in order to reach a consensus regarding
that Government. Mr. Melkert also expressed concerns
about the security situation, especially the
assassination yesterday in Mosul of a newly elected
Member of Parliament, Bashar Al-Aqidi. We believe
that this was the result of terrorist activities in Iraq,
which have been aimed at trying to exploit the vacuum
created by the delay in forming a Government. With
regard to our relations with the brotherly and
neighbourly State of Kuwait, I can assure Mr. Melkert
and the Security Council that Iraq is committed to all
Council resolutions, especially those regarding
relations with Kuwait and the borders.

On 7 March, the Iraqi people took an important
step in building and structuring democracy in Iraq.
More than 12 million Iraqis inside and outside Iraq,
through their participation in casting their votes in the
Iraqi parliamentary elections, challenged all obstacles,
expressed their determination to select their
representatives, and signified their intention to
continue to have their say in the formation of the
Government that will run the country for the next four
years.

The success of the electoral process in its various
stages in Iraq is another achievement of the Iraqi
Government, the security forces and the Independent
High Electoral Commission. Through their meticulous
efforts, a safe environment was provided and voting
procedures were conducted with the highest level of
integrity and transparency. This was observed by all
the international and regional bodies that exercise a
supervisory role to ensure the integrity of the electoral
process. I would also like to commend the important
role that the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq provided in its advisory, assistance and logistical
support to the Independent High Electoral
Commission.

The judicial decision on the vote recount of
Baghdad province, due to a number of complaints
made by political entities, was an important step in the
successful completion of the electoral voting process.
As guaranteed by Iraqi law, the complaints regarding
the legitimacy of the elections and credibility of their
results were addressed so that the results could be
confirmed, especially in the wake of the political
controversy that followed the announced results. The
Independent High Electoral Commission implemented
the legal decision through a recount of the votes at
11,000 polling stations in the city of Baghdad. This led
to the discovery of minor differences that did not affect
the announced results for the Baghdad Governorate.

The political process in Iraq is ongoing and will
continue as political rivals turn to the law and the
Constitution to find solutions to political problems.
This process represents an important development in
the rule of law in Iraq's political culture and a
momentous cornerstone of the peaceful political
process in the building of a State in which the
sovereignty of law and institutions, rather than
individuals and parties, rules.

The joint efforts of the central Iraqi Government
and the Kurdistan Regional Government in resolving
outstanding issues have produced fruitful results. On
17 May, the Council of Ministers approved the
implementation of the agreement between the Ministry
of Oil and the Kurdish Regional Government, which
will allow the export of crude oil produced in the
Kurdistan region and the payment of financial dues to
the oil companies.

In the context of the continuing development of
the capacity of the Iraqi security forces to gather
information and respond immediately to potential
threats, on 18 April, with the support of American
forces, our security forces carried out a successful
operation in the Al-Tharthar area in Salahaddin
province north of Baghdad that led to the death of the
Egyptian terrorist Abu Hamza al-Muhajir, Al-Qaida's
military leader in Iraq, and Mohammed Khalil aI-Zawi,
known as Abu Omar al-Baghdadi, alleged leader of the
A1 Qaida-affiliated terrorist organization known as the
Islamic State of Iraq. The death of these terrorists was
a devastating blow to Al-Qaida's network in Iraq,
which has carried out many of the terrorist operations
that have targeted innocent civilian lives. At the same
time, this represents a significant victory for the Iraqi
security forces in their continuing efforts to combat
terrorism.

In the context of successes achieved in security,
on 22 April Manaf Abdul Rahim al-Rawi, known as the
"governor of Baghdad" by the Islamic State of Iraq,
was captured. He was responsible for the perpetration
of deadly bombings in Baghdad, resulting in the
horrific loss of hundreds of innocent civilian lives. I
would like to emphasize here today that messages of

death and destruction sent by terrorist forces will not
hinder the democratic process and reconstruction of
Iraq, nor will they discourage the Iraqi Government
and people from moving forward on the path of
building a stable State based on law and civic
institutions.

The Iraqi security authorities apprehended Tarek
Abdelqadir al-Jazari and Abdullah Azam al-Qahtani,
known as Snan al-Saudi, who had made contact with
the number-two person in the Al-Qaida network,
Ayman Al-Zawahiri, and who were planning to carry
out acts of violence and detonate explosions at the start
of the World Cup in South Africa. Once again, the Iraqi
Government's victory in its battle against terrorism is
in the interest of all States regionally and globally.

Under the auspices of His Excellency Prime
Minister Nuri Kamel al-Maliki and in the presence of
His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Iraq's Foreign Ministry building
was reopened. Its reconstruction had been completed
after it was targeted by terrorist attacks on 19 August
2009, attacks in which 562 staff members of the
Foreign Ministry were injured and 42 lost their lives.
We are still seeing attacks and terrorist operations
being carried out, such as the assassination of the
newly elected member of parliament. However, I think
the security situation in general has improved
dramatically in the past few months.

The Iraqi Government continues its effort to
benefit from former cadres of the Iraqi army who are
innocent from shedding the blood of the Iraqi people.
The Ministry of Defence recently announced that, by
the end of 2009, around 13,000 former members of the
Iraqi army had been reassigned to serve and that
another 7,000 were to be reassigned soon. That makes
a total of 20,000 former army members reassigned to
the Iraqi army as part of the Iraqi Government's
continuous efforts to resolve the issue of military
personnel who had served in the Iraqi army under the
former regime.

In the framework of the continued security forces
coordination effort between the Iraqi Government and
the United States Government, the United States forces
handed over the joint security command centre east of
Baghdad to the competent Iraqi authorities. This step
represents progress in the efforts of the Iraqi
Government to receive and fully operate all security
centres in preparation for the full withdrawal of United
States troops in accordance with the time frame agreed
upon between the two countries.

The improvement of the security situation has
coincided with the Iraqi Government's policy plans to
return displaced Iraqis within Iraq and abroad. This has
led to an increase in the numbers of Iraqis returning to
their homes, both from within Iraq and from abroad.
Reports from the Ministry of Immigration and
Migration on 31 March 2010 on the return of displaced
families indicate the return of 61,285 persons displaced
abroad and internally. Since that date, the figure has
increased by an additional 41,852 internally displaced
persons and 7,241 persons returning from abroad. The
Iraqi Government is still working in conjunction with
international specialized bodies to manage all of the
necessary requirements for the continuation of the
return of families - both from abroad and internally
displaced - to their homes.

On the economic and social levels, Iraq has
signed and the Council of Ministers has endorsed the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
for Iraq for the period 2011 to 2014. The Framework
represents an update of the cooperation between the
Iraqi Government and the United Nations for the
coming five years. The agreement includes cooperation
on all aspects of human rights, the rule of law and
economic reform, as well as in the areas of basic
services and social and human capacity-building for
employees in ministries and State institutions.

Iraq's oil exports have witnessed remarkable
stability over the past few months, as Iraq exported
around 2 million barrels per day. The Iraqi Government
continues to work to increase the amount of oil to be
exported during the current year, with projections of up
to 2,325,000 barrels per day. In the framework of the
Iraqi Government's ongoing efforts to develop the oil
industry in order to reduce Iraq's importation of oil
products, the Iraqi Oil Ministry called on the National
Investment Commission to hold a preparatory meeting
to develop mechanisms and a programme with a view
to convening a large conference of investment
authorities in the provinces so that Arab, foreign and
local companies could be invited to invest in oil
refineries in accordance with the Iraqi investment law
in order to develop the capacity of oil refineries in Iraq.

The Oil Ministry is now preparing for the third
round of bidding, which will focus on investment in
natural gas fields. The bidding will include three major
fields - the Saybah field, the Mansourieh field and the
Akas field - and will focus on developing Iraqi gas
production to meet Iraq's growing natural gas needs
and to develop the productive potential of these fields
to allow the export of natural gas to foreign markets.

In the context of the Iraqi Government's efforts to
enhance economic openness between Iraq and the rest
of the world, on 13 May 2010 the Council of Ministers
took the decision to authorize the Minister of Transport
to negotiate and sign a draft air transport agreement
between the Government of the Republic of Iraq and
the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is an
additional step in our efforts to open up to other
countries of the world, especially in fields of vital
importance, such as air transport.

In the framework of the gradual improvement of
the humanitarian situation in Iraq, in its Humanitarian
Action Report 2010, UNICEF mentioned the end of the
acute emergency stage of the humanitarian crisis in
Iraq and stressed the need for investments inside the
country to change from just the distribution of relief
and rehabilitation on a small scale to more durable
solutions to increase the strength of communities.

Some in the media have recently made an
exaggerated fanfare over the existence of secret prisons
in Iraq and the torture of detainees. On this issue, the
Minister for Human Rights, Her Excellency
Ms. Wijdan Mikhail Salim, held a press conference on
20 April 2010, at which she pointed out that the media
reports did not highlight the presence of any violations
but only distorted the truth and insulted the Iraqi
Government. Ms. Wijdan Mikhail Salim noted that the
Prime Minister had ordered the creation of committees
to investigate all the allegations referred to and a
number of legal proceedings to stop abuses, which
might occur in any prison or detention centre. The
Minister also pointed out that political objectives were
behind the distortions, which sought to undermine the
security achievements made by the Iraqi Government,
especially as they coincided with the killings of Abu
Omar al-Baghdadi and Abu Hamza al-Muhajir, the
most prominent symbols of Al-Qaida in Iraq.

At the regional and international levels, in the
framework of regional and international openness in
Iraq, the recent period witnessed a number of events,
including the following: the visit on 17 May 2010 of
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Assistant Secretary of State for
Near Eastern Affairs, who reviewed the work of the

committee to coordinate diplomatic and political
benefits between Iraq and the United States; the visit
on 11 May 2010 of His Excellency Mr. Arshad
Hermzlo, Special Envoy of the Turkish President; the
visit of His Excellency Mr. Christian Estrosi, French
Industry Minister; the visit on 25 February 2010 of the
Republic of Korea's Minister of Knowledge Economy,
Mr. Choi Kyung-hwan, who attended the first
conference of the Iraqi-Korean Economic Cooperation
Forum; and the visit on 23 February 2010 of Swedish
Foreign Minister Carl Bildt, for the opening the new
headquarters of the Swedish Embassy in Baghdad.

The President of Iraq, His Excellency Mr. Jalal
Talabani, made a series of visits to other countries,
including Iran on 26 March 2010, where he met with
the Supreme Leader His Eminence Ayatollah Ali
Khamenei; the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on 11 April
2010, where he met the Saudi King, His Royal
Highness Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz A1 Saud; and to
Egypt on 8 May 2010, where he met the Egyptian
President, His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Hosni
Mubarak, and the Secretary-General of the Arab
League, His Excellency Mr. Amr Moussa.

His Excellency Vice-President Adil Abdul-Mahdi
made a series of visits, including to Syria on 3 April,
where he met Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad; the
State of Kuwait on 6 April, where he met with His
Royal Highness the Amir of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah; and the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan on 7 April, where he met His Royal
Highness King Abdullah II. His Excellency Vice-
President Tariq al-Hashimi also made a series of visits,
including to the United Arab Emirates on 3 April,
where he met His Royal Highness Sheikh Khalifa Bin
Zayed Al Nahyan; the State of Qatar on 5 April, where
he met with His Royal Highness the Amir of Qatar,
Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani; Bahrain on
6April, where he met with His Royal Highness King
Hamad bin Issa Al Khalifa and Bahraini Prime
Minister Shaikh Khalifa Bin Salman Al Khalifa; the
State of Kuwait on 13 April, where he met Amir Sheikh
Sabah Al-Ahmad A1-Jaber Al-Sabah; the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, where he met His Royal Highness King
Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al Sand; and Turkey on
18 April, where he met a number of Turkish officials.

Iraq is still suffering from the sanctions imposed
upon it by Security Council resolutions on the
disarmament of weapons of mass destruction and
denying Iraq the use of technological advances and

research. The Ministry of Industry is being deprived of
technology necessary to rehabilitate the factories of
Iraq. The Ministry of Agriculture is unable to import
various types of fertilizers. The Ministry of Higher
Education and the Ministry of Science and Technology
are unable to procure the necessary laboratories for
scientific research. Lastly, the Ministry of Health is
denied many important services for the treatment of
many diseases.

In the context of Iraq's efforts to implement its
obligations under Security Council resolutions on
dismantling weapons of mass destruction, Minister for
Foreign Affairs Hoshyar Zebari wrote, in a letter dated
17 February 2010 addressed to International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) Director General Yukiya
Amano, that, in accordance with article 17 of the
additional protocol signed between Iraq and IAEA on 9
October 2008, Iraq had declared that it would comply
provisionally with the protocol pending its entry into
force.

In its presidential statement of 26 February
(S/PRST/2010/5), the Security Council welcomed that
fact as consistent with Iraqi law. It also requested that
the IAEA inform the Council as soon as possible
regarding the quality of Iraq's safeguards-related
cooperation with the Agency. In that connection, in a
letter of reply addressed to the Secretary-General and
contained in the annex to document S/2010/ 150, the
Director General stated that the Agency had been
receiving excellent cooperation from Iraq in the
implementation of its comprehensive safeguards
agreement. On that basis, my Government has renewed
its demand that the Security Council review the
restrictions imposed by resolutions 687 (1991) and 707
(1991), with a view to lifting them.

In conclusion, I would like to stress my
Government's gratitude for UNAMI's role in Iraq and
for the support provided by Mr. Ad Melkert at the
Government's request.

