Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the United States presidency for convening this
meeting. I also thank the United Kingdom for this very
timely update on the results of the British investigation
into the exposure of three individuals to a military
nerve agent in Salisbury last March. At the outset, on
behalf of France, I would like to reiterate the solidarity
expressed by our most senior officials to our British
friends in the aftermath of the hostile act on 4 March.

The British police investigation has now come to
an end. I would like to commend the United Kingdom's
commitment to transparency and the way in which it
has conducted the investigation in conjunction with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), whose exemplary work I also commend. I will
say a few words about what happened, before briefly
turning to the more general issues.

The facts are clear: the results of the British
investigation, combined with those of the OPCW,
confirm the initial analysis, which we agree with, on
the absence of any plausible explanation other than that
Russia is responsible. Everything lines up. A powerful
chemical agent, Novichok, which is considered to be
produced by the military, was indeed used in Salisbury
against Sergei Skripal and his daughter, and later in
Amesbury. I note the British conclusion that such an
operation could have been launched and approved only
at a sufficiently high level of the Russian State. We have
taken note of the issuance by the British justice system
of arrest warrants against the two Russian military
intelligence officers identified by the British police,
and we are prepared to cooperate with its services.

In the light of those very serious elements, I wish
to express my country's deep concern and reiterate our
condemnation of such acts, which are unacceptable.
We have unanimously reaffirmed that position to
our partners in NATO and the European Union.
Those actions endanger the safety of many civilians,
undermine the safety of one of our closest allies, are
contrary to the rules of international law and flout all
the principles of mutual cooperation and respect to
which we are committed.

The use of chemical weapons should in no way be
considered an option at the beginning of the twenty-
first century. The re-emergence of those weapons
challenges our collective security system in a way that
we cannot accept. It is the Council's responsibility to
protect the chemical non-proliferation regime, and
with it our collective security system. We ask Russia,
a member of the Security Council, to respond to
all the questions that are raised. We also call on the
Council and all our partners, including Russia, to
firmly commit themselves to protecting the Chemical
Weapons Convention and to reaffirming the prohibition
on the use of chemical weapons.

To that end, we must strengthen the capacity of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
to ensure that it is able to fulfil its mandate. The
implementation of the decision adopted by the Special
Session of the Conference of the States Parties to Review
the Operation of the Chemical Weapons Convention,
held in June following the major incidents in Duma and
Salisbury, must serve as our road map. That meeting of
the States Parties to the Convention also showed that
the majority of the international community shares our
concerns about the risk with regard to the chemical
non-proliferation regime being called into question and
supports the principle of strengthening the Convention's
means of protection.

It is essential to provide the international community
with an investigation and accountability mechanism
for all cases of the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
Such an instrument is essential for the protection of the
chemical non-proliferation regime, and we have long
encouraged Russia to take that path. We will return to
that topic this afternoon during our meeting on Syria.

As the President of the Republic, Mr. Emmanuel
Macron, recently recalled, France is resolutely engaged
with and committed to the protection of the Chemical
Weapons Convention regime, and it is fully determined.
We have just reaffirmed that, together with our British,
American, German and Canadian partners.

In the same spirit, we want the European Union
to adopt a sanctions regime against individuals and
entities involved in the proliferation or use of chemical
weapons. The Council can count on France's full and
complete commitment in that regard.
