Mr. Kaberuka: It is an honour and a privilege
to be here for this important debate. I would like to
thank the presidency of Senegal and His Excellency
Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Senegalese Abroad, for his leadership. I thank the
membership of the Council for the invitation to make a
contribution with a special emphasis on the emerging
architecture of the African Union (AU) for financing
peace and security.

Peace and stability is the prerequisite for
socioeconomic development in a continent that has
begun to turn a corner and has demonstrated a new
dynamism after years of economic decline. Several
speakers have already referred to a number of high-
level reports that have established three very important
facts. First, the crises that the world faces today are
often so complex that no one single organization is
able to provide the needed response. Secondly, regional
organizations bring a comparative advantage to the
table. Thirdly, there is a need for financing mechanisms
that are predictable and sustainable, rather than
voluntary and ad hoc. A well-funded African Peace and
Security Architecture is not simply an African priority,
it is a global strategic imperative.

When the African Union came into being it was
determined to address the root causes of conflicts, and
it instituted a Peace and Security Architecture to that
end. It also adopted a vision to silence the guns by 2020.
However, even long before that, the Organization of
African Unity, the precursor to the African Union, had
put in place a mechanism to finance its peace activities,
mainly in the form of upstream preventive diplomacy
and, occasionally, a few stabilization missions pending
the maturation ofa global response.

That was the idea behind the setting up of the Peace
Fund established over 20 years ago in 1993. That was
the time when Africa was beginning to confront major
crises, to which the global community was not always in
a position to respond in a timely manner. Nonetheless,
despite the goodwill, the deep economic crises of
the day and the proliferation of crises in subsequent
years led to a situation where the Fund fell short of
its objectives. The limited resources of the Fund were
quickly overwhelmed by the needs, thereby hampering
the organization's ability to manage continental peace
and security priorities.

It is opportune here to highlight and appreciate
the support provided by the international community,
bilateral partners, regional organizations and the United
Nations, as well as the innovative ways in which that
was done, including through United Nations-managed
trust funds. There have sometimes been frustrations on
both sides, and lessons have been learned that will no
doubt inform the future.

Early this year, the leadership of the African
Union appointed a Special Envoy with the mandate to
develop ideas and proposals on how the African Union
could revitalize the Peace Fund. As that Envoy, I was
requested to put forward ideas on how the facility could
be funded, structured and governed for the challenges
of today in a much more predictable way that would
avoid overreliance on multiple unpredictable funding
channels. It is important to emphasize that, while
the Union's members were seeking to undertake that
initiative in a spirit of greater ownership and reduced
dependence on ad hoc voluntary and unpredictable
external sources, they also conceived of the Fund as
a means to strengthen and provide the international
community with a more effective tool for partnerships.

At the AU Assembly of Heads of States and
Government held in Kigali in July, the Union's
leadership deliberated on the revitalization of the
Peace Fund and took a number of key decisions. The
conclusions reached were by consensus and sought to
reflect the principles of self-reliance, solidarity, ability
to pay, equitable burden-sharing, greater compliance
and predictability. The Fund will focus on four main
priorities: first, on preventive diplomacy, as experience
has shown that that is by far the most cost-effective way
to maintain peace, which in the case of the AU would be
around $35 million per year, a modest but very effective
expenditure; secondly, on institutional capacity to
address institutional gaps in the implementation of the
Fund, estimated at $30 million per year; thirdly, on
peace-support operations, when that becomes necessary
and appropriate and as approved by the competent AU
organs; and, fourthly, on a crisis-reserve facility to
enable the AU to respond to the rapid onset of crises in
a timely manner.

I want to emphasize that it is on the third
priority - peace-support operations - and that
priority alone that the AU is seeking support and
cooperation from the United Nations through assessed
contributions for Security Council-authorized, but AU-
led, operations. A number of scenarios were considered
as to what financial commitment that translates into,
given the unpredictable nature of such undertakings.
Those scenarios are being shared with the competent
United Nations and AU administrative organs. African
Union members fully appreciate that getting the Fund
fully operational is a complex task at the technical,
administrative and political levels. Nevertheless, that
task is under way. An implementation mechanism is in
place, led by 10 Finance Ministers. We have agreed to
phase in the mechanism, using 2017 as a transition year,
so as to allow countries to go through the legal, fiscal
and institutional mechanisms and to ensure compliance
with national requirements and international
obligations.

As far as cooperation with the United Nations is
concerned, both sides appreciate that there is much
work to be done by both organizations to refine the
ways in which that cooperation should be realized,
including the consideration of a number of scenarios to
define, first, what the 25 per cent African contribution
would imply and, secondly, under what conditions
the 75 per cent United Nations contributions would
be requested. Both the African Union and the United
Nations fully appreciate what that would mean in terms
of the administrative, fiduciary and governance angles,
including full compliance with AU and United Nations
norms as well as international obligations.

The recent joint review by the two organizations
has provided further lessons for reflection. There is
a need for further innovation and mutual learning.
However, African countries are determined to take
ownership of the maintenance of peace and stability
on the continent. Today the world faces threats that
cannot be confined to a particular geographical
area, and it is critical to have all hands on deck. The
African Peace Fund provides a robust mechanism and
unified governance and reporting lines to deal with the
numerous channels that complicate accountability and
the frameworks that raise transaction costs and reduce
effectiveness for all. As the United Nations Security
Council considers a strengthened partnership between
the two organizations, I hope members will agree that
the revitalized AU Peace Fund provides a more coherent
framework and a more articulated instrument, through
which the continent of Africa and its friends in the
international community can work together to promote
the cause of peace and stability in Africa and the world.

