Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me thank Venezuela for having convened
today's debate and on its choice of the theme "Respect
for the principles and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations as a key element for the maintenance of
international peace and security". I take this opportunity
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing on the
topic this morning.

I also take this opportunity to condemn in the
strongest terms terrorism in all its forms. Last Friday,
the Kidal camp of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali was the target
of indiscriminate terrorism that claimed the lives of six
peacekeepers and wounded approximately 30 others.
At this painful time for the peacekeeping family, which
includes Morocco, I offer my deepest condolences to the
Secretary-General and to the families of the victims,
and wish the injured a speedy recovery.

On 26 June 1945, the founders, eager to save
succeeding generations from the scrouge of war, signed
the Charter of the United Nations in San Francisco.
The objective of that historic founding document is
to maintain international peace and security, ensure
development and promote human rights. Thus, the
principles and purposes of the Charter were carefully
developed to prevent a recurrence of past tragedies,
restore dignity to humankind and establish the principle
of equality among the States Members of the United
Nations. Although the Charter of the United Nations
has laid the foundation for a new global system, over the
years the United Nations has adapted to the challenges
facing the international community. Thus, each of the
three pillars ofthe United Nations - peace and security,
development and human rights - developed gradually
to meet the needs of the international environment.

Human rights, which are featured in six Articles
of the Charter, were the first main concern of an
international community anxious not to relive the
suffering of two world wars. That is why, in 1948, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights was the first
instrument to be adopted by the United Nations. The
United Nations later developed a robust legal framework
comprised of 18 conventions, covenants and protocols
and over 30 declarations, covering the entire spectrum
of rights and vulnerable groups. The United Nations
has also set up a complete and comprehensive system
of mechanisms to promote and protect human rights.

The development dimension reflected in six
Articles of the Charter was also at the centre of United
Nations action, on the basis of the principle that there
is no peace without development and no development
without peace. The new 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1),
the Millennium Development Goals and the United
Nations Development Programme are all elements that
have brought the Organization closer to its Member
States and help them set up sustainable development
structures for their populations.

Peace and security, addressed in one-third of
the Charter's Articles, has undergone significant
changes, particularly in the approach used. Indeed,
the United Nations, which had focused initially on
decolonization issues in the 1950s and 1960s, has in
recent decades become a body that promotes political
solutions, mediation and dialogue for the peaceful
resolution of conflicts, thereby working to maintain
and consolidate peace. Leaving behind the traditional
patterns of conflict management and investing more
in conflict prevention and technical assistance in the
areas of development and promotion of human rights,
the United Nations has been able to adapt to new global
security challenges that are increasingly complex and
cross-border.

The Kingdom of Morocco supports the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, particularly
those relating to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
as outlined in Chapter VI, and strongly supports the
ongoing role of the United Nations as a universal
Organization responsible for resolving and deciding
on matters relating to peacekeeping and international
security, the promotion of human rights and sustainable
development. The Kingdom fully supports efforts
to promote reconciliation and dispute settlement, as
evidenced by the mediation efforts of His Majesty
King Mohammed VI in resolving the crisis in the Mano
River region, our assistance to our Malian brothers in
overcoming their crisis, and our support for our Libyan
brothers to help them get back on their feet.

At the request of the Secretary-General, a year ago
His Majesty the King offered the Kingdom of Morocco
as host to the inter-Libyan talks under the auspices of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya. Those talks culminated with the signing of the
Libyan Political Agreement in Skhirat on 17 December,
and we welcome the formation of the National
Reconciliation Government in Libya.

Moreover, in its tireless efforts to address the
crises in our continent and elsewhere, the Kingdom
of Morocco has been committed since 1960 to United
Nations efforts to maintain international peace and
security, including by participating in peacekeeping
operations in Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, cote d'Ivoire and Mali, as well as in operations
of the NATO and the European Union mandated by the
Security Council. Moreover, during its three terms as
a non-permanent member of the Security Council, the
last in 2012 and 2013, the Kingdom of Morocco has
continued to uphold the purposes and principles of the
Charter. Lastly, in the coming weeks the Kingdom of
Morocco will host the Arab Summit, which we hope
will be an opportunity to overcome the challenges
facing the Arab world.

The principles of the Charter must be achieved
through the adoption of a comprehensive and
multidimensional approach that focuses onthe rule of law
in all aspects of international relations. That approach
must be based on respect for human rights, democracy,
electoral processes and democratic transitions, the rule
of law and institutions of governance, which are all key
elements established by the United Nations. Finally,
domestic law, which allows States to comply with their
international obligations, must not take precedence
over international law.

The international community is called on to
continue to adapt its approach and method. To that end,
the United Nations must put human beings and their
well-being at the centre of its action. United Nations
action in the areas of humanitarian rights and human
rights must be depoliticized. Obsolete ideologies must
evolve and adapt to the realities of today's world.

