Mr. Gonzalez Franco (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate the
Government of Uruguay on its initiative to convene
this open debate on an issue that, unfortunately, is still
current, even after the heartbreaking experiences of
two world wars and countless armed conflicts.
In an armed conflict, the protection of any individual
who is not a party to hostilities is an obligation that the
States at war cannot avoid, even if they are not parties
to the Geneva Conventions, since that obligation is
enshrined in international humanitarian law and is
of a customary nature. Armed conflicts have been
changing. Today, they have little in common with the
conflicts of the nineteenth century, which took place on
defined battlefields, far from populated areas, and were
between armies ofdifferent States. Such armed conflicts
are now the exception. Unconventional conflicts are
now the norm and, increasingly, it is civilians who
indiscriminately suffer their consequences.

ForParaguay,theincreasednumberofunconventional
conflicts and the new technologies in no way challenge
the applicability of the Geneva Conventions. We
believe that the concern of the international community
should be focused on developing their provisions and
their Additional Protocols, in order to avoid legal
gaps that could impede their implementation in given
conflicts, which would be mainly to the detriment of
the affected civilian population. For that reason, it is
vital that the issue of defining an armed conflict be
properly debated. Not defining a situation as an armed
conflict implies the non-application of the norms of
international humanitarian law, and can therefore lead
to a lack of protection for civilians, particularly the
most vulnerable civilians - those who, for the simple
fact of being present at the wrong place or time, are
trapped in conflicts between States and non-State or
transnational armed groups or in conflicts between such
groups, or have been subjected to kidnapping, torture,
forced recruitment, inhuman or degrading treatment
or displacement from their homes and separation from
their families.

We are convinced thatpolitical will is one ofthe main
factors needed to ensure that civilians, irrespective of
their nationality or any other social, economic, cultural,
religious or other condition, are protected and that their
human dignity is safeguarded, particularly through
respect for, and the enforcement of, international law
and accountability, when those laws are violated. We
appeal to States, in all situations, when faced with the
imperative of military requirements, to always choose
the humanitarian imperative to protect. In that regard,
we encourage the Council to ensure that such a choice
is made at every point in time, irrespective of who the
parties to the conflict are. We reaffirm that negotiation
and political agreements in conflicts represent the best
guarantee for protecting individuals and achieving
lasting and sustainable peace. We emphasize that that
is a matter in which the Security Council must play a
major role.

Finally, Paraguay reiterates its support for the view
that all civilians have the right to be protected, and that,
when referring to the most vulnerable, such as children,
women or the elderly, the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution should serve as the basic
guideline for all actions on the part of parties to armed
conflicts.

