Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan): Allow me, first of all,
to express my appreciation to Mr. Konuzin, Chairman
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and acting
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation,
for his accomplished report on the activities of the
Committee.

We truly welcome the rapid development of
practical mechanisms of international cooperation to
combat terrorism. Security Council resolution 1535
(2004) has given further important impetus to that
effort. In that connection, we welcome the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban. We fully support
the efforts of those Committees to reinforce the
capabilities of United Nations Member States.

In recent years, the Central Asian region, like
other parts of the world, has experienced the brutal
manifestations of criminal terrorist schemes. The
strengthening of the forces of international terrorism,
extremism and separatism casts a shadow over the
stability of the countries of the region. It is necessary
to note that, after a period of decline, international
terrorism has now started to galvanize its capacities
and to employ much more destructive means. The
disturbing reality is that more and more countries and
regions are becoming targets for terrorists.

In view of that fact, I would like to stress several
important factors in countering the threat of terrorism.
First, counter-terrorism is not only a fight against
terrorist acts and their perpetrators. It is first necessary
to combat the numerous radical and extremist centres
that create and disseminate the ideology of hatred.
Those centres are designed to poison people's minds
and to recruit new zombies to fill the terrorists' ranks,
primarily among young people.

In that connection, I would like to draw the
Council's attention to a very serious threat, not only to
the stability of Central Asia but to that of the entire
world, that is emanating from the religious-extremist
organization Hizb ut-Tahrir. In dealing with
organizations of this kind it is essential to take into
account the fact that peaceful extremist movements do
not exist at all. By their very nature, they are filled
with a sense of hatred and intolerance that eventually
turns into violence. In that regard, our call is for the
Security Council and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
to give more serious attention to the danger of
religious-extremist organizations, including Hizb
ut-Tahrir, and to undertake determined measures by
applying strict sanctions against them.

Secondly, it is no secret that international terrorist
organizations are trying to gain access to components
of weapons of mass destruction. In the last three years
alone, Uzbekistan's law-enforcement bodies have
confiscated 15 containers of radioactive materials as
they made their way across our country. We consider
resolving the issue of the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction to be a vital element of our foreign
policy and an essential part of regional and global
security. In that context, realizing the initiative to
create a nuclear-free-zone in Central Asia is in the
interest not only of the region but of the entire world
community.

Thirdly, the illicit flow of narcotics has become
one of the main sources of financing for terrorist
structures. To ensure safe corridors and good markets
for their commodities, narco-syndicates are entering
into alliances with destructive forces whose terrorist
acts create favourable conditions for the narcotics
business, as they destabilize situations in different parts
of the world. Having realized that danger, Uzbekistan
has taken the initiative to establish a regional
information and coordination centre in Central Asia to
combat trans-border crime connected with the illegal
flow of narcotics. That initiative was supported by the
Secretary-General, and we hope that many members of
the Council will offer their kind assistance in realizing
this plan.

My fourth point is that positive results in the fight
against international terrorism can be attained only
through a solid global system of counteraction with the
United Nations at its centre. The principle of
indivisibility demands a more active and increased role
by regional organizations in the process. In that
connection, we attach great importance to the recently
established regional counter-terrorism structure of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), which is
based in Tashkent, which will coordinate the
interaction of SCO member States with a view to
combating terrorism, separatism and extremism.

In our view, establishing contact mechanisms
between the regional counter-terrorism structure of the
SCO, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) would play a considerable role towards
consolidating international efforts to combat new
challenges. We are of the belief that taking into account
the points I have outlined would contribute to the
effective realization of the international counter-
terrorism strategy.

We would like to note that, over many years,
Uzbekistan has continuously appealed to the
international community to consolidate common efforts
in the fight against terrorism. The work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee reflects our vision for tackling
this problem. The Counter-Terrorism Committee of the
Security Council has made significant progress in its
work and is no doubt an effective mechanism for
coordinating the international efforts against terrorism.

The Government of Uzbekistan welcomes the
programme of work of the Committee for the coming
90-day period. The recommendations and provisions
reflected in the programme will no doubt contribute to
further strengthening the cooperation between the
Committee and member countries to combat terrorism.
In particular, I would like to stress the importance of
the development of the work of assessing countries'
needs for technical assistance. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee's experts will play an important role to that
effect by visiting those countries.

