Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): Since this is the first time I
have taken the floor in the month of August, allow me
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to wish you
every success. May I also extend our appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
describing the present situation in Afghanistan
(S/2005/525). It was indeed enlightening. In addition, I
would like to thank the Special Representative,
Mr. Jean Arnault, for his briefing today and to
commend him and his colleagues for their efforts in
trying to promote democracy, peace and stability in
Afghanistan.

Turkey has already aligned itself with the
statement made a short while ago by the representative
of the United Kingdom on behalf of the European
Union. In light of Turkey's deep-rooted historical and
friendly ties with Afghanistan, I am taking the floor to
highlight a few points with regard to my country's
views.

The adoption of the constitution in January 2004
and the holding of direct presidential elections in
October 2004 constituted important milestones in the
Bonn process and reaffirmed the dedication of the
Afghan people to achieving reconciliation, peace and
stability in their country and thus in their region. We
very much hope that the last benchmark of the Bonn
Agreement - the parliamentary and provincial council
elections on 18 September - will be held on time and
in a secure environment.

As of February 2005, Turkey assumed for the
second time the leadership of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) with the participation of a
large Turkish military contingent in order to further
consolidate peace, tranquillity and law and order in
Afghanistan. As stated in the Secretary-General's
report, after having fulfilled its mission Turkey handed
over the command to Italy on 4 August. However, it is
needless to say that Turkey's strong commitment to the
security, unity, reconstruction and welfare of
Afghanistan will continue unabated. The visit to
Afghanistan by the Turkish Prime Minister in April
2005, during our leadership of ISAF, gave our
Government the opportunity to confirm its readiness to
assist and support Afghanistan in every possible way.

The only option open for Afghanistan is success.
Hence, the continued commitment of the international
community to the achievement of that goal is essential
and will remain so in the months and years to come.

