I thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the Head of the Delegation of the European Union and the Security Council Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) for their comprehensive and interesting briefings. First of all, I welcome the tenth report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1177) on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), which was just been presented to us by Ms. DiCarlo. The report not only recalls the Secretary-General's unswerving support for resolution 2231 (2015) and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) but also shows the support provided day after day by the Secretariat for the concrete operational implementation of the resolution in its various dimensions, thereby confirming that resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA remain the only legal framework in force today. The recently adopted report of the Facilitator (see S/2020/1244) for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) is also particularly useful in that regard, and I thank him. I would also like to stress that it is essential that the Secretariat continue to have the necessary means to monitor the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). Together with Germany and the United Kingdom, France has worked tirelessly for the preservation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. Iranian statements aimed at making the E-3 - France, Germany and the United Kingdom - responsible for the current situation are therefore particularly unwelcome. That agreement is an essential achievement of multilateral diplomacy and the non-proliferation architecture. We negotiated the JCPOA with the conviction that it would decisively contribute to international peace and security and to building confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme. It remains the best way to verifiably monitor Iran's nuclear programme in order to ensure that Iran develops nuclear energy for exclusively peaceful ends. We stand today at a key moment for the preservation of that agreement. Our first priority is to end Iran's violations of the agreement, which deprives it of its substance, and to prevent any action by Iran that would further weaken it. We are very concerned about Iran's recent announcement of its intention to install three new advanced centrifuge cascades at the Natanz Fuel Enrichment Plant and about the law recently passed by Iran's Parliament, which if fully implemented would substantially ramp up the enrichment programme, significantly reduce the verification capabilities of the International Atomic Energy Agency and result in a resumption of activities that have no credible civilian justification and were abandoned by Iran some 20 years ago. Such measures would be absolutely incompatible with the JCPOA and Iran's other nuclear commitments. Their implementation would jeopardize the balance upon which the agreement was built by putting Iran in a more serious situation than it was in before the conclusion of the JCPOA. Our second priority is to ensure the full return of all stakeholders to full compliance with the agreement, as Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian clearly recalled yesterday during the meeting of the JCPOA Joint Commission's participating States. That is essential to preserving the JCPOA. In that regard, we are very encouraged by the recent statements made by the future American Administration with regard to the JCPOA, which could pave the way for the return of the United States to the Vienna agreement, opening the diplomatic prospect for the return of the United States and Iran to the agreement and for addressing broader concerns regarding Iran. The priority today is clear: to preserve the space for diplomacy in order to allow all the parties to return to the full implementation of the agreement. In a context in which the risks and challenges are many, there is no alternative to full compliance with resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA in all their aspects. We are pleased that message was clearly expressed in the ministerial declaration adopted yesterday by the participants to the agreement. My third and final point is to echo what we unanimously agreed at the Security Council meeting on 20 October (see S/2020/1037), that is, that we must also address regional security concerns. To that end, the return of all parties to the Vienna agreement could contribute to restoring trust and opening up dialogue on those issues in order to find political solutions to the conflicts in the region and prevent any escalation. In that regard, it is important that Iran comply with the relevant Security Council resolutions on the prohibition of the transfer of arms to non-State actors in the Middle East. Along with its E-3 partners, France is ready to commit to a constructive dialogue on regional security issues with the Secretary- General, the countries of the region and the main partners, because the security of the region is also a matter of international peace and security and concerns us all. Since 2003, the E-3 has played a key role in the Iranian nuclear dossier. Today we are determined to continue to meet our responsibilities.
