Mr. Barros (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to congratulate the delegation of the Republic of
Korea on its assumption ofthe presidency ofthe Security
Council. We would like to reiterate our commitment to
providing ongoing support towards the success of its
stewardship. We also thank the delegation of Nigeria
for its excellent work in the presidency during the
month of April.

We value the briefing by Under-Secretary-General
Feltman.

Since the Council last met to discuss the situation in
Ukraine (see S/PV.7l65), just three days ago, the crisis
has escalated and, once again, we see acts of violence
involving separatist groups. The crisis is very quickly
entering a dangerous and unpredictable phase. We
regret that turn of events and we would like to express
our deep concern at the recent events in Sloviansk that
had fatal consequences.

The Council must contribute to generating
maximum restraint and moderation from the parties.
We reiterate our call upon all parties to use all means
conducive to finding a peaceful settlement of the
crisis through inclusive political dialogue. It is also
extremely important that parties focus on a peaceful
way out of the crisis through direct political dialogue,
that they refrain from acting unilaterally and that they
support international mediation efforts, in keeping with
General Assembly resolution 68/262. In that context,
we reiterate our condemnation of the kidnapping of
observers affiliated with the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and we reiterate our call for
them to be released immediately and without conditions.

Now more than ever, it is vital to work in a spirit of
compromise like that which we saw during the Geneva
talks on 17 April, which then led to thejoint declaration
of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, the United States of America, Ukraine and
the European Union. That agreement lays out specific
steps for reducing tensions and restoring security for
all citizens, such as, inter alia, refraining from the use
of violence or intimidation, the disarmament of armed
groups and the handover of illegally occupied buildings.
Once again, we reiterate the need for respecting the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. Similarly, we reaffirm the responsibility
incumbent on States Members of the United Nations to
show restraint in the use of force or the threat thereof
against the territorial integrity or political independence
of any State.

Chile believes that it is necessary to strengthen
the possibilities for a diplomatic solution to be found.
To that end, we support the efforts of the Secretary-
General and, in particular, we welcome the visit of
Under-Secretary-General Feltman to Ukraine and
Russia, which at this time Chile believes is the top
priority. Chile also believes any further escalation of
the crisis should be avoided by entering into dialogue
and through confidence-building measures, with a view
to contributing to the establishment of an environment
conducive to the holding of presidential elections on
25 May.

