Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French): At
the outset, I wish to join Ambassador Fulci in conveying
our deepest regret at the tragic death of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Maitre Alioune
Blondin Beye; members of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola who were accompanying him; and the
two pilots of the plane in which they were flying. Maitre
Beye, former Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali,
performed his sensitive work with unflagging intelligence
and zeal. His loss, and those of his colleagues in the cause
of peace, will be lamented throughout the great United
Nations family.

I will begin this afternoon by congratulating you, Sir,
for your initiative in arranging this debate. Focusing the
Security Council's attention on the plight of children caught
up in armed conflict is both appropriate and overdue.

It is appropriate because the Security Council, in many
of the ways it carries out its peace and security mandate -
be it mediation of peace settlements or peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations - has an unparalleled impact on
the plight of children affected by armed conflict. This is an
urgent problem not only of human rights and development,
but also of peace and basic human security.

Furthermore, the ramifications of our continuing to
neglect this issue today will have devastating consequences
on future generations. Children weaned on violence will be
ill-equipped to build a peaceful and prosperous society for
the future, which in turn will increase the threats to
international peace and stability in the coming decades.

It is also appropriate that, in considering possible
measures in this area, the Council seek the views and
support of all Member States, as well as of relevant
international agencies and non-governmental
organizations. I commend you in particular, Sir, for
considering the contributions of non-members of the
Security Council before the Council takes its decision.
Your efforts to this end represent a high standard that we
hope will be followed in the Council' s future proceedings.

(spoke in English)

This debate is also overdue because today's conflicts
exact a grim and terrible toll on children, a toll of death
and injury, with some 2 million children killed and 4 to
5 million disabled in conflicts over the past decade; a toll
of displacement and separation from families, with over
a million children orphaned over the same period; a toll
of abduction, detention, sexual abuse - including rape -
and the widespread recruitment of child soldiers, with
hundreds of thousands of children currently participating,
in one manner or in another, in armed conflicts around
the world; and a toll of lasting psychological trauma, with
some 10 million children being deeply scarred in this way
over the past decade.

A fundamental point of departure for this discussion
can be found in relevant international human rights and
humanitarian law, in instruments like the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and the Geneva Conventions and
Additional Protocols.The basic legal norms do exist to
protect children from the ravages of armed conflict, but
this is clearly not enough. If such standards are to have
any effect, state and non-state actors must be aware of,
understand, accept and fully adhere to them.

The dissemination of information relating to these
legal norms and the enforcement of these principles
require rigorous political advocacy. In this connection,
Canada strongly supports the work of Olara Otunnu as
Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
a post created as a result of the ground-breaking report by
Mrs. Graca Machel on the impact of armed conflict on
children.

As an advocate on behalf of children trapped in
conflict, and as a mediator with Governments and
non-state actors that target children, the Special
Representative has a critical role to play in creating

 

"political space" for the relevant United Nations agencies
and the humanitarian non- governmental organizations which
are increasingly active in this area.

When designing its operations, the Security Council
must make every effort to protect both children and their
supportive environment: schools, hospitals, health centres
and religious institutions. We strongly endorse the concept
of children and their protective and nurturing institutions
being considered as "zones of peace" and protected as such.

Perhaps the most well-known aspect of this issue, and
one which needs our urgent attention, is that of the use of
child soldiers - not just those who are trained to fight, but
also the many children who are required to serve in armies
and rebel groups as cooks, porters, messengers, spies,
labourers and sex slaves. While this is not a new
phenomenon, in the late twentieth century the problem has
escalated with the advent of light-weapons technology, the
rise of intra-State conflict and the huge increase in irregular
forces in most of today's armed confrontations.

Canada is therefore pleased to be supporting the non-
governmental organization Coalition to Stop the Use of
Child Soldiers, which tomorrow in New York and in
Geneva will launch its campaign to raise global awareness
of this problem. We urge this campaign to pay special
attention to the plight of young girls caught up in armed
conflict and to the acts of violence against women and girls
which such conflicts seem to generate so inexorably.
Targeted as sex slaves, they not only suffer directly and
immediately in times of war, but are further violated with
social stigmas which impair their reintegration into their
families and societies after the hostilities are concluded.

Only last week, a group of about 30 young girls was
abducted from their school in northern Uganda by the so-
called Lord's Resistance Army, which has already abducted
hundreds of children to serve its needs since the beginning
of the year.

In addressing the issue of child soldiers, the challenge
is manifold. There is the challenge of prevention: we must
make it difficult and risky to make combatants out of
children. There must be retribution for those who indulge
in such practices, and we must find alternatives to children
being recruited as soldiers. This involves addressing
forthrightly the fundamental root causes, including
underdevelopment, economic deprivation and societal
instability, that make children prone and vulnerable to being
made soldiers.

International legal norms have an important role in
such prevention. Canada supports the early adoption of
the optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, which aims at raising the age of recruitment in
the armed forces, and especially the age at which young
people may participate in hostilities.

In addition, Canada has taken a strong position in
favour of the creation of an impartial, independent and
effective international criminal court, and we are working
to ensure that its statute will contain a provision to
criminalize the recruitment and use of children under 15
years old as soldiers.

We must also facilitate the early demobilization of
children from current military pursuits. In this connection,
when mediating peace agreements, and in developing
peacekeeping and peace-building mandates, the Security
Council should insist on compliance, by Government and
non-State actors alike, with the relevant principles of
international humanitarian and human rights law.

Finally, we must all assist with the reintegration and
rehabilitation of child soldiers into their communities and
enable them to participate fully in the reconstruction of
their war-torn societies. To this end, Canada has recently
launched a number of projects supporting the tracing and
resettling of children in northern Uganda and the
demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers in
Liberia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Our approach to the plight of children affected by
armed conflict should be founded on the premise that they
represent the most vulnerable segment of human society,
and as such they deserve special care and protection of
their rights. It does not satisfy our duty merely to meet
their basic needs, as objects of compassion. The Security
Council's engagement in this issue therefore represents a
significant step forward in advancing the cause of human
security and a more comprehensive approach to solving
this problem.

As a first step, the adoption of a strong presidential
statement by the Security Council against such vile
practices will focus attention on this issue. The Council
cannot stop there. It must persist in its vigilance and
continue to keep the plight of children caught up in armed
conflict at the forefront of its agenda. This means, inter
alia, automatically considering taking measures to protect
children as part of its actions to maintain international
peace and security, including, of course, actions which

 

address specifically the rights and requirements of children
devastated by the ravages of war.

