Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I should like to
thank the Presidents and the Prosecutors for the clarity
and specificity of their briefings. They have reminded
us of the significant practical issues that need to be
addressed as the Rwanda and Yugoslavia Tribunals
wind up their work. They need our continuing support
as they go through this important period.

With the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda closing this month and the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia expected to close in
the foreseeable future, it is timely for us to take a step
back and reflect on the value and significance of their
work.

New Zealand has a very strong sense of identification
with both Tribunals. As a Council member in 1993,
New Zealand was an early and strong advocate for the
establishment ofthe Yugoslavia Tribunal. In 1994, New
Zealand played a leading role in pushing the Council to
respond to the unfolding genocide in Rwanda, and later
that year we took the initiative in the Council to prepare
the draft statute and led the negotiations on the text.

When we look back at what the Tribunals have
achieved, we are all the more convinced that the
Council made the right decision in establishing these
bodies. We should be proud of what was created. We
should warmly thank the judges, Tribunal staff and
United Nations personnel who have worked tirelessly
to deliver justice and provide some measure of closure
to Victims, and, above all, to send a clear message that
there can be no impunity for perpetrators of atrocities,
even at the highest levels.

New Zealand also congratulates all those countries
that have cooperated with the Tribunals to help bring
accused persons to trial, and those countries that
provided other forms of practical assistance to the
Tribunals, not least the Netherlands and Tanzania.

Unfortunately, the Security Council itself has been
a less supportive parent to the Tribunals than it should
have been, and it has failed to support the International
Criminal Court with regard to cases that it has referred
to it. We also believe that it is necessary to speak out
against an unfortunate trend that has developed in the
Council in recent years. A budget-driven mentality
seems to have distorted the conversation about the
role and performance of the Tribunals. While justice
must be delivered efficiently and expeditiously, judicial
machinery is inherently expensive. Judicial processes
are slow. We know this only too well from our domestic
experiences. We all knew this would be the case in 1993
and 1994, and we also knew that teething problems and
initial inefficiencies were likely; they always are when
you create something new.

We accept that there have been administrative
and other problems that might have been avoided. The
Tribunals have not been perfect. But we reject any
suggestion that this should lead to the conclusion that
the Tribunals have failed. We also take issue with any
assertion that the experience of these two Tribunals
means that future efforts to establish ad hoc tribunals
must rely solely on voluntary contributions. Begging-
bowl justice is unseemly and unsustainable over
time. The experience of the Lebanon, Sierra Leone
and Cambodia tribunals has highlighted the many
challenges that a wholly voluntary funding model
presents.

It is true that we now have a standing judicial body
in the International Criminal Court (ICC). That is an
important and positive part of the way forward. But we
are nonetheless seeing an ongoing demand for ad hoc
judicial solutions, in order to meet local characteristics
or requirements related to specific peace processes.
The Special Criminal Court established in the Central
African Republic is a current example of this; it
complements the ICC and responds to the need for
wider national accountability. New Zealand wants to put
firmly on record our View that a reliance on voluntary
funding alone is not adequate for such bodies.

We need to have a serious conversation about how
to practically, sustainably and cost-effectively ensure
accountability for serious international crimes. In these
conversations we need to face up to the reality that
real justice has real costs; it always has. Part of this
conversation also needs to be about how the Council
can do better in ensuring practical support for the
machinery of international justice and thus assist it in
expediting its work.

Looking forward, we reiterate our support for the
Residual Mechanism. It has an important role to play
as the Rwanda and Yugoslavia Tribunals complete their
work.

The Mechanism's first review is under way. There
is, of course, still room for improvement, including
drawing on lessons learned from the Tribunals.
But overall, we believe the Mechanism should be
commended for its work to date. It is implementing many
of the lessons learned from the Tribunals. We would
encourage the Mechanism to work collaboratively with
Rwanda on legacy issues, including with regard to the
final location of the Rwanda Tribunal archives and
original documentation and evidence.

The Council also needs to continue to support
the Yugoslavia Tribunal through to the end of its
mandate. As we have been reminded today, some of the
judgements yet to be handed down are among the most
important that the Yugoslavia Tribunal will deliver.
We need to ensure that the Tribunal has the resources
needed to complete this important work. Negotiations
on a draft resolution to extend the judges' terms will
begin shortly. Member State cooperation in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions continues
to be vital to the success and timely completion of the
work of all tribunals.

Finally, I would like to thank Ambassador Cristian
Barros Melet of Chile for his work in chairing the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.

