Mr. Champion (spoke in French): With regard to
the role of women, last year we set up a very active
United Nations police women's committee, and this year
I appointed a very dynamic woman as gender equality
adviser. Through our action plan to protect the victims
of electoral violence, which consists of 120 points for
the next two years, we have been trying for the past
two months to figure out how we can fully integrate a
gender perspective across our work. That is not an easy
undertaking given the role of women in the Congo, but
we are working on it and it is very motivating.

With respect to sexual violence and abuse, since
the month of August we have obviously made an
extremely great effort under the leadership of our
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
I would just like to note that we have put in place a
mechanism for reporting any allegation of sexual
violence or abuse to the Special Representative and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic People's Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) within three hours. I think this
is the key to a number of other mechanisms, since the
disciplinary unit is also informed within in the same
time period.

On the use of new technologies, in particular
drones, the police use of unarmed drones last year
showed some promise with respect to maintaining
public order, monitoring of illegal barriers, deterrence
of crime in urban areas and a range of police-oriented
aspects as to the use of these new technologies. If we
have reduced our use this year, it is because priority
must be given to military use for dealing with a number
of armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, particular the Allied Democratic Forces, the
Forces de resistance patriotiques en Ituri and the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda. A second
reason for the reduction in the use of drones by police
is that we also have to recruit police officers who have a
certain sensitivity on the police use of unarmed drones,
give them some training on the ground and follow up on
and manage them in a somewhat specific manner. But it
is a subject that we have naturally not set aside.

With respect to organized transnational crime which
is connected to one of the questions that was raised in
the context of the very prescriptive versus somewhat
flexible mandates adopted by the Security Council, I
would say that, in the context of the current MONUSCO
mandate, the trafficking of natural resources is an
important subject. We do not necessarily see the
mandate as very prescriptive in terms of requiring
the MONUSCO police to work specifically on serious
organized crime. Indeed, in bringing all of these items
together in the context of budgetary constraints, I would
say that the right balance has to be found, first, to take
into account that, as stated in the mandate, there is a
problem involving the trafficking of natural resources.
Secondly, there are budgetary constraints and, under
the traditional mandate of the United Nations police in
terms of capacity-building, serious organized crime is
one of the elements of the judicial police and as such
those aspects cannot be completely overlooked.

I believe, therefore, that we must find the right
balance of resource allocation. For our part, we are
currently dedicating four MONUSCO police officers
with some limited resources, but they still manage to
have an impact and, in terms of civilian and military
coordination, it is possible, for example, to have some
aspects of this effort linked with those of the military
component of MONUSCO beyond dealing with armed
groups in eastern Congo, as the aim of our general
approach on the serious organized crime is to work on
a national scale.

