Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the
Council on this important issue. I also wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy for his briefing,
and I appreciate the participation at this meeting of
Mr. Tete Antonio, Acting Permanent Observer of the
African Union (AU).

I also want to welcome the presence among us
today of Mr. Romano Prodi. The Secretary-General's
report on support to African Union peacekeeping
operations (S/2009/470) draws effectively upon the
Prodi report and its vision for an enhanced partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union. I
would like to echo Mr. Prodi's call for an approach that
looks at Africa from a regional perspective, analyses
African peacekeeping within the broader context of
promoting social and economic development and
strengthens the multilateral dimension of our efforts.

Brazil has a permanent, deep and multifaceted
commitment to Africa that is rooted in our important
historical, cultural and political links with the
continent. We seek to support Africa's efforts to
achieve peace, security and development through
various means, from military cooperation to technical
assistance and capacity-building. Brazil is currently
contributing to five peacekeeping missions in Africa
and has participated in many others in the past. We also
seek to contribute to peacebuilding, in particular
through our work in the Peacebuilding Commission's
country-specific configuration for Guinea-Bissau.

More recently, we have engaged in initiatives
designed to broaden the scope of our bilateral
cooperation with African countries in such matters. In
Guinea-Bissau, for instance, a Brazilian military
mission has been established that is expected to be
fully operational early next year, with a focus on
training. We are beginning a programme of intense
military cooperation with Mozambique, with a specific
focus on capacity-building for peacekeeping
operations. That involves training officers and
exchanging experiences, which will ultimately enable
Mozambique to create its own peacekeeping training
centre. Consultations are under way with other
countries in order to define the terms of enhanced
bilateral military cooperation.

Peacekeeping is a global responsibility as well as
a global asset. As the United Nations recognizes the
African Union's ability to make a unique contribution
to conflict prevention and peacekeeping on the
continent, it must seek to extend all the necessary
support for those endeavours. Cooperation with
regional organizations under Chapter VIII of the
Charter is, first and foremost, a way for the Council to
better exercise its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The Secretary-General's report on support to
African Union peacekeeping operations is a rich
document that contains many useful proposals. I am
certain that the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, the Security Council and the Fifth
Committee will give it the careful consideration it
deserves. Today, I would like to briefly comment on a
few of the ideas put forth in the report.

My delegation endorses the need for a broader
and more institutionalized dialogue between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union. Such a dialogue must be informed
by the will to listen, thus allowing for a genuine
exchange of views with the aim of finding the most
appropriate avenues of cooperation between the two
organizations.

Brazil also believes that strengthening the ties
between the Secretariat and the Commission of the
African Union is of great importance. We welcome the
report's suggestions in that regard. We look forward to
debating the Secretary-General's forthcoming proposal
to reconfigure the Secretariat's presence in Addis
Ababa in the Fifth Committee.

Concerning the financing of peacekeeping
operations carried out by the African Union under a
United Nations mandate, it seems to my delegation that
more work needs to be done. Building the African
Union's capacity in the areas of budgeting, accounting
and management is certainly an important aspect of
that. Donors should also strive to harmonize their
accountability requirements and to make their funding
mechanisms more flexible, long-term and predictable.

The creation of a trust fund for African Union
peacekeeping operations is an idea that deserves
serious consideration. In our view, a trust fund could
have two valuable results. First, it could attract a
number of non-traditional donors who would find it
difficult to participate in such efforts through the
bilateral route. Secondly, by its very nature, the fund
could help to address the challenge of coordinating
international cooperation, and thus make it more
effective.

In conclusion, I wish to mention the need for us
to see the maintenance of international peace and
security in Africa, as anywhere in the world, as a
process that is not, and cannot, be limited to
peacekeeping. Conflict prevention, post-conflict
peacebuilding and strong socio-economic development
are key to maintaining and consolidating political
stability. The Security Council, United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, national
Governments and the Secretariat should redouble their
efforts to work together, under the principle of national
ownership, to effectively support the efforts being
made all over the African continent to build peaceful
and prosperous societies. Brazil will continue to do its
part.

