Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, we emphasize our support for the statements to be delivered by the representatives of the Sudan, on behalf of the Group of Arab States, Bangladesh, on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, and Azerbaijan, on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. We also thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, and the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Ursula Mueller, for their valuable briefings (see S/PV.8706), which reminded us of the gravity of the situation on the ground. Regrettably, today's meeting is convened because of the delicate and dangerous circumstances as a result of continued aggression and repeated violations against the Palestinian people by Israel, the occupying Power. Over the past two years and as a non-permanent member of the Security Council, we felt the deep concern of the United Nations about the illegal Israeli policies that have threatened to cause total collapse and undermine any prospects for a two-State solution, as noted by the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, here in the Chamber on many occasions. Israel has adopted countless aggressive practices and policies during the years of occupation, but it is unacceptable that the Israeli occupying authorities continue those violations with impunity. The Security Council has been unable to hold Israel, the occupying Power, accountable for failing to implement the Council's resolutions, in particular for showing disregard and contempt as the occupying Power for the resolutions aimed at protecting the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, and for engaging in illegal practices against Palestinians, their property, holy sites and fundamental rights, in violation of resolutions of international legitimacy and international humanitarian law. It is also unacceptable that 25 years have passed since the Oslo Accords without progress on a comprehensive and just peace regarding this question, which is at the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict. Continuous Israeliacts ofaggression aim to entrench occupation and undermine any prospects for genuine peace. In2019, the occupying Power continued to conduct arbitrary arrests and demolish and seize Palestinian homes, for instance in July when it raided the village of Sur Baher, destroying homes and displacing scores of Palestinian families. It continues unprecedentedly to build many settlements and thousands of settlement units in the West Bank, while expanding settlements in occupied East Jerusalem and forcibly displacing Palestinian civilians, in flagrant violation of resolution 2334 (2016). Settlers are increasingly committing crimes against unarmed Palestinians and their places of worship, which are protected by the occupying Power,which we hold totally responsible for the crimes and aggressions that are flagrant violations of international humanitarian law, international human rights law and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. The occupying Power has also tightened the blockade against Gaza for more than 12 years and continues to shoot live ammunition at Palestinian civilians, claiming, since the start of the Great March of Return, the lives of hundreds of martyrs, including dozens of children, and tens of thousands wounded. The occupying Power is also undermining the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). It continues to attack Muslim and Christian holy sites and persists in altering the legal status of the Al-Aqsa Mosque and dividing it in space and time. It insists on taking illegal unilateral decisions, such as to withhold part of the Palestinian tax revenues and to not renew the mandate of the Temporary International Presence in Hebron, not to mention changing the historic character and demographic composition of Jerusalem and trying to impose a fait accompli while entrenching its control over the land that it occupies. I raise one simple question. Has the time not come for the Security Council to act decisively to stop Israeli attacks and crimes? If it does not, we will witness another year of tragedies and lack of hope for us and the Palestinian people. In conclusion, we reiterate the Arab position that we are committed to achieving peace as a strategic option and to resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict in accordance with relevant resolutions of international legitimacy, international law and all the elements of the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002. That Initiative provides for comprehensive peace with Israel preceded by ending the occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories occupied since 1964, including Jerusalem, with the aim of realizing all the legitimate political rights of the Palestinian people and establishing a Palestinian State on their territory, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
