Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): On behalf
of Senegal, I would like to extend my country's deepest
condolences to the Pakistan Government and people
following the cowardly attacks endured in Pakistan
last week. We would also like to commend and express
our appreciation for the Pakistani delegation's wise
and timely initiative to organize this open debate of
the Security Council on the fight against international
counter-terrorism, which continues to be of great
concern to the international community. Without
a doubt, international terrorism is a dangerous and
complex phenomenon that requires a holistic approach
in order to completely eradicate it, as is suggested by
the topic of this debate.

By reiterating our firm condemnation of terrorist
acts, whatever their motivation, my country is committed
to acting in a concrete and concerted way to achieve
results in our common objective in the fight against
that scourge. Today, this is indeed an enterprise that
really does require effective and sincere international
collaboration and cooperation. International terrorism
includes groups that ignore borders and that benefit
from information and communication technologies to
plan and commit their crimes.

Terrorism, without a doubt, is one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security,
as well as to human life and dignity. The alarming
frequency of terrorist attacks, despite the numerous
and untiring efforts undertaken to combat them, show
that additional work is necessary within the framework
of international cooperation and coordination. Our
work is more necessary than ever before. That is
why we support all actions that will lead to greater
mobilization and closer cooperation among members of
the international community to combat terrorism.

In that regard, the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, adopted in 2006, remains the most
comprehensive reference framework in providing and
effective response to this scourge. The Strategy reflects
our commitment and willingness to act in a coherent
and concerted fashion to achieve our common goal of
eradicating this danger. In order for the Strategy to be
completely successful, the four pillars, because of their
intrinsic importance as well as their interdependence,
must be implemented impartially. In the same vein,
implementing the Strategy is indispensable in order
to improve cooperation and to make the fight against
terrorism more effective, particularly with regard to
an exchange of information and experiences. What
we need, therefore, is an effective global approach to
terrorism that should, by definition, be based on the
comprehensive and balanced implementaton of the
Strategy.

Likewise, by establishing a raft of obligations and
measures that States Members of the United Nations
must adopt to crack down on terrorist acts, resolution
1373 (2001), which established the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, offers a framework of action to prevent
and act effectively against terrorist acts. The visits of
the Committee to various countries have provided the
opportunity to review the concrete steps that States
have taken to implement the resolution.

As for my country, Senegal, in addition to the
establishment of a centre for strategic guidance, we have
undertaken enormous efforts to address the challenges
posed by border control, airline security and maritime
safety, among other things, not to mention the legislative
reforms that we have undertaken to adapt our domestic
legislation to the pertinent provisions of international
law. We have also engaged in dynamic cooperation at
the bilateral, subregional and international levels. In
that respect, the situation currently prevailing in the
Sahel, in particular in norther Mali is a source of grave
concern. That crisis, largely fuelled by arms and drug
trafficking, is further proof that our fight against the
tragedy of extremism and terrorism is far from over. In
that regard, we welcome the adoption by the Council of
resolution 2085 (2012), which provides the necessary
international legality and legitimacy to the action
undertaken by the countries of the south-west African
region, which are more than ever determined to help
Mali to dismantle those terrorist groups and regain its
territorial integrity.

The Organization's global approach to the fight
against terrorism cannot succeed without effective
coordination. In that respect, we support the Secretary-
General's proposal to appoint a United Nations counter-
terrorism coordinator, which will allow the Organization
not only to rationalize its counter-terrorism action, but
also to strengthen its visibility and effectiveness.

Furthermore, the adoption of a global convention
on international terrorism would offer considerable
benefits in strengthening the legal framework of our
fight against the scourge. However, we recognize that
the international community must be more politically
resolved to overcome the differences and difficulties
that impede a speedy and consensual finalization of the
draft global counter-terrorism convention.
In conclusion, my delegation, like others here, looks
forward to enjoying a world that is free of all forms of
terrorism, thanks to ourjoint efforts.

