Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I am
delighted, Sir, to convey to you and to your country,
fraternal Guinea, our congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I wish you every success in your work.
I should like also to say how much we appreciated the
efforts of Mr. Gunter Pleuger, the Ambassador of
Germany, who accomplished constructive work last
month during Germany's presidency of the Council.

We thank you also, Sir, for having acceded
swiftly to the Malaysian request, on behalf of the Non-
Aligned Movement, to convene an open meeting to
discuss the question of Iraq. We are doing our utmost,
in a particularly delicate situation, to avert a crisis and
to achieve a peaceful solution that is agreeable to all
States and consonant with their aspirations.

From the very outset, the Arab States -
including Tunisia - have worked tirelessly to defuse
this crisis. We have redoubled our efforts by stepping
up political and diplomatic contacts in order to use
every means to achieve a peaceful solution to the Iraqi
question in accordance with international law and
within the framework of the United Nations.

These efforts have borne fruit. Iraq has accepted
the return of the inspectors and has been cooperating
with them in order to implement the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, in particular
resolution 687 (1991) and resolution 1441 (2002).

The most recent Summit of the Arab League, held
at Sharm el-Sheikh, reaffirmed the sincere desire of
Iraq and of the Arab States to continue on this path.
The decision taken at the Summit to set up a ministerial
committee, which took the initiative of coming to New
York, is the best example of the Arab League's desire
to preserve dialogue as the best way to resolve this
question. The initiative of the Arab League and the
contacts undertaken within the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, the Non-Aligned Movement, the
African Union and the European Union reflect the
desire of the majority of the international community to
choose the peaceful option, within the context of
international law, and to stave off the horror of war, in
keeping with the desire of the overwhelming majority
of world public opinion, as is currently evident.

All of these international parties agree that there
is a need to give the inspectors more time, so that they
can continue to implement resolution 1441 (2002) and
continue their work. Their efforts to date have
produced concrete results, as reaffirmed by the chief
inspector, Hans Blix, and the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, Mr. ElBaradei.
We would like to take this opportunity to express our
deep appreciation for their work and for the efforts of
the team of international inspectors that they have been
leading.

Tunisia, as our President has always stated, firmly
believes that we must continue to try to resolve the
question of Iraq through political and peaceful means
and avoid military action, particularly since it is clear
that Iraq is continuing to cooperate with the United
Nations and is complying with Security Council
resolution 1441 (2002), by which it has committed to
abide. We hope that there will be a peaceful solution to
the Iraqi crisis in the near future so that the unity,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of that country can
be preserved, a way opened to the lifting of sanctions
imposed on the fraternal Iraqi people, and the risk of
tension and instability averted in the Middle East and,
indeed, throughout the world.

Tunisia believes that taking the peaceful option to
resolve the Iraqi problem will have a positive impact
on the prestige of the United Nations and the Security
Council, the guarantor of the world's collective
security. It will also enhance the role of our
Organization in seeking effective solutions to various
unresolved issues, in particular the problem of the
brotherly Palestinian people, whose sufferings continue
under the brutal daily practices of Israel, which
continues to block a political solution to that problem,
with potential negative consequences for security and
stability in the region as a whole.

