Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, and Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
for their briefings.

It should be recalled that, in the same time period
last year, the Security Council took up the question
under consideration today following a report of
the commission of inquiry on human rights in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea that reported
massive human rights violations in the country. The
report, which described some of those violations,
including crimes against humanity, recommended that
the international community and the Security Council
take urgent action, including by referring the situation to
the International Criminal Court, given the seriousness
of the situation in the country, which was characterized
by systematic, flagrant and widespread violations of
human rights. According to the latest reports on the
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
in 2015, those violations persist. As in 2014, we express
our deep concern with regard to allegations of serious
violations of human rights in the country.

We abstained today, as we did last year, because
the reports of serious violations are the result of
investigations conducted outside the country and
because the North Korean authorities categorically reject
them. That is why we call for caution and emphasize
the urgent need to conduct further investigations in
order to determine unequivocally whether the alleged
violations were actually committed, before assigning
responsibility. Furthermore, the special interest that
Council members bring to the issue of human rights
violations in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
should be extended to all similar situations around the
world in order to avoid a double standard, which would
imply that the issue is being used for political purposes.

We therefore urge the members of the Security
Council to move beyond their political and ideological
differences and to find agreement on the ways and
means to create a suitable framework for cooperation
between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and
the United Nations bodies responsible for investigating
violations of human rights. Accordingly, we call on all
States that can exert influence over the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to encourage the country
to engage in a genuine dialogue with the international
community and the countries of the region to facilitate
the access of independent investigators to its territory.

