Mr. Stagno Ugarte (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): The armed conflicts on the Security
Council's agenda are complex phenomena. Their most
visible feature is military confrontation, the armed
clash between two or more parties. However, over and
above military confrontation, there is an unyielding
political and social antagonism based on recurring
cycles of enmity, grudges, hatred, separation, animosity
and fear. Indeed, many of the conflicts that plague
humanity today are based on psychological
mechanisms of fear and hatred among groups, where
any single offence is perpetuated and amplified through
a pernicious dynamic of revenge, victimization and
reciprocal injustice. Personal relationships and social
structures cannot support the burden of stereotypes
used to dehumanise supposed enemies. Hatred
generates more hatred and destruction generates more
destruction and death.

Peace-building at the end of an armed conflict
requires halting that pernicious cycle of hatred and
destruction. The social institutions and personal
relations that serve as a bridge among the various
groups must be rebuilt. It is essential to create an
atmosphere of mutual trust, justice and respect.
Ultimately, the parties must be reconciled with a View
to building a shared future.

Any reconciliation programme must re-examine
the past, the underlying causes of the conflict and the
behaviour of all the parties throughout it. However,
reconciliation must go beyond a mere historical
account. It is indispensable to create an atmosphere
that promotes thinking, contrition and forgiveness, both
collectively and individually, in order to provide an
outlet for demands for justice and revenge.
Reconciliation must not be confined to rehashing past
grievances or to punishing the guilty. Reconciliation
must be committed to the future and create an
atmosphere of tolerance and cooperation among
individuals and communities that have been rent by
conflict. The end product of reconciliation must be a
genuine culture of peace.

Every conflict is unique; each has its own
features and peculiarities. That is why there is no
single mechanism for reconciliation that can be applied
to all. In some cases, truth commissions have
facilitated the process. In other situations, the
prosecution and punishment of leaders and those guilty
of atrocities has been helpful. In others yet, amnesties
have been required. The use of traditional community
mechanisms for justice and forgiveness have also been
very useful.

Reconciliation must be based on truth, justice and
compassion. The truth about a conflict must be fully
revealed so that the victims can talk about the pain and
the trauma caused by the injustice they suffered.
Justice must be served. There must be public
recognition of the damage done and of the violation of
the fundamental rights of the victims. It is crucial that
compassion temper the desire for revenge so as to
make it possible to break the cycle of retribution.

Reconciliation must also empower the victims of
conflict and create a feeling of interdependence among
the parties. The victims must come to feel that their
rights have been recognized and are being respected
and that their former torturers will never again harm
them. Conditions must be created to ensure that the
parties can build a shared future and commit to
working together for the well-being of the entire
community.

It is essential for all the parties to recognize that
working together and cooperation among all are
indispensable elements for building peace.

Reconciliation is an arduous process for which
the local population bears the primary responsibility.
The international community must actively support
local efforts at reconciliation, but it should not try to
act as a substitute. In this context, the United Nations
has an important part to play as a facilitator, assisting
in crafting the mechanisms and agreements that are
required to initiate the process of reconciliation.

In this context, the United Nations in general and
the Security Council in particular could adopt a series
of concrete measures to facilitate national
reconciliation.

When the parties agree to use truth commissions
as a mechanism to achieve reconciliation, the
international community must provide political,
logistic and, whenever necessary, economic support for
those institutions so as to ensure that they are effective,
legitimate and impartial, and seen to be such by the
local population. The Security Council must urge the
parties to provide such commissions with all the
information that they have about the conflict and any
atrocities that may have been committed.

When the parties have decided on legal
mechanisms to achieve reconciliation, the international
community should support their efforts by facilitating
the establishment of local courts, providing technical
assistance or creating tribunals with international
participation. The experience of Sierra Leone is
particularly valuable in that context. On the other hand,
recourse to local tribunals may present some
difficulties if they are not seen by the local population
as being impartial or if due process is not guaranteed,
either for the victims or for the accused. In such cases,
the use of local tribunals can become an obstacle to
genuine reconciliation. The international community
must be vigilant in ensuring that the mechanisms are
legitimate and that they scrupulously respect the rights
of both the victims and the accused.

Furthermore, bringing the main leaders before
international tribunals can be useful only if the local
population sees that as an impartial exercise ofjustice.
In this context, we welcome the prosecution strategy
crafted by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court to ensure that that international instrument
cooperates in a constructive manner with national
reconciliation processes.

When the parties opt for traditional mechanisms
to achieve reconciliation, the international community
must promote the idea that such mechanisms respect
the rights of the accused; they should not be used to
impose excessive punishment or extrajudicial
executions.

When the parties agree to grant amnesty, the
international community must support such efforts,
provided they are aimed at reconciliation and as long
as they do not become a means of protecting the
perpetrators or those who organized serious crimes
against humanity. Amnesty must never serve as a
mechanism to conceal the truth or deny justice to the
victims.

When the parties opt for mechanisms to provide
economic compensation, the international community
should support them by freezing the assets of those
who committed the atrocities and transferring those
assets to the victims.

National reconciliation at the end of an armed
conflict requires long-term and continuous efforts.
Such efforts are the primary responsibility of the
community affected and of the parties to the conflict.
Nonetheless, the Security Council and the international
community at large have an obligation to provide
resolute support for those efforts.

