Mr. Valinakis (Greece): Mr. President, I wish to
congratulate you for having convened this meeting on a
most important and timely issue. I wish also to thank
you for having provided us with a useful concept
paper. Greece fully aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the United Kingdom on behalf of the
European Union.

The prevention of violent conflicts lies at the
heart of the United Nations mandate. In the past few
years, many efforts have been made to increase the
effectiveness of the Organization in this field and to
move from a culture of reaction to a culture of
prevention.

The report of the Secretary-General of 2001
entitled "Prevention of armed conflict" gives conflict
prevention a prominent place in the agenda of the
United Nations and emphasizes its importance for the
establishment of lasting peace and security. The same
report and Security Council resolution 1366 (2001)
clearly recognize that non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and civil society play an important supporting
role in national efforts for conflict prevention.

We have also witnessed increasing activity on the
part of the Security Council in the field of conflict
prevention and closer interaction in this regard with
civil society. This has been manifested in its various
fact-finding and confidence-building missions to areas
of potential armed conflict. The Council also receives
and considers a significant number of reports
containing information provided by NGOs concerning
situations that threaten the political stability and
prosperity of States.

Important conferences have also been held
recently, and the recommendations that have been
made could move the process significantly forward.

The prevention of conflicts is a difficult and
complex activity that requires the involvement of many
actors. Today the task of conflict prevention lies not
only with national Governments and the United
Nations but also with civil society, such as NGOs, the
private sector and development agencies.

There has been a general realization that most of
today's internal conflicts are caused mainly by weak
governance, the absence of democratic institutions,
large-scale abuses of human rights, lack of socio-
economic development, systematic ethnic
discrimination, the previous history of the conflict and
its regional context.
In our view, civil society can play a crucial role
in the prevention of conflicts by providing independent
analysis of a particular situation, by addressing the root
causes of conflicts at an early stage, by educating
people on the horrors of war and by raising public
awareness on those issues and thus mobilizing political
will and action. Moreover, international and local
NGOs, due to their flexibility, outreach and
commitment, can respond rapidly to early signs of
tensions that have the potential to escalate into a
violent conflict. NGOs can also provide a continuous
platform for debate and a tool for action and hence
secure greater responsiveness and accountability.

Civil society and NGOs complement the efforts
of the United Nations. Indeed, in many of today's
multifunctional peacekeeping operations, civilian and
military tools are mutually reinforcing and play an
important role in promoting lasting peace and
development. In the post-conflict phase, civil society is
engaged in numerous activities, such as promoting
human rights and the rule of law, strengthening
democratization, consolidating peace and
reconciliation, disarming and reintegrating ex-
combatants and providing civic education, training and
research.

Although civil society and NGOs can play a vital
role in the democratic process and in consolidating
durable peace and stability, still their capacity, and
particularly that of local actors, is weak. In our view,
that capacity should be further built and developed. In
that respect, closer and better coordination and
cooperation with the United Nations and with regional
and subregional organizations is needed.

The United Nations should also better integrate
the views and insights of those important stakeholders
into its policy measures on conflict prevention. The
Security Council, in particular, should be aware of
those views through the reports it receives on potential
conflict situations. The Council should also take into
consideration the views of local actors when visiting
areas of potential conflict. The Arria formula meetings
are particularly useful tools since they provide the
Security Council with independent information
concerning situations that could potentially destabilize
a country. Those meetings have mobilized the opinions
of Council members on the need for preventive action.
We strongly support their continuation in the future.

In conclusion, I would like to stress my country's
full support for all the conflict prevention activities of
this Organization. We believe, however, that the future
strategies of the United Nations in this area should
involve mostly local actors and should build their
capacity to prevent and resolve local conflicts. Durable
peace can be established only if the needs of the people
concerned are adequately addressed and their views
and voice have been heard.

