Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
unreservedly supports the statement to be made later on
by the Permanent Representative of Sweden on behalf
of the European Union. I should like simply to add a
few more specific observations from my national
perspective.

First, I should like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jacques
Paul Klein, for rounding out the excellent report of the
Secretary-General with his comments - comments
which, as always, were not only precise and very
incisive but also imbued with a genuine vision of the
objectives that we must achieve in the long term, as
Ambassador Cunningham has just pointed out.

I should like also to convey to Ambassador Klein
our deep satisfaction at the outstanding work he has
been doing for almost two years now as head of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH).

The Special Representative's method is sound.
UNMIBH has set clear-cut objectives for itself and has
identified the ways and means of achieving them. It
gives account regularly and transparently of all of the
obstacles it encounters in the implementation of its
mandate and tells us what efforts it is making to
overcome them.

In the field, Mr. Klein deploys all his energy and
talent to bring about the success of his mission. We
would like to convey our warmest encouragements to
him and thank him for his exemplary action.

Several alarming events over the past few months
have challenged the police in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The first was the dissidence of Croatian Democratic
Union (HDZ) leaders, who tried to incite the Bosnian
Croatian police to violate the Dayton Agreements.
Later on, riots orchestrated in Banja Luka and Trebinje
in response to the reconstruction of mosques posed a
fresh challenge, which demonstrated the lack of
professionalism and above all the lack of respect for
institutions and legality on the part of the Bosnian Serb
police leadership.

Acting along with the High Representative and
the Stabilization Force (SFOR), UNMIBH reacted in
the most appropriate manner: it promptly de-authorized
the authors of these serious Violations of the letter and
the spirit of the Peace Accords.

Along with the sanctions that can be applied
under annex ll of the Dayton Agreements,
Ambassador Klein is right to emphasize also the need
to provide appropriate training for the Bosnian police
and to improve their financial and material resources.
UNMIBH is taking concrete steps in that direction. The
international community must lend assistance in this
respect, but the Bosnian political authorities cannot
shirk their responsibilities. By officially and sincerely
promoting the fight against corruption and organized
crime, by encouraging the independence of the
judiciary, and by taking every practical measure to
accelerate the return of minority groups, Bosnian
leaders will be making a contribution to the
construction of a modern police force, more in keeping
with European standards.

Further, to strengthen coordination and the
effectiveness of its civil activities, the international
community invited the High Representative, in
agreement with UNMIBH, to make proposals. We hope
that the restructuring process, which has been
described in detail by Ambassador Klein, will begin as
soon as possible.

We listened with great interest to the remarks
made by the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative concerning the political prospects in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the entire Balkan
region.

As the Secretary-General's report indicates, some
people seem to believe that borders and democratic
institutions can be altered if obstructionism and
violence are strong enough to weaken international
resolve. Those individuals must understand the Dayton
Accords have to be respected, and that they will be
respected. There is no future for extremists, whatever
their origin. It is only through respect for its
Constitution and the strengthening of its central
institutions that Bosnia and Herzegovina will be able to
move forward in its process of rapprochement with
Europe.

The international community will not let itself be
distracted from the achievement of its aspirations in the
region, as the Secretary-General very aptly recalled.
The heads of State or Government of the European
Union, meeting, even as we speak, at Goteborg, are
determined fully to play their part in achieving these
objectives. This is the same message that the Security
Council will convey unambiguously during its
forthcoming Visit to Kosovo.

