Mr. Vieira (Brazil): On 23 January, Venezuela
witnessed extraordinary events. In accordance with
the Venezuelan Constitution, and as endorsed by
the Supreme Court of Justice, the President of the
Venezuelan National Assembly, Mr. Juan Guaido,
assumed the functions of acting President of Venezuela.
The fact that on that same day an unprecedented number
of people took to the streets in peaceful demonstrations
to demand change in Venezuela only stresses the
momentous nature of the events that we are witnessing.

Minutes after Juan Guaido made his announcement,
Brazil, together with many other countries committed
to respect for the rule of law, legitimacy and democratic
transition in Venezuela, immediately recognized him
as Acting President of that country. That coordinated
action was not an abrupt, ill-thought-out or irresponsible
decision. It was the result of a collective understanding
that we need to support Venezuela's Constitution and
its legitimate institutions. It was also the result of a
very long process of diplomatic dialogue and action to
help Venezuela and its people.

Even before President Bolsonaro took office in
Brazil on 1 January, Venezuela was already a priority for
him and his team. The first trip of our Foreign Minister,
Mr. Ernesto Araujo, was to participate in a meeting of
the Lima Group to signal Brazil's firm commitment to
taking the lead and to working with other partners to
issue a very clear and strong statement of support to
the National Assembly and to the Supreme Court of
Justice for democratic transition and for urgent change
in Venezuela.

Since that first day, Brazil has also been in
permanent contact with members of the democratic
opposition in Venezuela and with the representatives
of its legitimate institutions to contribute to the process
of democratic transition. Therefore 23 January is only
a new stage - albeit a fundamental one - in the quest
for the rebirth of Venezuela. We are already working
with the acting President to help with whatever it takes
to fulfil the tasks that Venezuelans expect of him.

It is crucial that the Security Council and all
Members here today address the situation in Venezuela,
not only because it could pose real and immediate
risks to peace and security in Latin America and the
Caribbean but because it is a situation that demands
collective and urgent action.

The increasing deterioration of the political,
economic and social situation in Venezuela is not new
and has been cause for deep concern on the part of the
Brazilian Government and other countries in the region
in recent years. Venezuela is the product of a dictatorship
that sacrificed its people in order to remain in power.
Faced with an unsustainable situation of hunger,
scarcity, misrule, disorganization and insecurity, many
Venezuelans have simply been forced to flee their
country. They were welcomed with open arms in Brazil
and other countries of the region and elsewhere, but I
am sure that they would have preferred to stay in their
homes, with their families, in their country.

Representative democracy in Venezuela disappeared
long ago, in particular the separation of powers. Until
very recently, it was a police State, with hundreds of
political prisoners and assassinations of opponents,
including in State custody- all of this in an environment
in which the independent press was muzzled and
Venezuelans had lost the right to information.

The Maduro regime produced an economic crisis
of unprecedented dimensions that poses a challenge in
terms of methods of evaluation and comparison. Figures
from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the
World Bank indicate that the gross domestic product
has dropped by more than 35 per cent since 2013. The
IMF predicts a significant worsening of Venezuelan
hyperinflation, with the rate estimated at 1.3 million
per cent in 2018. The World Bank, for its part, estimates
Venezuela's international reserves to be on the order of
$9 billion and that the country's foreign debt in 2018
could reach $140 billion, that is, three times higher than
in 2017.

It is vital that we understand, here in the Security
Council, exactly what we are dealing with. Venezuela
and its people have not only been quashed by a brutal
and corrupt dictatorship; they have been held under a
regime with links to organized crime, drug trafficking,
money laundering and terrorist organizations. That
toxic combination has created risks for Venezuela and
for us all, with unpredictable consequences for peace
and security.

We therefore have an obligation to contribute to the
prompt and full restoration of representative democracy
and the rule of law in Venezuela, so that Venezuelans
can forge a new path. Brazil understands that this will
not happen without growing international pressure and
international aid.

Let us not be naive. Those who have long held
power in the country are comfortable where they are,
and they will remain convinced that they are allowed
to promote further chaos if they are not faced with
collective pressure on our part. Such pressure can take
different forms given the various regulatory milestones
and the specificities of each country's relations with
Venezuela, but increasing pressure is needed. Brazil
and many countries have already done their part and
will continue working in the same direction.

I would recall that in August 2017, after concluding
that there had been a breach of the democratic order
in Venezuela, Brazil and the other partners of the bloc
activated the Ushuaia Protocol on Commitment to
Democracy in MERCOSUR, the Republic ofBolivia and
the Republic of Chile and decided to suspend Venezuela
in all its rights and obligations as a State party.

Subsequently, the Brazilian Government considered
the Venezuelan electoral process held on 20 May 2018
to be completely illegitimate. Those elections did not
include all political actors in the country, nor did they
meet the minimum guarantees and standards required
for a free, fair and transparent process. Moreover, there
were no independent international observers. For that
reason, Brazil joined the countries of the Lima Group
in issuing a declaration on 4 January that considered
the presidential mandate of Nicolas Maduro that began
on 10 January illegitimate. The Brazilian Government
and the Lima Group countries recognized the National
Assembly, legitimately elected on 6 December 2015, as
the only democratically elected constitutional body in
Venezuela. From there, the necessary next step was to
recognize President Guaido and to start working with
him. Today we are here reiterating our position and
seeking the support of other Members.

There are countries that have not yet recognized
Guaido and that advocate for dialogue with the old
regime. Brazil is in favour of dialogue with acting
President Guaido and with the democratic opposition
in Venezuela. However, Brazil is firmly opposed
to any kind of dialogue, in any format, with Nicolas
Maduro and his accomplices. We know full well what
Maduro understands by dialogue. For him, it is another
opportunity to buy time and to continue his campaign
of oppression of Venezuelans and deconstruction
of Venezuela.

The only possible dialogue is one that will
speed up the already ongoing process of democratic
transition - a dialogue with Guaido and all those
committed to democracy and to the interests of
Venezuela and its people.

Brazil is convinced that only through the rapid and
full restoration of democracy and respect for human
rights will it be possible to address the causes of the
political, economic, social and humanitarian crisis
faced by our neighbour to the north. Brazil will fully
support the transition process, both politically and
economically, so that democracy and social peace
can return to Venezuela. Brazil trusts that the other
members of the Council and of the Organization will
do likewise.

