The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Rwanda
and Serbia in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Prica
(Bosnia and Herzegovina), Mr. Nsengimana
(Rwanda) and Mr. Loncar (Serbia) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the members of the Council, I extend a warm welcome
to His Excellency Mr. Zoran Loncar, Minister of Public
Administration and Local Self-Government of the
Republic of Serbia. In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Judge Fausto Pocar,
President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991; Judge Erik Mase, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States, between 1 January 1994 and 31 December
1994; Ms. Carla Del Ponte, Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia; and
Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

It is so decided.

I invite Judge Pocar, Judge Mose, Ms. Del Ponte
and Mr. I allow to take their seats at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
documents 8/2006/666, containing a note by the
Secretary-General dated 21 August 2006, transmitting
the thirteenth annual report of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia; and
S/2006/65 8, containing a note by the Secretary-General
dated 16 August 2006, transmitting the eleventh annual
report of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2006/898, containing the text of letter
dated 15 November 2006 from the President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, and
document 8/2006/951, containing the text of a letter
dated 30 November 2006 from the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by the President of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, the President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and the Prosecutors of
the International Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda.

Following those briefings, I will give the floor to
Council members who wish to make comments or ask
questions.

I now give the floor to Judge Fausto Pocar,
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.


