Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for allowing my delegation to
speak in this debate.

Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
would like to make the following statement in its
national capacity.
My country welcomes the annual report of the
Secretary-General on today's topic (S/2015/409) and
deplores the fact that armed conflict continues to
affect children disproportionately. In fact, the annual
report notes that we faced unprecedented challenges
in 2014 in attempting to ensure the protection of
tens of millions of children growing up in countries
affected by conflict. One phenomenon that is becoming
increasingly common, according to the report, is
that of the mass abduction of civilians - including
children. The information contained in the report
shows that, given the increased frequency and number
of abductions, children need to be better protected.
Belgium supports the request of the Secretary-General
to the Council to increase the types of tools available,
which include those used by child-protection agencies
to collect and share information on child abductions.
In that regard, Belgium believes that it would be useful
to add the abduction of children as a trigger violation
in compiling the lists annexed to the annual report. For
that reason, my country decided to sponsor resolution
2225 (2015), adopted by the Council today.

The report also shows that children continue to
be victims of rape and other forms of sexual violence.
The impunity that the perpetrators of sexual violence
enjoy remains a subject of deep concern. A climate
of impunity, characterized by a lack of disciplinary
procedures, sanctions and criminal prosecutions,
contributes to creating an environment filled with
risks for children. Belgium wishes to underline the
importance of ensuring effective access to justice for
victims of sexual violence.

In conclusion, we would like to stress that the
indiscriminate use of weapons - including barrel
bombs - is prohibited under international humanitarian
law. We are shocked by the indiscriminate attacks in
civilian areas in Syria, which continue to kill and maim
thousands of people many of whom are children. In
that context, Belgium would also like to reiterate its
concern overthe use of explosive weapons-particularly
in densely populated regions - and calls on all parties
to armed conflict to renounce their use. My country also
calls on those States that have yet to ratify the relevant
international instruments, to do so as soon as possible,
particularly the conventions banning anti-personnel
mines and cluster munitions.

 

