Allow me first to congratulate you on the choice of this topic, which is particularly important for your presidency of the Security Council. I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome Ms. Kersti Kaljulaid, President of the Republic of Estonia. I thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, as well as Her Excellency Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf and Mr. Peter Maurer, for their statements. As mentioned by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the protection of civilians in armed conflict has always been the concern of the United Nations and its Member States. It has now been two decades since the Security Council put that topic on its agenda, thus officially recognizing it as a matter of international peace and security. Resolution 1265 (1999), the Council's first resolution on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, established the parameters of what is today considered a guiding principle on the issue. Two months have passed since the Secretary-General called for a global humanitarian ceasefire in the wake of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). However, the situation on the ground in many conflict areas is deteriorating at an alarming rate, especially for women, children, the elderly and those with disabilities. In recent weeks, women and babies have been massacred in Afghanistan. Sub-Saharan Africa, for its part, has seen a 37-per cent increase in violence, with dozens of civilians killed in Mali, the Niger and Burkina Faso. Fighting continues in Yemen and Syria, causing casualties and displacement. In Libya, the already grave situation is at risk of deteriorating further with the over-armament of the protagonists, in flagrant violation of the embargo imposed by the Council itself. In the face of those various tragedies, the members of the Council continue to maintain their divergent positions instead of adopting a posture of unity that would have sent a clear message to the various actors committing the violence. Moreover, in those two months, armed conflicts forced more than 660,000 people around the world to flee violence, making them more vulnerable to infection and further complicating the global fight and recovery efforts against the virus. The Sahel and Lake Chad region has seen a sharp increase in the number of internally displaced persons, with Chad and the Niger being the most affected. The region is plagued by all kinds of attacks carried out through asymmetric warfare that spares neither the defence and security forces of our countries nor even peacekeepers, let alone civilians. The Niger would like to stress that, with regard to the protection of civilians in armed conflict, respect for and the promotion and implementation of international humanitarian law and other applicable legal and political frameworks by both State and non-State actors are essential. In that regard, I would like to reaffirm the Niger's deep commitment to the principles of human rights and its adherence to the international legal instruments for the protection and promotion of those rights, as signed and ratified by our country and promoted by the President of the Republic of the Niger, His Excellency Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou. Respect for the law of armed conflict is particularly important, especially by the armed forces, which are responsible for ensuring full application in theatres of operation. To that end and with the aim of integrating those international commitments into the doctrine of its armed forces, the Niger, in collaboration with the International Committee of the Red Cross, has developed a manual on international humanitarian law for its defence and security forces. In the same vein, the Niger fully subscribes to the human rights compliance framework in the context of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, in particular pillars 4 and 5, relating to the integration of the protection of civilians into the planning and conduct of operations and the feedback to assess the impact of operations on the population. Respect for the law of armed conflict cannot be complete unless perpetrators and offenders are held accountable for their actions before the courts. In this time of crisis, we must ensure that the public health response to the pandemic and respect for fundamental legal protections complement each other. As mentioned by the International Committee of the Red Cross, that can be done only by facilitating unhindered humanitarian access for medical personnel and humanitarian workers, protecting access to food and water, protecting vulnerable persons and detainees and ensuring access to education for children, especially for young girls. As the current pandemic requires the mobilization of resources, both economic and humanitarian, countries in armed conflict often lack the means to deal with the situation. We would like to echo the Secretary-General's statement that it is time to show solidarity, not exclusion and to call for economic mitigation measures and humanitarian exemptions wherever necessary. In conclusion, I would like to say that the role of peacekeeping missions at a time like this is particularly crucial. In Mali, for example, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali, Mr. Mahamat Annadif, stressed in his recent briefing to the Council (see S/2020/286) that exemplary cooperation has been established between the United Nations system and the Government of Mali in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. We should encourage and welcome such a commitment, which strengthens strategic communication to counter disinformation and rumours. We should also bear in mind that the success of the protection of civilians lies in an inclusive consultative process that is locally owned and engages local communities, as we saw in the recent debate organized by Ireland on the issue of pastoralism in the Sahel. Such people-centred peacekeeping should take into account the voices of women, youth, political parties and civil society. Only thus can lasting solutions be achieved as they would be based on a participatory process that would then be accepted and shared by all.
