Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Council's heavy agenda during your presidency in the
month of August, Sir, included many problematic issues
in the Middle East and Africa. The Council, under
your presidency, also organized visits to Europe, South
Sudan and Somalia. China appreciates the great amount
of work done by the United Kingdom as President of
the Council for this month. In reviewing the Council's
work this month, I wish to focus on three issues.

First, with regard to the situation in Gaza, since
the outbreak of the current Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
China has worked to bring about peace talks through
many means and channels. During his recent visit to
Egypt and the headquarters of the League of Arab States,
Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs Wang Yi set forth
a five-point peace initiative. The Chinese Special Envoy
on the Middle East Issue also made many mediation
visits. We have also provided humanitarian assistance
to the people of Gaza to the best of our abilities. In the
Council, China supported the draft resolution submitted
by Jordan on behalf of the Arab/Islamic countries and
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. We also took
an active part in the negotiations and repeatedly called
upon the Council to heed the voice of the international
community and act to stop the violence through peace
talks.

We appreciate the recent ceasefire agreement
reached on Gaza and the unremitting efforts made by
Egypt and other parties. They represent an important
step in easing the tension and the suffering ofthe people.
We hope that the two parties will attach importance
to achieving peace, put people first and effectively
maintain the ceasefire, seize the opportunity to resume
peace talks and bring about an early, fair and reasonable
settlement of the Palestinian question.

The situation there is still fragile. The international
community should continue its efforts to consolidate
the ceasefire and push for the lifting of the blockade of
Gaza so that the peace talks between Israel and Palestine
can resume. On that issue, the Council should play an
active and effective role. China is a firm supporter and
sincere mediator of the peace between the two parties.
We will continue our unremitting efforts aimed at
achieving peace between Israel and Palestine, as well
as stability in the region.

Secondly, with regard to counter-terrorism,
terrorist activities have recently become more rampant
and pose a serious threat to regional and international
peace and security. Early this month, the Council
adopted resolution 2170 (2014), which reflects the
Council's agreement to take measures to put an end to
support in terms of personnel, weapons and finance for
terrorist organizations, such as the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria, and to stop their efforts to instigate, plot and
carry out terrorist activities through the Internet and
social media. We hope that the resolution will be fully
and genuinely implemented.

Terrorism is an enemy common to all humankind.
All terrorist acts - regardless of their motive, where
and when they occur and who commits them - are
unpardonable felonies. The international community, in
combating terrorism, should not apply varying criteria.
We hope that the high-level counter-terrorism meetings
of the Security Council scheduled for next month will
enable the parties to further forge consensus so as to
increase international solidarity in the common fight
against terrorism.

Thirdly, with regard to the situation in South Sudan,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) recently held a special summit on South
Sudan. The leaders of the parties signed a protocol on
agreed principles on transitional arrangements to end
the crisis in South Sudan. The representatives of the
Government and the opposition signed the cessation of
hostilities agreement implementation matrix. That is
an important effort on the part of IGAD to promote a
political settlement to the question of South Sudan, and
China welcomes it. However, the tension there does not
inspire optimism. The international community will
need to make greater efforts to end the crisis. China
urges the parties to the conflict to put an end to the
violence and cease their fire immediately, implement
the cessation of hostilities agreement and work with all
ethnic groups and factions in the context of an inclusive
political dialogue.

We are in favour of Africans solving African
problems themselves through African means, and
we firmly support IGAD's leadership and mediation
efforts. Since the outbreak of the conflict in South
Sudan, Chinese leaders, the Foreign Minister and the
Special Representative on African Affairs have made
efforts aimed at fostering mediation. We took the lead
in providing emergency assistance to South Sudan. We
will continue to work with the international community
to press for the holding of peace talks and, in the light
of the need, for the provision of more humanitarian
assistance in order to promote a rapid return to stability
in the country.

Finally, I congratulate the United States of America
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of September. I wish it every success and
smooth sailing in its work.

