Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We listened carefully to the statement of High
Representative Inzko. His report to the Security Council
(S/2013/263, annex) is informative and detailed, but
unfortunately it is far from an objective analysis of the
true situation in the country and suffers from bias in its
criticism ofthe Bosnian Serbian leaders. So as to obtain
a more objective idea of the situation in Bosnia and the
processes there, we recommend that members of the
Council also read the ninth report of Republika Srpska
to the Secretary-General and the Security Council,
in which the commitment of the Bosnian Serbians to
international law and the spirit of Dayton is absolutely
clear.

We agreethatthesituationinBosniaandHerzegovina
continues to worsen. However, the reason for yet
another crisis at the State level is hardly to be found in
the rhetoric of the leaders of Republika Srpska. Of true
concern is the exacerbation of antagonism between the
two primary Bosnian parties. The effectiveness of the
intra-Bosnian dialogue has been undermined, creating
complications for the central Bosnian institutions.
Indeed, the Government of the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina is indeed paralysed. The recent
detention of its President on charges of corruption
illustrates the further exacerbation of the political crisis
in the Croatian-Muslim entities against the backdrop of
tensions between Bosniaks and Croatians.

We are seriously concerned by the inflammatory
rhetoric of the Bosniaks. How else can we characterize
allegations that Republika Srpska arose solely as a result
of ethnic cleansing and war crimes? We are concerned
to note a significant rise in Islamist radicalism in the
Federation.

Unlike that in the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the situation in Republika Srpska is
on the whole stable. Its political forces continue to
cooperate successfully in Bosnian affairs on the basis
of an approach that upholds the Dayton Agreement
and the national interests of the Bosnian Serbs in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Its Government has insisted
on the need for an agreement to be reached in Bosnia
and Herzegovina on reform in the country, refraining
from violations of consensus, including when taking
decision on political matters. Unless these principles
are upheld, the existence of Bosnia and Herzegovina
will be impossible.

Russia supports the territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and hopes to see its institutions
function on a sound basis, with equal footing for the
three constituent peoples of the State, in line with
the Dayton Agreement. One important task for the
international community at this stage of the Bosnian
process would be to hand over responsibility for the
future of the country to the Bosnians themselves. In
that regard, we advocate the abolition of the Office
of the High Representative and a return to efforts to
achieve agreement on the "5+2" programme set by the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board.

We are convinced that the residual issues in that
framework and any other matters vital to the future of
the country should be resolved by Bosnians themselves
through agreement among all three constituent
peoples of the Bosnia and Herzegovina: Bosniaks,
Serbians and Croatians. In that context, we support
the principled position regarding the inadmissibility of
outside intervention in the internal negotiating process
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Any outside support to
a single side would undermine the delicate political
balance in the country.

We oppose a resumption of the activities of the
Office of the High Representative in the European
integration agenda for Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
right to define their future integration and to breathe
new energy into the reform process is proper to
Bosnians themselves.

We caution the High Representative against using
the obsolete Bonn emergency powers, which have only
exacerbated situations that were already negative in
Bosnia and Herzegovina over the past year. A striking
example of this was the removal in March 2011 of the
procedural obstacles to the establishment of guiding
bodies in the Federation without the leading Croatian
parties. That is, to a large extent, the reason why the
crisis remains unabated today.

We feel that decisions on key matters in the
settlement of the situation should be taken on the basis
of the internationally agreed format emanating from
the Security Council and the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board.

There is a clear need for the Office of the High
Representative to work more actively to lift sanctions
imposed on Bosnian officials, primarily Serbians, due
to allegations of their having assisted suspects of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. This
process continues to move at a snail's pace. I recall
that over the past six months, restrictions were lifted
only with respect to one individual and continue to be
applied to three out of approximately a dozen others.

The High Representative, together with the Steering
Committee, should consider appropriate steps towards
the final closure of the frozen international supervisory
regime in Brcko and the Arbitral Tribunal.

As a step in the drawdown of the Office of the
High Representative, we support a scaling up of the
European Union mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In that context, we support a clear division of labour
between the High Representative and the European
Union Special Representative, and strict compliance
with their mandates so as to avoid any duplication.
While we do not contribute to the European Union-led
force Operation Althea in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
we do support its tasks of ensuring security in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and training personnel of the national
Ministry of Defence and armed forces.

We should like to touch specifically on the matter of
international reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We support an impartial investigation of all crimes
committed from 1992 to 1995. At the moment, the
cases being considered before either the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia or within the Bosnia
and Herzegovina judicial system are clearly biased;
they tend to deal only with allegations against Serbians.
We question the demonstrative disengagement of the
Chief Prosecutor of The Hague Tribunal from contact
with organizations of relatives of Serbian and Croatian
victims of the crisis in Yugoslavia.

We attached great importance to the collective
efforts to enhance the comprehensive inter-Bosian
dialogue, free from outside intervention, regarding
consultative options for socioeconomic and structural
reform, in keeping with the Dayton Agreement and
mechanisms. We recognize the importance of amending
the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina following
the decision of the European Court of Human Rights
in the Sejdie-Finci vs. Bosnia and Herzegovina case.
We are convinced that compromise in that respect
is possible and must be sought through continued
dialogue. However, we cannot agree with the broad
interpretation of the views of the Court on the use of
that decision as a pretext to impose a review of all of
Dayton provisions.

