Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I join others in
welcoming High Representative Valentin Inzko back to
the Security Council, and thank him for his briefing. I
would also reassure him of our full support.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU).

Our meeting takes place at an important moment
for Bosnia and Herzegovina. The commemoration of
the Srebrenica genocide earlier this year reminded
us all of the importance of continued reconciliation
efforts in the region. Twenty years ago this November,
the Dayton Peace Accord brought peace to the war-
torn region. The international community through its
engagement contributed to the security, stability and
realization of the vision of a prosperous, multi-ethnic
country which the Peace Agreement had outlined.

Through its positive agenda and prospects for
membership, the European Union has provided an
incentive for much-needed reforms for the countries in
the region. Bosnia and Herzegovina's choice of Euro-
Atlantic integration has been confirmed on numerous
occasions and should not be questioned by anyone.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has applied to and remains
an aspirant for the NATO Membership Action Plan.
In this context, we welcome the progress noted in the
report of the High Representative (S/2015/84l, annex)
on registration of defence property and look forward to
the completion of the remaining steps that would enable
activation of the NATO Membership Action Plan for
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Important steps have been taken towards realizing
the country's European perspective. Its authorities
reiterated their commitment to European integration
as a strategic goal. The Stabilization and Association
Agreement between Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the European Union has entered into force. A
comprehensive reform agenda adopted at the State and
entity levels in July offers a framework for addressing
the most pressing social and economic challenges.

A crucial moment has come for all the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to live up to their
responsibility before the country's citizens and embark
on the implementation of this comprehensive agenda,
with the aim of improving social and economic
situation, strengthening the rule of law and enhancing
administrative capacities so that the agenda is translated

into real benefits, jobs and opportunities for the nation.
A properly functioning mechanism of the coordination
of EU-relevant matters is of vital importance.

At this juncture, when consolidated efforts are most
needed to advance the reform agenda, we are seriously
concerned about the divisive rhetoric that threatens the
future course of the country. We are also alarmed by the
intention of the authorities of the Republika Srpska to
hold an entity-level referendum on State-level judiciary.
It is particularly troubling that such divisive rhetoric
is used to pursue political objectives that run counter
to the letter and the spirit of the Peace Agreement and
threaten the very sovereignty and unity of the country,
as noted in the special report ofthe High Representative.
This may seriously damage the country's efforts to
improve the life of its citizens and its progression on the
EU accession path. Prospects for EU membership have
been extended to Bosnia and Herzegovina as a united
country. We reiterate our commitment to the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign and
united country - a country with a European future.

We believe that the shortcomings of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's judicial system should be addressed
through constructive dialogue. The EU has engaged
in that regard through the Structured Dialogue on
Justice. We call on all the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to cooperate with the Office of the High
Representative with an aim of fulfilling the remaining
conditions necessary for the closure of the Office.
We also call upon all the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to fully cooperate with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia as well
as the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.

Over the years the international community and
this Council have stood with Bosnia and Herzegovina
and greatly invested in creating security and stability in
the region. We fully support the continued presence of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR)
Operation Althea with an executive military role to
underpin Bosnia and Herzegovina's efforts to maintain
a safe and secure environment. We welcome the renewal
of the EUFOR Althea mandate by the Council today.

Both the words and the actions of the Security
Council are being followed closely in the countries of
the region. At this important juncture for the future
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Council should be
united in condemning all actions that threaten the
Peace Accords. It should support the Office of the High
Representative. It should stand firmly behind Bosnia
and Herzegovina as a sovereign and united country and
in support of its Euro-Atlantic integration.

