Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I thank you, Sir, for your
initiative to take up once again in this Chamber the
issue of improving force generation as one for the main
prerequisites for successful peacekeeping. I am also
grateful to Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her
valuable briefing.

Peacekeeping operations continue to be a reliable
and commonly used instrument for curbing and,
more importantly, preventing conflicts and ensuring
sustaining peace. Yet, taking stock of the most recent
discussion of peacekeeping reform in the Council,
as well as the very comprehensive open debate we
held yesterday (see S/PV.8144), it is evident that the
world is not getting any safer. War and aggression
are spreading, and peace and goodwill are in retreat.
As my President said before the Council, in these
dangerous circumstances,

"[o]ur Organization, which was created to secure
peace and stability in the world, cannot afford to
stand aside. It must be proactive" (S/PV805], p. 12).

In this regard, it is essential to ensure proper
force generation for any peacekeeping operation to
make it capable of delivering on the mandates devised
by the Council. Therefore, my delegation considers
this task to be an integral part of the comprehensive
reform of United Nations peacekeeping, based on the
recommendations contained in the report of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446). I cannot but agree with the Secretary-
General that what is needed are the right capabilities,
not the available ones.

Ukraine is proud to have been among the first
States that joined the pledging process at the 2015
Peacekeeping Summit. We have been a participant
in a number of subsequent conferences. My country
joined over 80 Member States that took part in the most
recent Vancouver Defence Ministerial Conference. We
welcome the communique adopted at that meeting,
which, we believe, should be factored appropriately into
the activities of the Council and the General Assembly.

In recent years, peacekeeping operations have
become better adapted in terms of equipment
and expertise to the execution of mandated tasks.
Force generation has gained more flexibility and
predictability. At the same time, there is still plenty of
room to make peacekeeping operations more capable of
mandate delivery, especially in the light of oftentimes
rapidly changing situations on the ground. Let we share
some suggestions in this regard.

First, as an active troop-and police-contributing
country, Ukraine welcomes the work carried out in
the Council on improving the dialogue among troop
and police contributors, the Council itself and the
Secretariat, as well as with host countries. It is necessary
to continue the work on taking this triangular dialogue
to a new level, especially during the establishment or
renewal of peacekeeping mandates.

Secondly, missions should be provided with clear,
coherent, achievable, sequenced and, at the same time,
resilient mandates, drawn up in accordance with core
tenets of the United Nations peacekeeping and with a
focus on supporting a political solution to the conflict.
In this view, the impartiality of a mission and its
personnel should be a guiding principle.

Thirdly, Ukraine believes that the Secretary-
General's endeavour in restructuring the peace
and security pillar of the Secretariat should result
in strengthening strategic advice to the Council,
including on the elaboration of effective peacekeeping
mandates. It is also important to provide the Council
with detailed and frank reports from the field - to
give the information that is required, even if it is not
what the Council members may wish to hear. Such
reports should also be shared with relevant troop- and
police-contributing countries in a timely manner.
Fourthly, while considering the establishment or
renewal of mandates, the Council should engage more
actively and give all possible support to the Secretariat
in securing the use of appropriate modern technologies
in peacekeeping operations. Strengthening the
intelligence capacities of operations to improve their
situational awareness should also be envisaged. Due
attention must be payed to securing proper funding and
providing sufficient enablers, as needed.

All of these aspects are critically important to
ensuring the security and mobility of peacekeeping
personnel. Any decision on enablers' draw-down,
including aviation assets, must be taken with a due
weighing of all existing risks on the ground, especially
considering the limited scope of available high-
performing resources, as stated by the Secretary-
General. The recent tragedy in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo should serve as a bitter reminder to all of
us that peacekeeping operations have to be provided
with sufficient resources, technologies and intelligence
in order to ensure the safety of their personnel as they
implement their mandate. I pay tribute here to all
peacekeepers who have lost their lives safeguarding
international peace.

Last but not least, we have to provide United
Nations peacekeeping operations with properly trained
and equipped personnel capable and ready to take robust
action for mandate execution. For its part, the Council
has to closely monitor the implementation of resolution
2272 (2016) and continue to support relevant initiatives
of the Secretary-General, including on the eradication
of sexual violence in United Nations peacekeeping.

In closing, I would like to reiterate that Ukraine
has always been a strong and reliable partner of
the Organization in terms of its peacekeeping
activities. We will remain a steadfast supporter and
contributor - even in times when my country itself
requires United Nations peacekeeping assistance owing
to well-known external factors.

