Mr. Steiner: What do people in Kosovo want?
Last week I visited Ferizaj, the third largest town in
Kosovo; Pee/Peje, at the foot of the mountains in the
west; and Mitrovica, on the banks of the river Ibar, in
the north.

In Ferizaj a baker from a socially owned
enterprise asked for a secure job; a student wanted "An
end to corruption, so I do not have to buy my place at
university". In Peje a shopkeeper told me, "Beat
crime". And in Mitrovica a teacher from a minority
community said: "I want to move around Kosovo
without fear". So, it is jobs, security and respect for
multi-ethnicity.

Many politicians know that, and are working hard
in the Provisional Institutions all over Kosovo.
However, I am concerned that others in Pristina are
becoming more assertive about status and status-related
competences, and do not concentrate enough on the
real bread-and-butter issues.

At the same time, Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic
has now changed course in Belgrade by also calling for
an early resolution of Kosovo's status, and has
requested the return of the Serbian State to Kosovo. As
the international community concentrates on standards
and on what the people want, politicians focus on
status.

In tandem with the changing View in Belgrade,
we have seen two contrasting moves on the part of
Kosovo Serbs. It is good that we will have the
Coalition Povratak back in the Assembly after months
of boycott. Serb interests in Kosovo can best be
represented through the legitimate institutions.

The second move, a unilateral step by others to
set up a union of Serb municipalities in the north of
Kosovo, is having a damaging effect on these interests.
This union is based on mono-ethnicity. It has no legal
relevance, but it undermines work on decentralization
by the Council of Europe, which will be starting its
mission in Kosovo this coming Monday.

In the light of these developments, how does the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) address the challenges of 2003? As
the Council knows, much has been accomplished in the
last 12 months. The Kosovans and the international
community can be proud of that. But we need to move
further. So, this year we intend to focus on the
following areas: standards; the three priorities of jobs,
security and real multi-ethnicity; the transfer of power;
the establishment of direct dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade; and preparing for European integration.

Turning first to standards: for different reasons,
and with opposing ideas of what the resolution should
be, some in Pristina and Belgrade now seem to agree
on "status first". But what actually counts on the
ground is improving quality of life by delivering on the
standards, or benchmarks. The Security Council's
mission saw this for itself during its recent visit. It is
also evident from the quarterly report by the Secretary-
General, who was in Kosovo in November. But let us
be clear: our focus on standards in no way precludes
opening direct talks between Pristina and Belgrade. On
the contrary, dialogue with Belgrade is one of the eight
benchmarks. As the Secretary-General has said, talks
on issues of mutual interest should start as soon as
possible.

The handout that members will receive is
intended to serve as a baseline indicator against which
progress towards the benchmarks can be measured each
quarter from now on. It summarizes how we intend to
operationalize the process.

While there is general agreement on the goals, the
Kosovo institutions have not yet engaged with the
benchmarks with sufficient vigour. Several Kosovo
Albanian politicians have claimed that Kosovo has
already achieved the standards. A senior official has
publicly claimed that Kosovo has "risen above the
Governments of the region in its approach to returns,
property rights and freedom of movement".

The standards to be met must, of course, be
realistic and measured against the region's
performance. It would be unfair to compare Kosovo
with, say, Switzerland. However, as the Security
Council mission stressed in December, Kosovo is still a
long way from having truly functioning democratic
institutions and a society where minorities can fully
participate. Obviously, we do not expect the
institutions to deliver in areas where they do not have
instruments. But public figures can and must be held
accountable for a sustained effort to promote the values
of the rule of law, for example. We expect them to take
a stand against crime, to refrain from extremist
statements and to call on the public to cooperate with
the police and the courts.

Tacit tolerance of crime and corruption must stop.
I hope that, with the Council's help, we can convince
political leaders and Kosovo society to embrace the
benchmarks as a positive challenge. Kosovo
institutions will have to rise to it. They have to
understand that only the fulfilment of these standards
will make the international community confident that
Kosovo is ready for substantial self-government. The
fulfilment of these standards is necessary also to
remove the causes of future conflict and to make
Kosovo a normal European society.

Let me also state here that there are many
politicians, public figures and journalists in Kosovo
who are very supportive of this course. Their Vision is
encouraging.

Concerning priorities for 2003, UNMIK's
strategy is to focus on the standards that are required
for a decent life in Kosovo and on what the people
actually want. I will concentrate on the priorities for
2003. The first is crime. Overall levels of serious crime
declined significantly in 2002. The number of murders
last year was half that of 2001, and the clearance rate
of murder cases has risen to more than 80 per cent.
However, Kosovo was rocked at the turn of the year by
a spate of violence and killings. In the space of four
weeks, there were three car bombings. Over the past
months there also have been a number of high-profile
murders. Some of the victims were witnesses for The
Hague or in organized crime cases.

No one is above the law. We are intensifying our
attack against organized crime, corruption and
politically and ethnically motivated Violence. Members
of the Kosovo Police Service will use their new skills
to participate in the most sensitive areas of the fight
against serious and organized crime. They will
contribute their knowledge of crime networks in
Kosovo and the region. Last Thursday I saw in the
police station in Pee/Peje that this can work. I am also
pleased that members of Italy's Guardia di Finanza
have now begun their work in the new Financial
Investigation Unit to fight corruption and fraud.

The second priority is the economy.
Unemployment continues to be the number-one
concern. But jobs can be created only by attracting
investment, and investment will come only when
investors can be confident that their money will not be
lost. This will be the case only when they can rely on
the legal system and trust the institutions, and when
freedom of movement and property rights apply - in
other words, when the standards of a functioning
democratic society are met.

Together with the Government, I will seek to do
everything possible to develop the legal system,
institutions and basis for property rights that are
needed to generate investor confidence. Here the
privatization process will be key. We also have to make
it easier for business to invest in Kosovo. For this, we
will be opening an office where investors can get
through registration and legal requirements quickly: a
one-stop investment shop.

The third priority concerns multi-ethnicity. I am
concerned about ethnically defined interest politics on
the part of both Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo Serbs,
as well as on the part of Belgrade. We cannot allow
parallel structures to operate. That is also the reason
why we established the UNMIK administration in
Mitrovica on 25 November and are introducing the
Kosovo Police Service in the northern part of the town.
More still needs to be done. However, after three and a
half years of hearing of nothing from there aside from
the "bridge watchers", the international community is
now in control.

Belgrade has been helpful on Mitrovica, but in
other areas it continues to support parallel structures
operating on a mono-ethnic basis. While insisting that
Kosovo is part of Serbia, in reality Belgrade focuses
exclusively on the interests of only 10 per cent of
Kosovo's population.

But the majority Albanian community in Kosovo
has equally failed to take ownership of the interests of
the Serb community and other minorities. Minorities
are still being harassed. Minorities are still afraid to
move freely throughout Kosovo. They often lack
access to education, health care, public utilities and
jobs. We in UNMIK are working hard to create the
conditions for increased returns. In 2003 more returns
will be possible. But minority rights and returns need
to be supported also by the Provisional Institutions
with budget appropriations and concrete programmes.
Kosovo must prove that it is creating a multi-ethnic
society where every Kosovan, regardless of ethnic
origin, can live in security and dignity.

I now turn to the transfer of power. It is good that
the Assembly and the other institutions want to take on
responsibility. I am ready to hand over all competences
I legally can to the Provisional Institutions by the end
of this year. But the institutions must make progress
against the benchmarks and demonstrate that they are
equipped to handle added responsibilities and to really
accomplish things.

The municipalities now have more than two
years' experience of running local affairs. We will soon
be able to fully hand over executive responsibilities to
the most successful municipalities, and withdraw into a
monitoring and oversight function.

On the central level, UNMIK is carrying out a
review of how effectively we have actually handed
over real responsibility in the transferred areas. We will
also seek to identify, together with the Provisional
Institutions, all further areas that can be transferred this
year. We will then work out, together with them, how
that transfer can best be done. Our principle will be
effective empowerment. But it is important that the
transfer of authority not take the form of the
international community's simply abandoning the
Kosovo political structures, losing sight of resolution
1244 (1999).

It is not yet one year since the Government was
set up. There is still a lack of effective checks and
balances between the executive, the legislative, the
judiciary and the media. Minority protection is still
weak throughout the institutions. The Government
itself has asked for our continued support. Despite our
own shortcomings - as, surely, UNMIK makes
mistakes - we are still needed in Kosovo.

In addition, there are certain things that I cannot
fully transfer to the local institutions. I am mandated to
act as guarantor for the equal rights and fair treatment
of minorities. Together with KFOR, I am answerable
for security and civil order, and I will retain authority
for external relations.
I do not believe that 2003 is the time for finally
resolving Kosovo's status. But it is the time to lay the
groundwork for the political process which, in the end,
will determine its status. Dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade on issues of mutual interest is necessary in
itself and will help enable political dialogue further
down the line. Indeed, paragraph ll (e) of resolution
1244 (1999) mandates me to promote such a process.

It is crucially important that the Security Council,
representing the whole international community,
remain in charge of Kosovo until the main objective set
out in resolution 1244 (l999) is fulfilled. At the same
time, Kosovo must prepare for the process of European
integration, together with its neighbours in the region.

The European Union (EU) is expected to outline a
more energetic strategy with respect to the Balkans at
its Thessaloniki Summit on 21 June. In his letter to the
Greek and future Italian EU presidencies, Commission
President Romano Prodi calls for an even stronger
political commitment of the EU and a clear and
unambiguous membership perspective. At a meeting of
the international representatives from the region with
High Representative Javier Solana and Commissioner
Chris Patten, held last week in Brussels, we all saw this
as essential for success.

But any engagement by the international
community must be matched by an equal engagement
of our local partners in fulfilling the standards of a
functioning democratic society.

In conclusion, what do the people of Kosovo
want? What are our priorities? Jobs, security and multi-
ethnicity. This is what the standards are about. This is
what the international community wants, and this is
what people of Kosovo want.

