Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the President for having
convened this meeting to consider the first report of the
Peacebuilding Commission, a body whose
establishment is clearly one of the best outcomes of the
2005 World Summit.

The comprehensive approach which, at the time,
inspired the decision on peacebuilding on the part of
the world's highest-level leaders, is starting to bear
fruit in terms of the work carried out in one year by the
Peacebuilding Commission. My delegation would like
to pay tribute to His Excellency Mr. Gaspar Martins,
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Angola,
who chaired the Commission from the very outset and,
through him, to all those who have been working
tirelessly with him to bring about the birth of this body.
As is the case with a newborn baby, we all know
that it is the very first moments of life that require the
greatest attention and care. The key issue here will
never be which parent provided more care to the
newborn, but rather whether the pooling of efforts in
an ongoing interaction was able to ensure the well-
being and the best possible development of the
newborn. Because of the number of meetings held, the
high quality of the results obtained and the
commitment in the field, as is indicated in the report of
the Secretary-General in document A/62/l37, these
men and women serving the cause of peace have
enabled the United Nations to begin this project
successfully, and we congratulate them.

We would like to express our gratitude to Carolyn
McAskie, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacebuilding Support, whose commitment and
contributions to getting the Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund functioning have been decisive.

Allow me to congratulate Ambassador Yukio
Takasu, the new Chairperson of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission, for the
excellent briefing he has just given us. Through him, I
would also like to thank Japan for its unwavering
commitment to and support for the work of the
Commission, as well as for its contribution to the
Peacebuilding Fund. My delegation would like to wish
Mr. Takasu every success in his difficult task and in
overseeing the future phases of that new body.

For a year now, the Peacebuilding Commission
has been carrying out its challenging functions under
the constant and careful monitoring of the bodies that
established it. The interaction with those bodies did not
have the paralyzing effect we had feared, although it
seems that it is necessary to further clarify the
relationship between the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council as the
activity of the Peacebuilding Commission expands.

My delegation believes that, in that tripartite
relationship, the Security Council has continued to play
its role while being aware of the challenges that arise
from the situations on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission and while daily following their
development in the light of its own agenda. In that
regard, it is clear that the Security Council is the body
best equipped to assess the benefits produced by the
efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission in the two
07-54678
countries on the Commission's agenda - Burundi and
Sierra Leone - in regard to the developments in those
countries in recent months. For example, free and
transparent presidential and legislative elections were
held in Sierra Leone, leading to the establishment of a
new Government.

Nevertheless, given the fragile nature of the
situation in those two countries, we must continue to
accord them attention at the highest level. Even though
there are gaps in those two successful experiences, as
in all human undertakings, the Council can learn useful
lessons from them for the determination of the criteria
for inscribing new countries on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2007/458) points out, by putting in place integrated
peacebuilding strategies the Peacebuilding
Commission has progressively developed a better
understanding of the issues and challenges in the field.
By adopting a country-specific approach, the
Commission has been able to tailor its efforts to the
requirements on the ground and to engage in
productive dialogue with local authorities and other
stakeholders in the search for appropriate strategies.
However, the partnership with Sierra Leone and
Burundi must be based on national ownership of the
process and respect for their own responsibilities and
commitments, with a view to overcoming the numerous
current and future challenges. Moreover, close
coordination between the Commission, national actors
and civil society is essential, both in determining goals
and in evaluating the efforts undertaken. That entails
strengthening on-the-ground verification and follow-up
mechanisms.

We would like to emphasize that the summary
notes of the Working Group on Lessons Learned
underscored the need to include the regional element in
peacebuilding strategies for Burundi and Sierra Leone.
We believe that that is valid, including for future cases.
In some countries conflicts are fuelled by the
destabilization of an entire region or of neighbouring
countries - as is the case with the conflicts in the
Great Lakes region, the complexity of which is not
well understood. With regard to the two countries on
the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission, we
would suggest that the international community should
take advantage of the regional actors as intermediaries
and of their involvement in the search for sustainable
and lasting solutions.

My delegation fully agrees with the methods of
work of the Peacebuilding Commission, especially as
regards field missions, video-conferencing with major
actors on the ground, thematic and country-specific
meetings, and presentations by senior officials and
experts. However, we believe that, in order to raise the
profile of the Commission's work, it may sometimes be
necessary to hold coordination meetings in countries
concerned.

Lastly, the innovative mechanism that is the
Peacebuilding Fund was established, among other
things, to provide crucial support during the early
stages of a peace process. In that connection, my
delegation would like to express its support for the
Secretary-General's appeal for contributions to the
Fund in order to meet its initial goal of $250 million.
In that regard, it would be useful to hold donor
meetings of bilateral and multilateral partners, as well
as to promote interaction between the Fund's Advisory
Group and the members of the Commission. More
generally, given the lessons learned from the Fund's
current functioning, there is a need for clarification
about its relationship with the Peacebuilding
Commission and about the process of disbursing funds.

In conclusion, and given the approach adopted by
Guinea-Bissau - whose desire to be inscribed on the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission Congo
supports - my delegation would like to point out that
the Council should pay a bit more attention to the issue
of placing new countries on the Commission's agenda,
with a View to clearly defining the modalities for
inscription. We agree that it would be useful to draft
the procedure in such a way as to take into account
States with a genuine and urgent need for assistance.

