Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the United Kingdom
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August. I would also like to
thank Sweden for its efforts during its presidency ofthe
Council last month.

I welcome the briefing by Mr. Jan Kubis, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), and thank his team for its hard work and
tireless efforts. I would also like to thank Mr. Spoerri,
Permanent Observer and Head of the International
Committee of the Red Cross Delegation to the United
Nations; and Ms. Suzan Araf Maroof, coordinator of
the national team for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). We also congratulate all civil society
groups on their actions as part of the national team
for the implementation of the resolution. That is a true
expression of our determination to bring about change
and to meet the challenges facing us following decades
of disasters experienced by Iraqi society.
My Government welcomes the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2421 (2018), extending the mandate of
UNAMI. We are grateful for the support of all Security
Council members in establishing a new mandate that is
unique among its kind in the past 11 years. The mandate
calls for supporting Iraq so as to meet the needs of all
components of the Iraqi people, including women and
young people. It calls also for achieving sustainable
development and addressing climate change. We are
fully confident that UNAMI will work with the Iraqi
Government to respond to those needs. We encourage
UNAMI to coordinate closely with the other United
Nations agencies in Iraq in order to ensuring continuity
in the efforts undertaken, building on the progress
made in the humanitarian area and rebuilding and
development of local communities, the Government
and the country.

We welcome the appointment of Mr. Karim Khan
as Special Adviser of the Secretary-General and head of
the international investigative team on the war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide perpetrated in
Iraq by Da'esh, the terrorist organization. We wish
him every success in his tasks, which he took up in
Iraq on 6 August in accordance with resolution 2379
(2017), adopted to support Iraq's national efforts to
ensure accountability among the elements of terrorist
Da'esh. This would be done by collecting, preserving
and storing evidence in Iraq to further promote
accountability throughout the world consistent with
relevant national laws. We underscore our support for
Mr. Khan's efforts and our commitment to providing
him with all the facilities necessary to ensure his
success. We also look forward to the international
community's support for him and his team.

Despite the definitive military victories over
the Da'esh terrorist gangs, we cannot say that they
and other terrorist networks have been defeated. The
propagation of takfiri and extremist ideology has
been the driving force behind terrorism in Iraq and
represents the greatest threat to national security in the
post-victory period. We must adapt our anti-terrorist
strategy to combat extremism and address the growing
decentralization of such groups, which are seeking
to expand their territory and increase their numbers.
Further international efforts will be needed to help
Iraq devise genuine and realistic strategies targeting
the expansion of these groups. We must move from
military confrontation to a national and global fight
at the individual, society and State levels, nationally,
regionally and internationally, so as to prevent these
groups from extending their influence or regrouping
once again.

Landmines and explosive remnants of war have
consequences for the Iraqi people, preventing them
from accessing basic services. Such devices maim,
paralyse and even kill them, and that is Why we will
address all challenges that prevent us from meeting our
commitments in terms of our technical and medical
capacity to help victims and ensure their medical
rehabilitation. We need additional financial resources
to meet our urgent and growing needs, given our very
difficult economic situation. We welcome the efforts of
all international partners and donors, and we call on
the international community to step up its efforts in
this area.

My Government, having rid our territory of the
Da'esh terrorist groups with the support of the United
States and the other countries of the international
coalition, as well as that of friendly and sisterly
countries, has announced that it intends to implement
a reconstruction plan in areas affected by Da'esh and
those that experienced an interruption of economic
development and construction throughout Iraq.
We are striving to boost economic development
and have enacted policies aimed at strengthening food
stability and security in order to reduce the poverty rate
in the country and provide job opportunities for young
people as part of future programmes aimed at achieving
development and reforms. These include the 10-year
plan and the five-year plan for development 2018-2022,
as well as our poverty-reduction strategy. Our goal is
to boost the private sector through the adoption of a
policy aimed at strengthening the industry sector, in
order to create jobs and encourage the export of locally
made products in the framework of the Sustainable
Development Goals as set out in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

We are following up on the conclusions of the
Kuwait International Conference for Reconstruction of
Iraq. Reconstruction is no less important than fighting
terrorism. Iraq looks forward to enjoying the support
of friendly countries in order to finance the recovery
programme launched by the Secretary-General at the
Kuwait conference, aimed at addressing crises and the
causes for the resurgence of terrorist organizations.

My Government is keen to implement the principle
of peaceful alternation of political power. We were
determined to hold parliamentary elections as
scheduled on 12 May. The Iraqi people have learned
many lessons from the elections. They hope to form
a fully representative Government that focuses on
promoting justice and strengthens democracy and
good governance, free of nepotism or corruption.
Following the official validation of the results by the
Federal Supreme Court, the winning political blocs will
strive quickly to form a new national Government that
will implement reforms in order to use the abundant
resources of the country to benefit our people.

My Government supports freedom of expression
and popular demands made through peaceful and legal
demonstrations without fear. The Government has
issued clear instructions to the security forces on the
protection of civilian demonstrators, so that legitimate
demonstrations are not exploited for political purposes
and create discord in Iraq. The Prime Minister, Haider
Al Abadi, has established a crisis unit on security
and services aimed at implementing the development
measures adopted by the Government in response to the
demands of those who demonstrated on 14 July. These
include the allocation of financial resources and job
creation in the provinces of Iraq.

The people of Iraq need sustainable stability. This
can be done only through the efforts of all actors to
find solutions to the problems and challenges facing the
country. Some Iraqi women and children continue to
suffer the impact of the negative effects of terrorism,
especially those who live in regions that were previously
under the control of Da'esh terrorist gangs. Their
suffering persists as a result of the security challenges.
My Government is working hard to reintegrate
persecuted women and children into society and to
repatriate children who fought with Da'esh to their
countries so that they are not subjected to extremism
and trafficking.

My country hopes that the United Nations will
support it in implementing thejoint communique signed
between the two parties in 2016, aimed at preventing
and addressing conflict-related sexual violence. This
would provide a platform for collective work among
religious and tribal leaders and civil society.

I would also like to mention that work is being
done between the Iraqi side, represented by the High
Commission to investigate reports of violations
of children's rights in armed conflict, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, UNAMI and UNICEF in order to
establish a joint action plan to address any violations
regarding child recruitment.

The Government of Iraq has gone a long way in
preparing its national report on the implementation
of the national plan pursuant to resolution 1325
(2000). We are about to start working on the second
national plan. We hope that UNAMI will provide us
with the necessary support and advice in completing the
first national report and in ironing out any difficulties
that may prevent the implementation of the first plan.

Iraq has been seeking to resolve all pending issues
with neighbouring countries and is eager to establish
balanced diplomatic relations with the international
community. We hope that Iraq will be a key factor in
achieving economic prosperity in the region, given
its various natural resources and strategic location.
Since 2003, successive Iraqi Governments have
respected the principle of good-neighbourly relations
and non-interference in the internal affairs of other
countries, while seeking to resolve disputes peacefully
and establish relations of mutual respect.

My Government wants to fulfil its commitments
under resolution 2107 (2013). It is trying hard to
investigate the fate of prisoners and those who
disappeared and are citizens of the sisterly State of
Kuwait and of other third-country nationals. We are
striving to repatriate Kuwait's national archives and
assets. My Government has made progress and is in
the course of preparing a new set of Kuwaiti property,
including television broadcasts, books, a sword and a
very valuable painting.

On behalf of my Government and the people of
Iraq, I would like in particular to thank Mr. Kubis, who
has led UNAMI for the past three years and helped Iraq
through a challenging time. We reiterate our thanks
to his team in Iraq and New York for their efforts
to help my country. We also thank all the friendly
countries that have pledged additional funds in order
to implement projects to improve the living conditions
and security of the Iraqi people. This demonstrates the
interest and belief of the international community in
the humanitarian efforts and in achieving stability in
Iraq, while benefiting the displaced persons and the
host communities inland, in addition to supporting
efforts to achieve development in the country.

