Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): 1 thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's open debate.
I would also like to thank today's briefers for their
statements, in particular Special Representative Virginia
Gamba. Portugal reiterates its support for her important
mandate, and we commend her unrelenting efforts.

The information contained in the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/465) is alarming.
While there have been improvements in some places,
with the adoption of action plans, in others violations
of children's rights significantly increased, including
sexual violence, maiming and killings as a result of
military operations, both by State and non-State actors.

Despite the strong normative framework and
a mechanism to monitor, report and respond to
grave violations against children, huge challenges
remain, in particular to the changing nature of
hostilities, protracted conflicts, violent extremism
and the proliferation of non-State armed groups,
including terrorist groups. Prevention, reintegration,
rehabilitation and cooperation, both at the domestic
and international levels, are essential. Efforts should
include the demobilization and return of displaced and
refugee children.

As the international community, we must
ensure that adequate resources are devoted to child
rehabilitation programmes and educational training
in post-conflict situations. However, it is fundamental
that children deprived of their liberty for their alleged
association with extremist groups be recognized, in the
first instance, as victims of forcible recruitment who
have been exposed to extreme brutality.

Portugal supports the inclusion of child protection
provisions in the mandates of peace operations and
mandatory predeployment training on child protection
for all United Nations troop and police contingents. We
also support the effective screening of peacekeepers.

Attacks on, and the use of, schools and hospitals
for military purposes cannot continue to take place
with impunity. In that context, my country reiterates
its active engagement in providing access to education
in emergency situations, including higher education,
and calls on Governments to endorse the Safe Schools
Declaration. Education is both a mechanism to prevent
recruitment and the means to address the root causes
of conflict.

The Convention of the Rights of the Child and
its Optional Protocol on children and armed conflict,
along with the Paris Principles, continue to provide an
adequate frame of reference for action. Portugal invites
all Member States that have not yet done so to consider
endorsing the Paris Principles.

In conclusion, protecting children from the
ravages of war is a moral imperative and a priority
of international peace and security. The international
community is equipped to improve the situation of
children in armed conflicts and address the root causes
of conflict, including through sustainable development,
the promotion and protection of human rights and
peacebuilding. It is our collective duty to do our utmost
to end the suffering of children victims of armed
conflicts and violence.

