Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): We thank Ambassador
Petritsch for his very comprehensive briefing and the
submission of the report covering the activities of the High
Representative and the developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina over the last six months.

We appreciate the activities of the High Representative
and his Office. We have taken note of a number of positive
steps that have been achieved during the latest six months
with the assistance of the Office of the High Representative
in almost all areas of implementation of the civilian aspects
of the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement.

We are satisfied with the successful holding of the
second municipal elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
April, reported facts regarding the increasing use of the
convertible mark and growth of foreign reserves, progress
in the implementation of the ownership concept, the
increase in the number of minority returns, promotion of
the comprehensive judiciary reform and the establishment
of judicial training.

My delegation commends the High Representative and
his Office on the creation of the Brcko District of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which was officially proclaimed on 8
March 2000, and the appointment of its interim
government, as well as the completion of the formation of
the tri-ethnic Brcko District Police Service.

At the same time, it is obvious that the progress made
by the entities in establishing their own State has been very
slow and that the acts of obstruction persist. It is truly
disappointing that the adoption of important legislation by
the Parliament, or the elimination of persistent obstruction
by entities officials of the implementation of the Peace
Agreement, often requires decisive actions by the High
Representative, as was the case in the imposition in January
of a very important draft law on the State Border Service.

It is with regret that we learned from the report that
some of the specific commitments made by the Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the New York Declaration of
last November are still to be fulfilled. Specifically, these
relate to the establishment of a permanent Secretariat of the
Presidency, the adoption of the draft Permanent Election
Law and the creation of a single national passport.

Despite the existing problems with implementation of
the civilian aspects of the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement,
in our view the overall current situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina seems to be more promising than
discouraging. Slowly but hopefully, the country, with the
assistance of the international community, is moving
forward from its recent tragic past towards a better future.

Activities of the High Representative and his Office
continue to play a vital role in international efforts aimed
at restoring peace and stability in this part of the Balkans.
Therefore, as a member of the Peace Implementation
Council and a member of the Security Council, Ukraine
will continue its support for the High Representative's
activities.

Finally, I would like to put a couple of questions to
Mr. Petritsch on the basis of the information contained in
his report.

The first question relates to the implementation of
property laws. The registration of property claims is
largely complete in both entities. At the same time,
according to paragraph 71 of the report most claimants
have still not received decisions confirming their property
rights, because of the lack of political will and proper
funding. Could Mr. Petritsch elaborate more on the
reasons for such delays? How is the Office of the High
Representative going to proceed in this situation with a
View to enforcing the property laws?

My second question relates to what is being
undertaken by the Office of the High Representative to
eliminate discrimination against national minorities and
returnees with regard to their social and economic rights,
as set out in paragraph 82 of the report, and in particular
with regard to the issuance of their identity cards, which
give access to basic social services such as health care.

And, what are his Views on the prospects for the
establishment of the unified armed forces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina?

