Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): I wish first to join
other speakers in expressing my delegation's deep
condolences and sympathy to two friendly countries,
India and Pakistan, for the tragic loss of life as a result
of the earthquake that struck the subcontinent
yesterday.

I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
Singapore, and the other new members - namely,
Colombia, Ireland, Mauritius and Norway - on
joining the Council. We are convinced that the new
members will contribute new ideas and perspectives to
the work of the Council. I should also like to express
my delegation's sincere congratulations to you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Council for this month
of January. We are confident that under your able
stewardship the work of the Council will be brought to
a successful conclusion.
Today the Council is considering an issue of great
importance and profound interest to the international
community 4 namely, the issue of bringing a territory
into nationhood. If it is successful in this undertaking,
the world will, in the not-too-distant future, witness
East Timor becoming the first nation to be born in this
new millennium. In the meantime, our collective
support is deemed necessary, as it involves the complex
and difficult tasks of nation-building, governance and
development.

As part of the international community of nations
situated in close geographical proximity to, and sharing
a common border with, East Timor, I should like to
reiterate my Government's firm commitment to
building a mutually beneficial and harmonious
relationship with a future independent, democratic and
stable East Timor. Therefore, we are fully committed to
resolving all outstanding issues, including the question
of East Timorese refugees. To that end, Indonesia has
consistently cooperated, as it will continue to strive to
do, with UNTAET and its administrators, as well as
with the leaders of East Timor. Undoubtedly, the
resolution of these issues would facilitate the
attainment of my Government's objective.

Its attainment, however, depends not only on the
prevailing situation in East Nusa Tenggara, but also on
the situation in East Timor. While acknowledging the
results achieved by UNTAET thus far, we cannot
ignore the fact that some independent observers,
including Xanana Gusmao, in his new year's message,
have been critical of UNTAET. These views, in our
opinion, reflect the aspirations of the East Timorese
people and thus must be taken into account and
considered constructively.

My Government has on several occasions
reiterated its strong belief that the key component to
resolving the myriad of existing issues is the need to
promote true and genuine reconciliation among all East
Timorese of all political persuasions - particularly in
View of the fact that, in the past, political differences
among them have usually led to violence. Thus,
reconciliation has attained greater importance and must
be pursued in all earnest if the potential of civil strife
befalling East Timor and its people is to be avoided.

For its part, Indonesia has facilitated and will
continue to facilitate talks leading to reconciliation
among the East Timorese. The most recent of these
talks were those held in Denpasar, Bali, on 18-19
December 2000, with the assistance of Uppsala
University of Sweden. The fact that the leaders of the
two groups participated in such an event was indeed a
milestone and could pave the way for similar
undertakings in the near future.

The repatriation of refugees and the early
resolution of this issue is another aspect that needs to
be urgently addressed, as it is in the interest of both
Indonesia and East Timor, particularly when viewed
from the perspective of ensuring stability on the island
of Timor. To that end, it is essential that an
environment of calm and tranquillity, including job
security and employment prospects, be advanced in
East Timor. Therefore, independent reports stating that
abuses, violence, intimidation and even killings were
perpetrated against pro-integration returnees, as well as
minorities, are not conducive to their return. As a step
towards furthering their repatriation, Indonesia
conducted a pilot project of an ad hoc, spontaneous
nature with former reservists of the Indonesian armed
forces (MILSAS) on 22 November 2000, with the
assistance of UNTAET and the International
Organization for Migration. In this context, it is
pertinent to note that since September 2000, the
Indonesian Task Force for Refugees in East Nusa
Tenggara has facilitated 4,000 spontaneous returns,
conducted in close cooperation with UNTAET and aid
agencies at the border.

It is undeniable that refugee problems are
multifaceted and have many dimensions. In the
conclusion of its publication entitled The State of the
World's Refugees - In Search of Solutions, the Office
ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
states that

"The search for solutions does not depend
on governments, international organizations and
NGOs alone. It relies on the knowledge and
capacities of the refugees themselves, and on
their determination to resume a more productive
life."

The East Timorese refugees need to be reassured,
not only as concerns economic development in an
independent East Timor, which is necessary for
pursuing a productive life, but also as concerns the
kind of development that will allow them to realize
their human potential, retain their self respect, enjoy
physical security, meet their material needs, participate
in decisions which affect their lives and, above all, be
governed fairly, under the rule of law.

In my Government's view, these are the
objectives that should be pursued by UNTAET as the
extension of its mandate is being considered, in the
context of the principle of shared responsibility, as
called for by the Millennium Summit Declaration, as
we begin the twenty-first century.

Furthermore, Indonesia is continuing its
endeavours to disarm the militias, through both
persuasive and repressive measures, resulting in the
confiscation of hundreds of standard and home-made
weapons, including ammunition and grenades. The
Indonesian security apparatus is now in control of the
situation in and around the camps and along the border
with East Timor. These endeavours have been lauded
by Mr. Ramos-Horta, the Foreign Minister of East
Timor's transitional government, as the measures have
resulted in a significant decrease in criminal activities
and acts of violence by the so-called militias since
September 2000.

On the question of the registration of refugees,
two rounds of meetings between Indonesia and
international aid agencies were held in Jakarta to
discuss the necessary modalities for the resumption of
the process; that resumption is expected to begin in
March 2001. The tragic incident of 6 September 2000
has, however, resulted in the area being placed under
the security phase five category, prohibiting
international agencies from conducting operations.
Undeniably, the present situation of the refugees
demands an urgent response so as to alleviate their
plight. It is therefore hoped that the ongoing
consultations between Indonesia and the United
Nations Development Programme Resident
Representative, as the security coordinator of United
Nations personnel in the area, on the modalities for
conducting a security assessment, in line with the
procedure established by the Office of the United
Nations Security Coordinator, will result in the rerating
of the phase five category.

During a visit to Geneva, Vice-President
Megawati Soekarnoputri and Foreign Minister Alwi
Shihab met the new High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Ruud Lubbers. Minister Shihab reaffirmed
Indonesia's commitment to ensuring security in the
refugee camps in West Timor.

As a manifestation of my Government's
commitment to bring the perpetrators of criminal acts
to justice, it should be noted that the judicial process
began with several trials of the accused parties. On
2, 8 and 15 January 2001, Eurico Guterres went on trial
for his role in inciting his followers to retake
possession of arms already surrendered to the
authorities in September 2000 and was thus charged
with illegal possession of weapons. Meanwhile, the six
suspects in the killings of the three UNHCR staff in
Atambua were brought to trial in the north Jakarta
district court. The first hearings took place on 11 and
23 January 2000, and the judicial process is expected to
continue in the coming weeks. Another suspect,
Jakobus Bere, alleged to have killed Private Leonard
Manning, surrendered himself to the Indonesian armed
forces authorities at the border in Atambua on
9 January 2000 and is presently in police custody for
further questioning. During this investigative phase,
the suspect will be accorded due process of law.

In looking towards the future, Indonesia will
endeavour to ensure that East Timor's geographical
location is reflected in the workings of the Association
of South-East Asian Nations. A further manifestation
of Indonesia's serious commitment to building a
mutually productive and beneficial relationship with
East Timor at all levels is reflected in the proposal of
President Abdurrahman Wahid to form a new regional
grouping, called the West Pacific Forum, in which the
nascent state of East Timor will find itself amid
friendly countries in the region, thereby assisting it in
consolidating the process of nation-building and
development.

In conclusion, in the light of the foregoing, it is
Indonesia's sincere hope that the extension of the
mandate of UNTAET will focus on the future and meet
the challenges in a positive, balanced and
comprehensive manner, as well as fulfil the aspirations
of all the East Timorese people during the final phase
leading to independence.

