Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset,
I would like to express our profound solidarity with
and heartfelt condolences to the Government and the
people of Colombia, as well as the family members of
the victims of the heinous attack yesterday, which we
strongly condemn.
We welcome the convening of this meeting and
would like to thank Special Representative Ghassan
Salame and Ambassador Juergen Schulz, in his capacity
as Chair ofthe Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
for their comprehensive presentations. Their briefings
this morning described a situation that requires the
urgent support of the international community and the
attention of the Council.

Peru is particularly concerned about developments
in Libya. The rigidity of positions, the lack of real
commitment on the part of certain actors and the
persistence of violent incidents, such as the one this
week, continue to fuel an unstable and unsustainable
status quo.

We deeply regret that the existing legislative bodies
persist in delaying the adoption of the legislation
necessary for the political transition process - all the
more so since, as Mr. Salame previously pointed out to
the Council, 80 per cent of Libyans are in favour of free
and fair elections.

In the currrent fragile context, we welcome the
developments promoted by the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) to hold the national
conference at the beginning of this year, which has
contemplated, among other actions, the holding of
77 preparatory meetings. We expect tangible results,
which, in the coming weeks, will contribute to
fostering a climate of moderation, detente, dialogue
and commitment to the peace of the country and its
people. In that regard, we welcome the fact that the
Palermo conference reaffirmed the commitment of the
international community to the implementation of the
United Nations action plan.

Our focus on the political sphere does not negate
the urgent need for concrete parallel progress in
various areas. In the economic sphere in particular, we
wish to highlight the recent reforms implemented by
the Presidency Council aimed at alleviating the daily
difficulties of civilians and diminishing the sources
of income of the militias, which rely on the informal
economy. We must also continue to pursue efforts to
evaluate and unify the Central Bank of Libya and its
sister branch in the east, which seek to ensure a more
transparent and efficient management of the country's
considerable financial resources.

In the humanitarian field, we are particularly
concerned about the deplorable conditions faced by
thousands of detainees, many of them women and
children. We must urgently intensify efforts to review
their files in order to remedy baseless and illegal cases,
which must be complemented by putting an end to all
acts of humiliation or torture.

We also emphasize the importance of preventing
the further escalation ofviolence in the capital and other
parts of the country, and of establishing professional
armed and police forces under a unified command. The
international community, in particular the countries
with the greatest resources and those committed to
peace and stability, are called upon to make substantive
contributions to restore the rule of law to Libya.

We highlight the establishment and launching of
the Women Support and Empowerment Unit within
the Presidency Council, whose work, we hope, will
be reflected in greater participation by women in the
different entities and stages of the political process.

Peru remains committed to achieving a political
solution in Libya that does away with the high level of
violence, ensures accountability for heinous crimes,
favours regional stability and makes it possible to
achieve sustainable peace.

Before I conclude, I would like to take this
opportunity on this, my last appearance in the
Security Council, to thank all of the representatives
of the Member States for their precious contributions
and for being extraordinary colleagues and friends. I
would also like to thank the Secretariat and the entire
technical team for their invaluable support. Finally, I
would like to particularly acknowledge and express my
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of my
country, Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, and my
dear colleagues at the Permanent Mission.

