Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I think that the representative of Ukraine
making ironic comments about the Chechens is
pointless. I do not understand. He could talk to them.
Perhaps that could lead to a diaologue with the people
in the southeast of Ukraine. But I will not go further
into that issue.

I will say that I liked the fact that at the very
end of his remarks, he nevertheless gave an objective
assessment of what is happening in southeast Ukraine.
He talked about the poverty of that region. That is
something that we should discuss. But talking about
artillery strikes and bombardments will not resolve the
poverty.

I do not know whether the Ukrainian television
showed it or not, but when the the people of Donetsk
and Luhansk turned out for the referendum on ll May
it was not just a handful of people. It is a region of,
I believe, 7 million residents in Donetsk and Luhansk
together. Absolutely nothing was done to engage in a
respectful dialogue with them. I do not know. If there
have been some events that have drawn attention to
the region, I hope that that will lead to constructive
actions. But we have not seen that. Stop the military
operations. Then perhaps we would help to establish
a dialogue. That is what we have always said. Let us
move forward and start a dialogue. Russia is ready to
assist in establishing a dialogue.

Russia came to Geneva and we drew up an
agreement. But what did we see the Ukrainian
authorities in Kyiv do? We saw them undertake punitive
operations in violation of that agreement. So what
happened to dialogue? We have always been ready to
assist in setting up a dialogue and stand ready to do so
now. So we hope that the military operation will stop
as soon as possible, because how can we help while it
continues? How can we assist in establishing dialogue
in the southeastern regions if there is killing there? It is
very difficult for us to talk about dialogue.

As is known, in our country there are many ties with
Ukraine, and 3 million of its people are dual citizens
of Ukraine and Russia. Whether they have Russian
passport and Moscow residency is not significant
because they may have 30 relatives living in Ukraine,
and so on. So that is what I mean. It is very difficult to
say who is Russian, who is Ukrainian and who is half
Russian and half Ukrainian.

We all know that. Let us try to end on a constructive
note. We agree that in that region there is a very difficult
socioeconomic situation.

The Ukrainian representative also mentioned
Crimea. As he asked a question, I, too, will ask
one. That is, why was the water shut off in Crimea?
Why was the water supply in Crimea stopped? The
economic situation is still bad 25 years after Ukrainian
independence, and the water is shut off?

It is clear that there is a poor socioeconomic situation
in the east of the country. Let us together try to solve
the issue. Let us cooperate. Can Russia and the Ukraine
cooperate economically? Does the representative recall
those serious proposals that we made? They were
ongoing right up to time of the coup d'etat that took
place on 22 February. So Ukraine turned its back on
all that. Now Ukraine talks of closing the border with
Russia and leaving the Commonwealth of Independent
States. It can clearly do that. There would not be free
trade with us. But as for the issues of bilateral relations
and cooperation in our region, what we now see is a
military operation near the Russian border farming the
flames of anti-Russian rhetoric or policy. That is not
constructive.

I hope that Ukraine carefully reads the statements
made by our Government. There are very constructive.
I hope that the representative has listened closely to

our statement today, which, in addition to its possible
criticism also contains a number of constructive ideas
as part of our policy on Ukraine.

So we would like to turn the page as soon as
possible, but much depends on Ukraine. First, it must
stop the military chaos in the east of the country.

I have already said this, but it was of course very
difficult to listen to everything. The representative
of Lithuania said that an Italian journalist had been
killed but not by whom. The whole way in which
when the Ukrainian armed forces do something, it is
not mentioned. The representative of Luxembourg,
who always talks a great deal about the humanitarian
matters, spoke little about that.

I recall the meeting on Crimea, when Ukrainian
soldiers were killed. Some people thought they
died as a result of Russian bullets. Then when the
pro-Russian forces made it known that they were sniper
bullets, the Security Council immediately expressed
its condolences. Now dozens of people, including
residents, are being killed in the east of the country.
Some Council members say that the Kyiv authorities are
showing exceptional restraint. That is very surprising.

Why are we gathering today? If it is for the
Security Council to undertake its political function,
let us demonstrate how to put an end to the violence
as quickly as possible. I perhaps heard another useful
point from my Ukrainian colleague when he welcomed
the mediation efforts of the Secretary-General. The
Secretary-General could perhaps immediately stop
the violence because the Ukrainian representative will
soon welcome his role in ending the violence in the east
of Ukraine. Let us do that in order to put an end to it.

