Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would first like to thank Ms. Sandra Honore,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2014/l62). Spain aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union, and
wishes to add a number of observations in its national
capacity.

Spain shares the Secretary-General's relatively
positive evaluation of the political situation in Haiti.
We welcome the progress in the inter-Haitian dialogue
among the various political actors, namely, the
executive and legislative branches and the political
parties, fostered by the Episcopal Conference of Haiti.
We call on all political actors to pursue and strengthen
that path of dialogue in order to address the country's
political agenda in a climate of consensus.

We believe that holding the upcoming elections
is a fundamental step in Haiti's stabilization, the
consolidation of its institutions and the promotion
of democracy and the rule of law. We trust that the
elections will take place this year.

Spain appreciates the efforts of the Club de Madrid's
first high-level mission on political consultation/
dialogue, funded by the European Union and led by the
twice former President of the Republic of Mauritius,
Mr. Cassam Uteem, and the Secretary-General of the
Club, the Spanish Ambassador Mr. Carlos Westendorp.
The mission's goal is the promotion of dialogue in
discussing Haiti's stabilization and political reform.

With regard to security, we are pleased at the
developments in 2013 as a result of MINUSTAH's
remarkable work and the ongoing process of the
institutional strengthening of the Haitian National
Police. Spain believes that, in the area of security,
there must be greater support for measures that foster
reform in the judicial and corrections systems, in
particular with regard to preventive detention. The
results achieved in the security sector encourage us to
support the work being undertaken in the training and
increasing deployment of the national police force.

We support the current process of reflection on the
MINUSTAH's future towards a progressive reduction
in its personnel. That will allow it, in the medium
term, to focus on assisting civilians, in particular in
emergency situations. In any case, Spain understands
that such reflection must go hand in hand with an
effective strengthening of the capacities of the Haitian
National Police in order to enable it to increasingly
assume MINUSTAH's functions.

With regard to the judiciary/justice sector, we
welcome the decision of the Court of Appeal in the case
of ex-President Jean-Claude Duvalier as testament to
strengthening and developing the rule of law in Haiti.

Turning to the humanitarian situation, Spain views
with satisfaction the progress noted in the Secretary-
General's report with regard to the reduced number of
internal displacements. We support the United Nations
in its efforts to eliminate cholera in the context of its
two-year plan and in support of the Haitian national plan.
As one of the country's main donors, Spain continues
and reaffirms its commitment to Haiti's development
through cooperation focused, in particular, on access
to clean water, which is crucial to the eradication of
cholera, education, rural development and the fight
against malnutrition.

Finally, we would like to express our support and
confidence in the high-level talks between Haiti and
the Dominican Republic. We believe that the high-level
bilateral commission is the ideal forum for discussing
the common agendas of both countries for their
mutually beneficial development.

