Mr. Kafando (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency
of the Security Council for this month, and to assure
you of my full support.

The report that I have the honour of introducing on
behalf of the Secretary-General (8/2018/1028) provides
a review of the situation in Burundi, as well as my and
my team's activities during the period from 10 August
to 30 October. In the report's political sections, the
Secretary-General takes stock of the tensions that are
affecting the political stakeholders, and primarily the
relations between the Government and the opposition.
In particular, the report discusses the lack of trust and
dialogue between the authorities and the opposition
parties, which are nevertheless acknowledged to be
essential to resolving the ongoing crisis. Since the
publication of the report, the political situation on
the domestic front has been dominated by four major
events.

The first is that the Minister of the Interior, alleging
the violation of certain provisions ofthe law by political
parties, rejected a request by Agathon Rwasa, the
leader of the opposition coalition, for the registration
of the Front national de liberte/Amizero y'Abarundi
party. The second was the appeal on 9 November to
the African Union and the United Nations by the
platform of the Conseil national pour le respect de
l'Accord d'Arusha pour la paix et la reconciliation au
Burundi et la restauration de l'etat de droit opposition
party asking them to take charge of the inter-Burundian
dialogue process, partly to prevent any resort to the
use of weapons, which has been advocated by some
members of the opposition. The third was the European
Union's renewal until October 2019 of its restrictive
measures against a number of Burundian officials and
officers for what are described as serious violations of
human rights, as well as the obstruction of democracy
and efforts to achieve peace. The last was the National
Assembly of Burundi's renewal until 2022 of the
mandate of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
with the principal aim of examining acts of violence
committed between 1885 and 2008.

More fundamentally, the political situation has
been largely dominated in the past few weeks by
the holding of the fifth inter-Burundian dialogue
session, unfortunately without the participation of the
Government and the majority party and its allies. For
various reasons, the participants adopted their own road
map, thereby de facto rejecting that of the Government,
adopted in August, particularly because of the lack of
any prior consultations on it. Based on a synthesis of the
various proposals, the facilitator and former President
of the United Republic of Tanzania, Mr. Benjamin
Mkapa, submitted to the mediator a final report on the
dialogue process that he had conducted. I would like
to take this opportunity to once again pay tribute on
behalf of the Secretary-General to the facilitator and
mediator for their tireless commitment, despite the
fact that it has not yet resulted in the conclusion of an
agreement between the parties involved.

The security situation in Burundi remained
relatively calm during the period covered by the report.
At the beginning of this month, however, the media
reported deadly fighting in Uvira, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, between Burundi's national
defence forces and the Resistance pour un etat de
droit au Burundi-Tabara, an armed rebel group. Those
incidents, which were confirmed by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, have resulted in several deaths.
The Secretary-General notes in his report that the
human rights situation in Burundi remains a matter
of concern, pointing out that the Government has still
not resumed its cooperation with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Violations of human rights and other abuses, such as
arbitrary arrests, forced disappearances and other acts
ofintimidation, continue to persist, as does hate speech,
especially against opposition actors. The democratic
space continues to be constrained, except for some
parties allied to the Government. With regard to the
latest report of the Commission of Inquiry on Burundi
(A/HRC/39/63), the Secretary-General deplores the
unacceptable remarks made by the representatives of
the Burundian Government about the report and its
authors.

The humanitarian situation remains worrying.
An estimated 1.7 million people are threatened by
food insecurity. I would also like to reiterate the
Secretary-General's concerns about the ongoing
deterioration of the country's socioeconomic situation
and the food insecurity that is affecting many
Burundians. The Secretary-General welcomes the
steps that the Government and various international
non- governmental organizations have taken to relaunch
their cooperation, and we continue to encourage the
Government to be flexible in that regard in order to
ensure the welfare of its most vulnerable populations.

Between January and October nearly 52,260
refugees returned to Burundi under the voluntary
repatriation programme, particularly from Tanzania.
There are still just over 380,000 Burundians in the
region, 227,510 of them in Tanzania. In that regard,
the Secretary-General encourages the Government to
continue collaborating with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to ensure
their voluntary repatriation and dignified return, and
their reintegration into their communities of origin or
host communities.

In sum, the Secretary-General's report shows that
the situation in Burundi remains fragile, partly because
of the lack of an inclusive political dialogue, but also
owing to its humanitarian, economic and financial
problems and to security threats. After more than three
years of tireless efforts through the inter-Burundian
dialogue process, the United Nations, the African Union,
the subregion and Burundi's partners must reassess the
ways and means to help Burundi emerge from its current
political crisis, and that assessment should naturally
be initiated first and foremost by the Burundians
themselves and then by the region. The Secretary-
General welcomes the East African Community's
forthcoming summit and fervently hopes that it will
address the issue of Burundi. Based on that meeting's
conclusions, and especially on its recommendations,
the East African Community, the United Nations and
the African Union must re-evaluate their commitment
to helping Burundi emerge definitively from its crisis,
especially in view of the elections scheduled for 2020.

I would like to thank the Burundian authorities for
the consideration shown to my Office and me, and to
the United Nations family in Burundi in general.

