Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
once again condemns in the strongest terms the
illegitimate and immoral decision of the President of
the United States of America with regard to Israel's
so-called sovereignty over the occupied Syrian
Arab Golan. It constitutes a flagrant violation of
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
the relevant resolutions of the Organization, including
resolution 497 (1981), which was adopted unanimously
by the Council. That resolution acknowledged that the
Syrian Arab Golan is an occupied territory and that
any actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power, in
the occupied Syrian Arab Golan, are null and void and
have no legal effect.

That decision by the United States represents
an attempt to undermine international legitimacy,
revealing the true reality and scale of its criminal
scheme to legitimize the occupation, spread chaos and
destruction and divide our region. It also revealed a
serious abrogation of the United States Administration's
obligations - especially those associated with being a
permanent member of the Security Council - and the
fact that it is an enemy to all peoples around the world
who believe in international legitimacy and reject
policies of hegemony, colonialism and depriving people
and States of their rights.

The entire international community has rejected
the decision of the United States and reiterated its
commitment to resolution 497 (1981) and other relevant
United Nations resolutions that reaffirm the Syrian
Arab Republic's sovereignty over the occupied Syrian
Arab Golan. International positions have shown that
the decision will serve only to further isolate the United
States, even among its closest allies.

The Security Council has been prevented from
discharging its responsibilities and mandate in
maintaining international peace and security as a result
of the position held by the United States Administration
in support of Israel's occupation policies. The failure
of the United Nations to implement its resolutions
on the settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict has
encouraged Israel to continue its aggressive behaviour
and its violation of international resolutions by
refusing to withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan
to the borders of 4 June 1967, in accordance with the
relevant international resolutions. Israel has launched
aggression after aggression against the territories ofthe
Syrian Arab Republic, the latest of which took place on
13 April.

Israel continues to perpetrate war crimes and
crimes against humanity in the occupied Syrian Golan,
including by confiscating land and property, expanding
settlements, looting wealth, attempting to falsify the
history of the Golan, stealing its monuments, laying
mines and depriving the steadfast Syrian citizens of
their rights, including their right to bear the identity
of their mother country and communicate with their
parents in their mother country, Syria.

Moreover, Israel, the occupying Power,
continues to exercise its policies of oppression, racial
discrimination, arbitrary detention and terrorism
against Syrian citizens. It carries out fake trials
and hands out long prison sentences, as is the case
with the Syrian Mandela - prisoner Sidqi Sleiman
Al-Makt - who was arbitrarily detained for exposing
Israel's cooperation with the terrorist Al-Nusra Front
and other terrorist groups in the disengagement of
forces zone in the Syrian Golan. He was sentenced to
14 years imprisonment, having already spent 27 years
in the occupation prisons. We call on the international
community to work for the release of Sidqi Sleiman
Al-Makt and young prisoner Amal Fawzi Abou Saleh,
as well as those under house arrest.

My Government wishes to stress that the occupied
Syrian Arab Golan is an integral part of the territories of
the Syrian Arab Republic. Recovering the Golan from
Israeli occupation by any means under international
law remains a priority in Syrian national policy. It is
our eternal right that we will not compromise or waive.

Finally, the Syrian Arab Republic remains steadfast
in its principled position in support of the right to self-
determination of the Palestinian people, as well as the
establishment of their independent State with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and the right to return for
refugees, in accordance with resolution 194 (III) of
1948. We renew our call to grant the State of Palestine
full membership at the United Nations.

