Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to welcome
Mr. Nikola Spiric', Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to thank him
for his valuable statement. We would like also to thank
Mr. Miroslav Lajcak, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and European Union Special
Representative, for his comprehensive briefing. We
express our high regard for his efforts.

My country welcomes the progress that has been
made by Bosnia and Herzegovina, referred to by the
High Representative in his briefing, in particular the
reforms undertaken with regard to integration into
European institutions, as represented by the agreement
among party leaders on a two-phase police reform. The
first phase paved the way for the initialling of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the
European Union in December 2007; this was followed
by the adoption of the two police reform laws.

We share the concern of the Special
Representative with regard to the tensions among
parties. Paragraph 8 of his report (see S/2008/300)
refers to inter-party tension due to the fact that 2008 is
an election year. We also share his concern about
unilateral actions to which he referred, and we support
his affirmation that the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, are guaranteed by
the Dayton Peace Agreement. We call upon all parties
to find common ground, which would allow them to
bring stability to the country.

We would like to record our satisfaction at the
agreement among members of the Steering Board on a
transition strategy. This will help to sustain the unity of
the international community on this issue. We believe
that in the next phase, there should be a focus on
constitutional reform, on reaching a unified position
among the parties, and on consolidating the rule of law,
as the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina set out this morning.

My country believes that it is important to
consolidate long-term stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This must not be done on the basis of the
horrible crimes that were perpetrated during the war in
order to entrench the reality of the time. It is of ever
greater importance that refugees and internally
displaced persons return to their pre-war homes. They
should be allowed and enabled to return home, and we
should deal with any conditions that prevent them from
doing so.

Secondly, all perpetrators of horrible crimes
should pay the price. There must be no impunity for
the perpetrators of such crimes. That is the basis on
which the scope of the national strategy on the
prosecution of war crimes must be determined, and we
hope that the Bosnian authorities will cooperate in that
respect. We welcome what has been achieved by the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers in that respect.
We value the efforts undertaken on Bosnia and
Herzegovina by international and regional
stakeholders, and we believe that continuing such
efforts is important to bringing about stability,
sustainable peace and the development that is needed.

Finally, I would like to express once again our
high regard for the efforts of the High Representative.
