Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We thank you, Sir, for
presiding over this important meeting and for your very
insightful remarks on such a troubling and sensitive
issue. We also thank Secretary-General Ban-Ki-moon
for his briefing and his continued commitment to a just
resolution of this intractable conflict, which has been
a source of frustration and despair for so many of us.

As we reach the final months of our tenure in the
Security Council, it is with great regret that we note the
lack of progress towards a two-State solution and the
lack of unity within the Council on how to reverse the
negative trends on the ground. Despite the efforts of a
large majority to provide the guidance and support that
Israel and Palestinians need to move towards a peaceful
resolution of the conflict and a negotiated two-State
solution, which envisages the coexistence of Palestine
and Israel living side-by-side in peace and security, key
stakeholders remain reluctant to put their weight behind
those efforts.

The reluctance to enforce the decisions that have
been adopted, along with the unwillingness to enforce
basic respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law, has not only delayed any meaningful
progress but also demonstrated the importance of
mechanisms such as the Middle East Quartet, whose
recommendations remain largely ignored by the
Government of Israel. Since the latest Quartet report
(S/2016/595, annex), which offers recommendations
for the way forward in the peace process, the Israeli
Government has increased settlement-related activities
as well as demolitions of Palestinian homes and civilian
infrastructure, and demonstrated a total disregard for
any international initiative to bring the parties together
to negotiate ajust and final settlement to the conflict.

That is not only regrettable, but also unacceptable.
It has been nearly 40 years since the Security Council
determined that Israeli settlements in occupied
territory had no legal validity and were an obstruction
to achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East. Yet here we are today standing by and
allowing thousands ofunits to be built in East Jerusalem
and the West Bank by the Israeli Government with total
impunity and disregard for our calls to reverse this
trend.

As we have repeatedly stated, this deadly and
destructive conflict has global repercussions, and
time is running out for us to bring about a meaningful
solution. That is why it is extremely important for us
to present a united front and to support all multilateral
efforts to create a viable political horizon so as to
resolve this conflict once and for all.

As we seek to promote justice, respect for human
rights, international humanitarian law and all other
democratic principles around the world, we must not
compromise our credibility by ignoring the plight of
the Palestinian people. The members of the Security
Council, the Middle East Quartet and all other
stakeholders have a moral obligation to bring about an
end to this illegal occupation, which has lasted nearly
50 years. It is our hope that Israel will recognize the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to self-
determination and independence by ceasing all illegal
settlement activity, as well as all oppressive policies,
and participate constructively in all multilateral efforts
to revive negotiations, because that is the only true path
to lasting peace.

