Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
join previous speakers in welcoming the report of the
Secretary-General and in commending the Special
Representative, Mr. Jessen-Petersen, for his briefing.
We, too, welcome the presence of the Minister of
Serbia and Montenegro here this morning.

We are encouraged by key achievements in the
eight standards set for Kosovo, and call upon the
Government and all other actors to strive to achieve the
other priority goals as set out in the technical
assessment report.

We, too, commend the calm reaction by the
people of Kosovo following the recent indictment of
former Prime Minister Haradinaj. We are relieved that
what had been feared did not come to pass. We see
their response as an illustration of growing political
maturity in Kosovo. However, we are concerned at
reports that tension between governing and opposition
parties has intensified. We urge politicians and rival
political parties in Kosovo to cooperate in
consolidating progress towards unity and final status
for Kosovo.

We note that efforts to reform local government
have faced delays. In our view, such negative
developments only work to undermine the evolution of
important institutions that are critical for genuine self-
government. Such delays should not be tolerated by the
parties in Kosovo or by anyone else, for they can only
engender instability. We know this, for it is all too
familiar in areas of conflict in our own region. Local
government reform programmes must not await final
status negotiations. Delay only weakens the political
process. However, we have heard with relief from the
Special Representative this morning of specific
measures now being undertaken to avert such delays.
We welcome this renewed commitment.

We also welcome the direct dialogue established
between Belgrade and Pristina on practical matters.
This is an important step towards normalization of
relations between the two sides. The signing of the
memorandum of understanding to reconstruct Serbian
Orthodox religious sites damaged in March 2004 is yet
another positive element. It is in this spirit that we
support the effort of the Special Representative to
arrange a meeting between President Tadic of the
Republic of Serbia and President Rugova.

We are encouraged by reported improvements in
the freedom of movement and in the promotion of the
return of displaced persons, and we urge that a more
conducive atmosphere be put in place to allow more
returns.

We are also encouraged by the steps taken to
establish a framework for Kosovo's economic
development and its economic integration in the region
as a means of addressing Kosovo's difficult economic
situation and to assist in generating employment.

We are too conscious that Mr. lessen-Petersen has
a tough job and is working under difficult
circumstances. We take this opportunity to commend
him and the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo for what we believe is the good
work they are doing in Kosovo. We also commend the
European Union and other financial institutions for
their financial support, which will enable Kosovo to
become a fully functioning economy and a democracy.

