The Secretary-General: Allow me, in this very
important debate related to the Charter and to the
maintenance of international peace and security, to
convey, before reading out my statement, a personal
emotion that I cannot hide.

I am deeply saddened by the terrible suffering
of the civilian population in eastern Ghouta, where
400,000 people live in hell on Earth.

I know that very important consultations are taking
place in the Council, aimed at achieving a cessation
of hostilities in Syria for a month, with a number of
conditions, and of course I fully support that effort.
But I believe that eastern Ghouta cannot wait, and so
my appeal to all those involved is for an immediate
suspension of all war activities in eastern Ghouta,
allowing humanitarian aid to reach all those in need
and for the evacuation of an estimated 700 people who
need urgent treatment that cannot be provided there,
and creating the possibility for other civilians to be
effectively treated on-site. This is a human tragedy that
is unfolding before our eyes, and I do not think we can
allow things to go on happening in this horrendous way.

I thank the Government of Kuwait for organizing
this briefing. I would like to express my appreciation
to Kuwait for hosting last week's International
Conference for Reconstruction of Iraq. I reiterate the
call I made there for global solidarity with Iraq in
the task of reconstruction. Let me also acknowledge
that the liberation of Kuwait from the forces of
Saddam Hussein took place 27 years ago this month.
This anniversary - of an undertaking in which the
international community used the Charter to uphold the
Charter - is a fitting backdrop to today's discussion.

The Charter of the United Nations has stood the
test of time. Drafted following the utter collapse of
international order, it helped to stitch the world back
together. Drawn up as the full scope of the Holocaust
was emerging, it is part of the global bulwark against
international crimes today. But of course, the founders
of our Organization understood that recovering
from the Second World War was not only a matter of
preventing crimes. They placed people at the heart of
the Charter and proclaimed that the true basis of peace
was to be found in promoting respect for human rights
and securing social progress and better standards oflife
in larger freedom for all.

Today, the Charter's principles - non-use of force,
peaceful settlement of disputes, non-intervention,
cooperation, self-determination and the sovereign
equality of Member States - remain the
foundation of international relations. The values it
proclaims - equal rights, non-discrimination, tolerance
and good-neighbourliness - remain guideposts for
global harmony. However, the challenges we face
have evolved, the drivers of conflict have become
more complex, new threats have emerged, and the
consequences of instability now flow far beyond their
source. Addressing the challenge of migration, as well
as the threats of climate change and inequality, will test
the Charter and our capacity to secure a better world for
all. Thus, while the Charter's principles are as relevant
as ever, we must continue to update its tools, we must
use those tools with greater determination, and we
must go back to the Charter's roots for inspiration as
we strive to deliver for "we the peoples".

That work starts with prevention. As I said to
the Council at the beginning of my mandate, the
international community spends far more time and
resources responding to crises than in preventing them.
We have to rebalance our approach to international
peace and security. Our goal must be to do everything
we can to help countries avert the outbreak of crises
that take a high toll on humankind. This vision extends
beyond wars and conflicts to natural disasters, fragility
and other kinds of stress. Our commitment must be to
all human rights - civil, political, economic, social
and cultural - and to eliminate discrimination based
on gender, religion, race, nationality or other status.
Across this work, we must recognize the great power of
women's participation, which makes peace agreements
sturdier, societies more resilient and economies
more vigorous.

Preventing crises is primarily the responsibility of
Member States. Chapter VI of the Charter describes
the tools that are available to them for that purpose:
negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement and other peaceful
measures and means. The United Nations is there to
offer support to States in resolving their disputes and
preventing the emergence of crises.

The International Court of Justice is the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations. 1 encourage
Member States to accept the compulsory jurisdiction
of the Court and to make greater use of the Court and
of other international courts and tribunals to help settle
and avoid the escalation of their disputes.

The United Nations prevention efforts in The
Gambia, Guinea and Burkina Faso over the past several
years, always taken in coordination with and often in
direct support of the activities of the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States,
highlight the conditions under which these efforts are
most successful. The role played in those contexts by
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel underscores the value of United Nations regional
political presences, as in other contexts does the work of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
and the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia.

Mediation is among the paths suggested by Chapter
VI. In recent weeks, the new High-Level Mediation
Advisory Board has undertaken its first initiative. We
have planned a number of other missions - with the
agreement of the countries concerned - to Member
States facing stability challenges. My own good offices
are available to the Security Council at all times to help
prevent, manage or resolve conflicts.

Of course, the Charter confers upon the Security
Council powers and responsibilities in the field of
conflict prevention. At this time, it is especially urgent
for the Security Council to uphold its responsibility
to bring about a political settlement on Syria, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), under United
Nations auspices.

Sustaining peace is a key part of prevention. My
report on sustaining peace (S/2018/43) is now before
the entire membership, and I look forward to taking
forward its proposals. Prevention also depends crucially
on advancing sustainable and inclusive development.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development offers
an integrated framework for addressing the economic
and social drivers of conflict and for building stable
societies, including through a focus on institutions and
the rule of law.

The word "peacekeeping" does not appear in the
Charter, but that flagship United Nations activity is
firmly rooted in the Charter's ideals and demonstrates
the Charter's flexibility. Peacekeeping has a solid record
of service, sacrifice and success, and it has ably served
as a tool to assist in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
as well as to achieve more robust objectives. However,
today peacekeeping faces major challenges. Often,
peacekeepers are deployed indefinitely to dangerous
environments where there is little peace to keep,
where there are no political solutions in sight, where
there are multiple armed groups and where casualties
are rising sharply from attacks on peacekeepers. For
these and other reasons, the United Nations ends up
serving as a crisis baby-sitter or focusing on simple
containment - and that is simply not sustainable.

A detailed plan of action to enhance the safety

and security of peacekeepers is being implemented by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and our
missions. The Department is also carrying out a series
of strategic reviews under the guidance of the Security
Council. There is no one-size-fits-all operation.
Our aim is to refocus peacekeeping with realistic
expectations; with well-structured, well-supported and
well-equipped forces; and with the support we need
from host countries. We look to the Security Council
to provide clear and focused mandates, and we call for
greater engagement on the part of all Member States
in providing personnel and political, material and
financial backing.
At the same time, peacekeeping is not the solution
to all crisis situations. Different contexts may require
other kinds of action, including peace enforcement and
counter-terrorist operations undertaken by coalitions
of Member States. Here, too, clear Security Council
mandates and predictable, adequate funding will be
critical.

Today, we have the highest number of United
Nations sanctions regimes in the history of the
Organization. Since implementation goes beyond
Member States, greater attention may need to be paid to
the private sector, in particular the financial industry.
We must be careful to avoid unintended consequences,
including humanitarian ones.

Let me turn now from Chapters VI and VII to
Chapter VIII. Even before most regions had created
regional or subregional organizations, the drafters ofthe
Charter recognized the value of regional arrangements
and agencies as a first resort for the pacific settlement
of local disputes. Regional perspectives are critical
in understanding challenges. Regional capacities are
crucial for rapid deployment. Regional ownership is
essential for solutions to take root.

Among the most vital and dynamic of today's
partnerships is our work with the African Union.
Our organizations have signed two new framework
agreements - on peace and security, and on the
alignment of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development with Africa's Agenda 2063. I again call
on the international community to ensure predictable
and adequate financing for African forces operating in
Somalia, the Sahel and around Lake Chad. We are also
forging closer ties with the European Union and several
other organizations.

The purposes and principles of the Charter speak
to today's challenges as firmly as they spoke to people
who had just lived through the most horrible war the
world has ever seen. The reforms in which we are all
engaged, which span peace and security, development
and management, aim to make us more effective in
fulfilling the Charter's vision. The Charter is our living
template for serving "we the peoples". The Secretariat
stands ready to help Member States embrace the full
spirit of the Charter and use it to its full potential across
all pillars of our work.

