The President (spoke in Chinese): I should now
like to make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of China.

The Chinese delegation welcomes the presence of
Mr. Aziz Pahad, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
South Africa, as well as his briefing to the Council
regarding the latest developments on the situation in
Cote d'Ivoire.

The meeting held in Pretoria in early April made
good progress. The Ivorian parties signed a peace
agreement and declared an immediate cessation of all
hostilities and the end of war throughout the national
territory. China is very pleased at that development,
and hopes that the Agreement will produce new
opportunities to revitalize the Ivorian peace process.
We very much appreciate President Mbeki's important
role in that regard.

China has closely followed the developments in
the Ivorian situation and sincerely hopes for the early
restoration of peace and stability in Cote d'Ivoire. We
are pleased to note that, subsequent to the signing of
the Pretoria Agreement, Ivorian Government forces
and the Forces nouvelles reached agreement on the
withdrawal of heavy weapons, and that some ministers
from opposition parties have returned to Cabinet
meetings.

As the mediator in the Ivorian crisis, President
Mbeki has taken important determinations regarding
the eligibility of presidential candidates. The first
priority is to expeditiously implement disarmament
programmes in order that opposition parties may return
to the Government of National Reconciliation, to
secure appropriate settlements of political differences
in accordance with the Agreement and to ensure that
the October elections proceed smoothly. We believe
that, so long as Ivorian parties act in good faith and
effectively honour their pledges, the prospects for the
Ivorian peace process will be bright.

Progress in the Ivorian peace process will require
not just joint efforts from all Ivorian parties, but also
continued assistance from the international community.
The United Nations should continue to strengthen its
coordination and cooperation with the African Union
(AU) and other regional and subregional organizations,
support and work with President Mbeki in his
mediation efforts and back the AU's continued leading
role. China stands ready to work with other members to
continue to study the specific issue of the extension
and reinforcement of the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire, as well as to promote the Security
Council's continued role in the resolution of the
Ivorian issue.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Cote
d'Ivoire.

