Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French): I
should like, Mr. President, to thank you and to convey
our great pleasure at seeing you, the eminent
representative of the Gabonese Republic, presiding
over the work of the Council during the month of
5
March. I am convinced that, owing to your spirit of
brotherly cooperation and to the diligence and, above
all, the comprehension of Council members - and I
convey my greetings to the new members - the
Council will give careful consideration to the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2010/ 106) before it.

As the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General just recalled, Guinea-Bissau has come a long
way. It has to be said, and we should celebrate this, that
substantial progress has been made in strengthening
democracy and promoting a culture of peace and
dialogue, but above all in establishing a political
climate of accountability and good governance that
will help create conditions that favour lasting
development.

As members will have noted, what emerges from
the report of the Secretary-General is that Guinea-
Bissau is on the road to political stability. Guinea-
Bissau has worked with great determination to
establish a mechanism to firmly enable good
governance, the rigorous management of public funds
through the rigorous monitoring of all tax revenues,
which has had evident success, as Mr. Mutaboba has
just noted. For the first time since 2004, the
Government of Guinea-Bissau was able to ensure the
regular payment of salaries, which represents
substantial progress since the payment of salaries, as
Council members know, contributes to the building of
the psychological climate necessary for peace and
stability in a country insofar as it is salaries that enable
families to live decent lives.

Here I should like to emphasize in particular the
effort being made in Guinea-Bissau - by both the
President and the Prime Minister - to ensure the
harmonious management of State affairs, and,
moreover, to ensure that there can be understanding
and dialogue, along with an inclusive political climate,
which is open to other stakeholders, especially other
political parties, and in which they too can make their
contribution to building a Guinea-Bissau that favours
peace and development.

In this respect, it is important to take note of what
Mr. Mutaboba just recalled: the fact that the President
of the Republic invited the former President,
Mr. Kumba Yala, to take part in the State Council,
which clearly shows the good intentions, and above all
the determination, of the leaders of Guinea-Bissau to
promote an inclusive political climate.
This policy of inclusion responds to the need to
ensure ongoing dialogue in Guinea-Bissau. That is
why, at present, all actors and stakeholders - the
Government, civil society, young people and women -
are participating in organizing what we hope will be a
national reconciliation conference. This conference
will be centred on topics focusing not only on the
concerns of the people but also on the need to ensure
that together, through fruitful dialogue, we can get to
the right solutions that will allow us to establish lasting
political stability and mechanisms opening the way for
sustainable development. Everyone in the country must
realize that, without dialogue, without the participation
by all and without the contributions of all the sons and
daughters of Guinea-Bissau, promoting development
will not be possible.

I should also like to say that defence and security
sector reform efforts are under way. The Council will
have realized that everything in Guinea-Bissau is a
matter of top priority. But among the great number of
priorities, defence and security sector reform is a pre-
eminent one, to which we are devoting enormous effort
and particular care. In this regard, I should like to
thank the international community, including the
European Union, for the invaluable cooperation that
our development partners are providing us, in
particular with regard to security and defence sector
reform.

However, while we are aware that defence and
security sector reform is necessary and indispensable,
it is not enough on its own. We must proceed, as we are
doing, to a much broader reform, including of public
administration, so that the skills needed to face all the
challenges we have to address together in Guinea-
Bissau are in place where and when they are needed.

That is why, as I said earlier, we have begun to
establish mechanisms that allow us to meticulously
manage public funds to ensure that what little we have
is spent in an intelligent way and so that, through
transparent accounting, the people of Guinea-Bissau
can have trust in their leaders and be aware of the
Government's praiseworthy efforts to meet their most
urgent needs.

I should also like point out that we are making
efforts relating to the need to combat drug trafficking
in our country. Here too, substantial progress has been
seen thanks again to reform of the justice sector and in
particular of the judicial police, which, today, equipped
10-26013
with far more substantial resources, is tackling this
scourge which affects us all due to its nature as a
scourge afflicting the entire region. For that reason, I
welcome the fact that the West African region has
decided to join in these efforts and place all available
energy and resources at our disposal to address this
scourge. From us, this requires firm discipline, joint
efforts and good coordination.

We are counting on the international community
to support us in these efforts. The challenges are many,
and despite my Government's endeavours and despite
our awareness of the need to redouble our efforts to
shoulder our primary responsibility to establish the
structures needed to transform Guinea-Bissau into a
stable country that can contribute to peace and stability
in the subregion. We need international assistance in
overcoming all of the many obstacles before us. I am
counting on Security Council members to urge the rest
of the international community to provide sustained
support for the efforts that we ourselves are making in
Guinea-Bissau.

I take this opportunity, once again, to thank the
members of the Security Council for the interest they
10-26013

have always shown in Guinea-Bissau. I believe that, on
the basis of the excellent report of the Secretary-
General and the excellent clarifications provided this
morning by Mr. Mutaboba, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, and by Ambassador Viotti,
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Council members will
have a clear and up-to-date idea of the progress
achieved in my country. I confident that the Council
will continue to provide the necessary support so that
we can complete all the reforms on which we have
embarked, so that we can continue all the necessary
efforts, and so that we can be worthy of the trust the
Council has placed in us.

