Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his comprehensive
briefing this morning. I would also like to acknowledge
the presence of the Vice-President of Colombia,
Mr. Naranjo - a key player in the peace process. We
thank him for honouring us with his presence and for
his personal commitment to the implementation of the
peace agreement.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands is a close
neighbour of Colombia - as Aruba and Curacao are
off the coast of Colombia and are autonomous countries
in the Kingdom of the Netherlands. In view of that
good-neighbourly relationship, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands has politically supported the peace process
in Colombia from the start, and we will continue to
do so. We are also providing financial support for the
implementation of the peace agreement.

Before going into the issue of Colombia, I would
also like to acknowledge that this is the last meeting
of my good friend and neighbour, Matthew Rycroft.
I honour the contribution he has made to peace and
security in the world through all of his activities on the
Council. We will miss him.

Today, I will address three issues - the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace, some of the challenges and
the ceasefire.

First, with regard to the Peace Agreement, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands commends the historic
peace agreement between the Colombian Government
and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC). We pay tribute to the achievements of both
parties in the peace process. They are remarkable.
The peace process is not only about Colombia; it gives
hope to many people in many other regions of the
world that are torn up by war. Our financial support
to the implementation of the peace agreement focuses
on human rights and gender, transitional justice,
democratization and land rights.

We thank the Secretary General for his report
(S/2017/lll7). It contains a clear and realistic overview
of the results of the Mission and the progress of the
implementation of the peace agreement in general.

That brings me to my second point - remaining
challenges and achievements. Of course, the full
implementation of the Peace Agreement is key. However
difficult it may seem, challenges need to be confronted
and dealt with without delay. Only the full commitment
to peace by all parties can overcome the challenges
that Colombia still faces. A solid national reintegration
plan is necessary to make the political, economic and
social reintegration of former combatants into society a
reality. We hope both parties will be creative in finding
ways to give demobilized ex-FARC-members access to
land. In that regard, we very much welcome the recent
steps of President Santos.

We would also like to stress the important dimension
of gender. Given the important role that women have
played in the peace process, they should also be able to
participate fully in the drafting and implementation of
the reintegration plan. The participation of women has
proven to be effective and it is crucial to the success of
the reintegration plan as well.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands is concerned
about the security situation in certain regions and the
increase in violence against human rights defenders,
community leaders and former combatants. Therefore,
we welcome the redesign of Plan Victoria into Plan
Horus, which includes the national police and focuses
more on areas where the security situation is most
critical. We welcome the first steps taken by the
Colombian Government to set up a transitional justice
system and we look forward to the full implementation
of chapter 5 of the peace agreement. In order to reach
sustainable and lasting peace, impunity should be put to
an end and reparations and guarantees of non-repetition
to the 8 million victims should be ensured.

On the ceasefire, we deeply regret the fact that
negotiations have been unable to reach an agreement
on an extension of the ceasefire. This morning's two
attacks took place shortly after the ending of the
ceasefire. It would be unfortunate if these attack were
the consequence of the decision by the ELN (Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional) to resume its actions against
the Colombian Government. As a member of the
group of countries supporting the negotiating table
of the peace negotiations between the Colombian
Government and the ELN, we call upon both parties
to renew the ceasefire. The first ceasefire has greatly
improved the humanitarian situation in areas affected
by the conflict. A renewal of the ceasefire is in the best
interest of the Colombian people and is a necessary
precondition for the full participation of civil society in
the peace negotiations.

(spoke in Spanish)

In conclusion, as a neighbouring country, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands remains fully committed
to the Colombian peace process and is ready to support
the Colombian Government in the implementation of
the agreements. We face significant challenges, but we
are convinced that the peace process is irreversible.

