Mrs. Telalian (Greece): Mr. President, I would
like to join previous speakers in thanking you for
having organized this timely and open debate on an
issue that has drawn international attention,
particularly during the last few days, in View of the
escalating violence in the Middle East, which has a
great impact on the lives of innocent children. We
strongly appeal to all the parties involved to put an end
to this suffering.

I wish also to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Coomaraswamy, and the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Veneman, for their
informative briefings.

Greece fully associates itself with the statement
made earlier by the Secretary of State of the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs of Finland on behalf of the
European Union, and with the statement to be made
later by Slovenia on behalf of the Human Security
Network.

At this stage, I would like to make some
additional remarks.

Since the 1996 Graca Machel report on the
impact of armed conflict on children, the issue has
attained international visibility and prominence.
Significant progress has been made, especially in the
field of international standard-setting, that recognizes
the human rights and freedoms of children in armed
conflict. The Security Council has contributed to that
effect with the adoption of six resolutions since 1999.

However, despite all of those efforts, thousands
of children continue to be killed and maimed and to
bear the full brunt of armed conflict and violence, as
pointed out earlier by Ms. Coomaraswamy.
Defenceless children are raped or abducted, in
Violation of the most basic principles of international

law, and children are still forcibly recruited into armies
and militias, with serious implications for long-term
regional and international stability. As has been
reported by United Nations humanitarian agencies, as a
result of limited or no humanitarian access, the number
of children who are dying in silence every day in many
refugee camps in Africa from disease and malnutrition
exceeds emergency thresholds.

All of the foregoing indicates that there is still a
lot to be done. It is important that we focus our
attention on the effective implementation of existing
international instruments. Protecting children in armed
conflict is, however, a very complex issue. A variety of
measures is required in order to deal with it effectively.
In that respect, the political will and active
involvement of national Governments is a necessary
precondition. If, however, national Governments lack
the capacity or will to do so, it is important for the
humanitarian community to create the necessary
conditions and environment to deter violence.

At the same time, States should address
prolonged impunity, as it aggravates violence. Those
responsible for serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law committed against
children should be brought to justice, in order to secure
justice and dignity for victims. In that respect, we
would like to emphasize that the ongoing
investigations of the International Criminal Court can
play a crucial role in dealing with accountability for
international crimes against children.

Since the Council's last open debate on children
and armed conflict, which was organized by Benin in
February 2005 (S/PV.5129 and 5129 (Resumption 1)),
considerable developments have taken place that have
paved the way for a realistic approach to further
promoting the protection of children in armed conflict.
In particular, the monitoring and reporting mechanism
established through resolution 1612 (2005) in July
2005 constitutes a major step towards implementing a
comprehensive and coordinated strategy to yield
reliable reports on the recruitment of children and other
abuses committed against children.

Work is also in progress to address the problems
in question, including the elaboration of specific action

plans. That information - gathered through close
cooperation among national Governments, United
Nations entities and civil society actors - is an

essential element for formulating effective measures,
as they will be tailored to the specific needs and
realities on the ground. The implementation of that
mechanism is at an early stage, but we are confident
that it will serve the purpose of its establishment, with
the full support of national Governments and the
international community.

The second important development was the
establishment of the Council's Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, under the skilful
chairmanship of France. The proceedings of its initial
four meetings, since November 2005, have been
fruitful. I would like to thank your country,
Mr. President, for its excellent report on the activities
of the Working Group (see S/2006/497, annex). Let me
just mention that, on 26 June, the Working Group
discussed the first report of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism set up in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The report is well documented
and proves the usefulness of the mechanism in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We look forward to
participating in the Working Group's consultations to
develop follow-up recommendations to the Council.

Finding lasting solutions to the problems facing
children in armed conflict requires hard work,
cooperation and coordinated activities on the national,
regional and international levels. A dialogue with all
parties to an armed conflict is also needed. In that
respect, the role of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and of
UNICEF is commendable.

Furthermore, effective peacebuilding strategies
should be developed in post-conflict societies in order
to prevent them from relapsing into future conflicts. In
that respect, it is essential that all disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes include
provisions to address the specific needs of children
associated with armed groups, such as reunification
with their families, medical support, education and
vocational training. The newly established
Peacebuilding Commission can adequately contribute
to that end.

We also support the emphasis of the United
Nations Development Programme on developing the
three Es, as was mentioned earlier by Mr. Melkert.

In conclusion, I want to underline that Greece is
strongly committed to the protection of children
affected by armed conflict and firmly supports all the
relevant efforts of the Security Council to ensure

enhanced protection for children living in the midst of
conflict around the world. We also support the draft
presidential statement that the Council is ready to
adopt.

