Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I, too, thank
the Presidents and Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals for their briefings and reiterate New Zealand's
strong support for their work.

As noted by colleagues this morning already,
the past few months have seen several important
developments regarding the completion of the work of the
Tribunals. They include the conviction and sentencing
of Radovan KaradZic' and the arrest of International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) fugitive Ladislas
Ntaganzwa in the Democratic Republic of Congo and his
imminent transfer to Rwanda for trial. We hope further
progress can be made in apprehending those ICTR
fugitives who remain at large, and encourage States to
continue their cooperation with the Mechanism in that
regard.

The ICTY will be able to achieve its completion
strategy only if all the relevant States comply with their
obligations under resolution 827 (1993). We are aware
that Serbia faces some challenges, but we encourage
the Government to maintain its positive record of
cooperation with the Tribunal.

The Office of Internal Oversight Services report
(S/2016/441) evaluating the implementation of the
ICTY completion strategy between 2010 and 2015
paints a mixed picture of the Tribunal's performance.
In response, the ICTY questioned the application
of a results-based management approach to judicial
institutions and the impact it could have on judicial
independence and the right to a fair trial.

New Zealand has some sympathy with the ICTY's
concerns. We accept that the Tribunal has room
for improvement in some aspects, and that some
administrative and other problems could have been
avoided. However, we believe that the central priority
for ICTY should remain the completion of its work
by the end of 2017. At this late stage in the Tribunal's
life cycle, a pragmatic approach to addressing the
deficiencies identified by the Office is required. It is
more important that lessons learned from the report
are gathered and that they feed into the work of the
Mechanism and future tribunals.

We hear the Tribunal's call for future reviews to
be given sufficient time and to have a sharper focus on
substantive issues. We also note its view on the need to
take into account the unique nature of the institution,
its judicial mandate and factors outside its control. The
Tribunal's suggestion that a more productive approach
would be to develop benchmarks for assessing the
efficiency and effectiveness of international judicial
institutions is worthy of consideration.

Also worthy of consideration is its suggestion to
undertake a serious analysis of the factors affecting
judicial efficiency. Agreement on the best approach
will be needed prior to the evaluation of the Mechanism
in two years' time. The Mechanism's first review
has been completed. Overall, we believe it should be
commended for its work to date. It is clearly mindful
of the Security Council's Vision for it as a small,
temporary and efficient structure whose functions and
size will diminish over time. We are pleased at the
Mechanism's efforts to maximize its effectiveness and
efficiency by drawing on best practices and lessons
learned from the ICTR, the ICTY and other tribunals.
Efforts to pursue new processes and working methods
and maintain flexibility in staff assignments, including
through the effective use of remote working practices,
deserve acknowledgement.

There are, however, ongoing challenges. The
Council's resolution 2256 (2015), adopted in December,
encouraged the Mechanism and the Government of
Rwanda to collaborate on matters related to the legacy
of the ICTR, including in respect of access to archives.
We hope there will be further progress on resolving
the archives issue. We also note the ongoing question
of how and where the 14 Rwandans in the safe house
in Arusha should be relocated. We would encourage
the Mechanism to develop a process for risk-based
assessments in that regard. Such a process could be
used for other situations, including in relation to those
finishing their sentences outside of Rwanda.

It is important that the Council maintain its support
for the ICTY through to the end of its mandate and
that it support the Mechanism. Issues such as the need
for an incentive structure must be addressed to avoid
delays due to staff attrition later on. But more broadly,
there is a need to have a serious conversation about how
to practically, sustainably and cost-efficiently ensure
accountability for serious international crimes. Part of
that conversation should be about how the Council can
do better in ensuring practical support to the machinery
for international justice, and thus assist in expediting
that work. In those conversations, we need to face up to
the reality that realjustice has real costs. It always has.

