Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to thank you, Sir, for
taking the initiative to convene today's meeting, and
Mr. Grandi for his inspiring presentation.

As we know, the number of displaced persons
throughout the world has never been so high:
68.5 million, including more than 25 million refugees.
Today's briefing therefore has its rightful place on the
Security Council's agenda, given the links between
conflicts and flows of refugees and internally displaced
persons. In that regard, the drastic increase in the
number displaced persons cannot become the indicator
of our decreasing ability to prevent, contain and
resolve conflicts. The emergence of flows of refugees
and internally displaced persons is, in many cases, a
warning sign. They should therefore be considered
an early-warning sign and be included in the analyses
and reports submitted to the Security Council so as to
improve our response and prevention capacity. I would
like to ask the High Commissioner for Refugees about
his opinion on that issue. How can we work on that
aspect of early warning?

Secondly, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) places
protection at the core of its mandate. Belgium supports
the centrality of protection through a strong partnership
with UNHCR. Such protection must remain at the core
of all humanitarian action that supports displaced
persons, as they face many additional risks, ranging
from discrimination to serious violations of their
rights. Given the additional vulnerability of women
and children to the risk of Violations, including sexual
violence, we call on the United Nations and other
humanitarian partners to pay particular attention to
their specific needs and provide specialized medical and
psychosocial services for victims of sexual violence.
With regard to protection, we recall that displaced
persons are protected by human rights through
international humanitarian law and refugee law, as
appropriate. We call on all States Members of the United
Nations to respect the principle of non-refoulement.

The High Commissioner mentioned the issue of
returns. We believe that returns and reintegration must
be an integral part ofpeace processes. Parties to conflict
must provide the necessary guarantees to ensure that
refugees can return in a safe, voluntary, dignified,
well-informed and sustainable manner. Accompanying
measures must be put in place, with a View to lasting
reconciliation and transitional justice. Furthermore,
refugees themselves, as well as diasporas, can make
a valuable contribution to peace and reconciliation
efforts; their role as actors in such processes must
be supported.

Thirdly, the shocking number of forced
displacements, including refugees, leads us to reaffirm
the importance of international cooperation on the
issue of refugees. In that regard, Belgium supports
the Global Compact for Refugees, developed by
UNHCR, and hopes that its adoption will help give
new impetus to international cooperation in that area.
Given that almost 60 per cent of refugees are hosted
by only 10 countries and that 85 per cent of refugees
are in developing countries, the Compact quite rightly
prioritizes support for host countries, responsibility-
and burden-sharing and the quest for durable solutions.
That approach prevents lost generations, in particular
in protracted crisis situations, due to the lack of health
care, education and psychosocial support.

I would like to end by paying tribute to the
outstanding work done by the High Commissioner and
his team.

