Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its 28 member States.

The candidate countries Turkey, North Macedonia,
Montenegro and Albania, and the European Free Trade
Association country of Liechtenstein, member of the
European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine, align
themselves with this statement.

I join other speakers in welcoming High
Representative Valentin Inzko back to the Security
Council and assuring him of the European Union's
continued support. I also welcome the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and thank her for her statement.

The European Commission will soon release its
opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina's application for EU
membership. The Council of the European Union will
then pronounce itself on the next steps to be taken. That
will be a historic moment for Bosnia and Herzegovina's
path towards integration in the European Union, based
on the values of peaceful coexistence, prosperity and
diversity for its member States and citizens.

Seven months have passed since the holding
of the country's general elections in October 2018.
We commend the rapid formation of the executive
institutions in the Republika Srpska entity and in seven
of the 10 cantons of the Federation entity, as well as the
formation of the parliamentary institutions at all levels.
We welcome, after the adoption of an ad hoc domestic
solution, the formation of the Federation entity - the
Federation House of Peoples - and, as a consequence,
the state-level House of Peoples.

Nevertheless, we are concerned about the slow
progress made towards the formation of Governments
at the State and Federation levels. The prolongation
of caretaker Governments seriously hinders the
implementation of reforms. Internal party politics and
a lack of willingness to compromise should not block
the legitimate aspirations of the citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to advance towards European Union
integration. We urge all political leaders to assume
their responsibilities and proceed without further delay
to the formation of Governments for the benefit of the
whole country and its people.

The European Union has repeatedly stated that
election-related issues, including provisions for holding
local elections in Mostar and holding elections for
the Presidency in Bosnia and Herzegovina, should
be addressed as soon as possible, while taking into
account the situation in the country and respecting the
European standards and decisions of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The European
Union underlines that no legislative or political steps
should be taken that would make it more challenging
to implement the European Court for Human Rights
Sejdie-Finci ruling and related rulings.

In that respect, the European Union underlines
that it expects the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities
to rapidly advance the reforms needed to advance
on the country's EU path in line with its citizens'
expectations. The European Union insists on the need
for the authorities to urgently resume its reforms and
work towards strengthening the rule of law, in particular
with regard to the independence and impartiality of the
judiciary, fighting corruption and organized crime,
countering radicalization and addressing irregular
migration, as well as the independence of the media,
the safety of journalists, promoting young people's
employment and education, and ensuring the adoption
and the full and effective implementation of a new set
of socioeconomic reforms.

Progress in the field of the rule of law and
fundamental rights is key for the country to advance
towards the European Union. We therefore call upon the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to urgently align
legislative initiatives and law enforcement practices
with European and international standards.

Taking into account the political and security
situation on the ground and the importance of
maintaining a safe and secure environment, the
European Union reiterates its firm commitment to the
executive mandate entrusted to the European Union-led
peacekeeping operation Althea by the Council.

(spoke in French)

Bosnia and Herzegovina has been clear about its
willingness to one day become a member ofthe European
Union, an aspiration that we support. In that context,
we welcome the statement made by the Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in December 2018 that
reaffirms that the country's accession to the European
Union remains a strategic priority for the entire country.
We reiterate the EU's unequivocal commitment to the
European perspective of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
single, united and sovereign country. We call on the
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to refrain
from any secessionist and provocative rhetoric and any
action that could destabilize the country and prevent it
from addressing its real challenges.

The European project was built on reconciliation
among peoples. The armed conflict in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has brought suffering and destruction to
all communities. The denial of genocide by elected
officials or any revisionism promoted by the elected
Parliamentary Assembly offends our conscience and is
incompatible with the prospect of integration into the
European Union.

(spoke in English)

We expect the institutions and political leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to uphold the commitment to
lasting reconciliation in a true European spirit, guided
by the aspiration of the vast majority of their fellow
citizens to join the European Union.

