Mr. Annadif (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on presiding over this meeting.
We assure you of our full support.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to take this opportunity to greet
and commend the Ambassador of Indonesia on his
country's presidency of the Council during the month
of May.

(spoke in French)

If I may, I would further like to take this opportunity
to greet and welcome Mr. Tiebile Drame', Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali.

It is an honour and pleasure for me to be before
the Security Council to introduce the Secretary-
General's report (S/2019/454) on the situation in Mali,
at a time when that country is entering a critical time
in its peace process. The Council renewed the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in June last
year by adopting resolution 2423 (2018), in which the
Council expressed its impatience and frustration with
the delay in the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.

The Council will also recall that, in its presidential
statement S/PRST/2019/2 of 3 April, the Security
Council stressed the urgent need for significant progress
to be made, including with respect to institutional
reforms, the redeployment of the Malian defence and
security forces in the north and the establishment of the
northern economic development zone. The continued
willingness of the signatory parties to proceed with
the implementation of the agreement still offers real
opportunities to advance the cause of peace in Mali
in the coming months, despite the accumulated and
ongoing delays.

The significant good offices efforts to promote
Malian ownership of the agreement and build trust
between the parties should be continued and encouraged.
Those good offices laid the foundation ofthe signature of
the peace agreement, one of the achievements of which
was to extend the implementation of the agreement to
movements that now uphold it even though they may
have split from their original groups.

The same efforts have led to the establishment of
a group within Parliament to specifically monitor the
implementation of the agreement. One cause for regret
is the lack of results regarding the inclusion of women
in the implementation structures of the agreement,
while the greater involvement of civil society
organizations in the public sphere is to be welcomed.
The latter, under MINUSMA'S impetus, have agreed
to establish observatories to monitor the actions of the
institutions set up under the agreement, in particular
the regional assemblies.

The peace process in Mali entered a new phase with
the appointment of a new Prime Minister, Mr. Boubou
Cisse, on 22 April and the signature of the political
agreement on governance between the presidential
majority and the main democratic opposition party
on 2 May. That was followed by the formation on
5 May of an open Government, of which the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation,
Mr. Tiebile Drame', who is present here today, is a
perfect representative. That development, which
prioritizes the implementation of the agreement, also
paves the way for the creation of a broader political
consensus around political and institutional reforms.
The consensus reached on the extension of the National
Assembly's mandate is an indication ofthat willingness
to move forward.

In the same vein, we note with satisfaction that the
bill to establish the northern economic development
zone has already been passed by the Council of
Ministers and sent to the National Assembly. The
political agreement on governance of May 2 also tasks
the Government with arranging an inclusive political
dialogue, the goal of which will be to enable discussion
among Malians with a view to forging a shared vision on
the major challenges facing the country. I am sure that
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, who is with us here
today, will give a more precise account of the evolution
of the process and its most noteworthy aspects.

In parallel with those important political
developments, the redeployment of the reconstituted
and reformed defence and security forces is making
encouraging headway. To date, nearly 1,400 troops
from the Platform coalition and Coordination
des mouvements de l'Azawad of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism will begin training for
their ultimate integration into the Malian defence
and security forces. If we add their 600 Operational
Coordination Mechanism colleagues from the Malian
armed forces, we will have nearly 2,000 troops, which
will represent the kernel of the reconstituted Malian
defence and security forces and will gradually be
redeployed to the north.

I note and commend the effective integration
into their original units of nearly 600 former Malian
armed forces combatants who had deserted following
the events of 2012. The fraternal welcome extended to
them by their brothers in arms upon their return proves
that reconciliation among Malians is possible.

The effective return of the Administration to the
north, a guarantee of the restoration of basic social
services, will enable the population to benefit from
the peace dividend, one of the key objectives of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.

The glimmer of hope on the horizon cannot be
transformed into a real opportunity without accelerated
control of the security situation, particularly in the
centre. What happened on Sunday night into Monday
on 9 and 10 June, in the village of Sobame-Da in the
Mopti region, reminds us of the gravity of the situation,
in particular following the massacres of Koulogon-Peul
and Ogossagou, respectively, on 1 January and
23 March, in the same region of Mopti, unfortunately.
It was precisely after the Ogossagou tragedy that
MINUSMA, as part of its mandate to protect civilians,
mounted Operation Oryx, in coordination with
Operation Kapigdou of the Malian defence and security
forces, in the central part of the country.

That emergency operation is based on the protection
of civilians and is structured around five pillars:
first, increasing patrols to ensure people's physical
protection through deterrence and threat anticipation;
secondly, deploying investigation teams and supporting
the judicial chain of the Malian authorities in order to
combat impunity; thirdly, increasing awareness through
ongoing communication with the institutions and local
communities in the central Mali; fourthly, coordinating
with humanitarian and development partners by
expanding secure spaces; and fifthly, engaging in
mediation activities to promote reconciliation and
social cohesion among the people.

The ongoing vicious cycle of violence must stop
lest everyone be tempted to take the law into their own
hands. It is worth emphasizing the importance of the
fight against impunity. In that connection, I congratulate
and encourage MINUSMA's human rights division,
which is carrying out considerable investigative work to
establish the facts and make relevant recommendations
to the Government, without forgetting its multifaceted
support for Malian judicial institutions, particularly the
specialized judicial police.

In the same spirit, we welcome the assignment ofa
public prosecutor to Mopti and the recent arrests made
by the Malian State. We hope that the arrests will bring
the perpetrators to justice soon. We also welcome the
establishment by the Government of a coordination
unit for all security initiatives in central Mali. The
Minister here in the Council today is responsible for
its establishment and will, I am sure, provide us with
details. To consolidate those efforts, we have adopted
an integrated United Nations strategy with the United
Nations country teams and MINUSMA, in line with the
integrated strategic framework. Since 28 May, there is
a military sector specifically dedicated to central Mali.
Those two new elements will have a multiplier effect on
our action in the days to come.

In terms of uniformed components, we are more
proactive than ever before. A few years ago, the majority
of our personnel were assigned to the protection of our
camps. Today, the situation has completely reversed
in that at least 70 per cent of them are now on the
ground, mainly for protecting civilians or escorting
supply convoys through coordinated initiatives with
our partners, leaving only nearly 30 per cent to secure
our facilities.

Parallel to these efforts in the centre, we are
maintaining the presence of MINUSMA in the north,
particularly to accelerate the implementation of the
agreement. I take this opportunity to recognize the
outstanding work of Operation Barkhane at our side.

It is also critical to take into account the resumption
of the operations of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel earlier this year. We continue to develop
our logistical support in accordance with resolution
2391 (2017). A specific unit is being set up to that
end, but, as we have often pointed out, geographical
limitations hinder the effectiveness of our support.

In addition, coordination between MINUSMA and
representatives of the international community based
in Bamako - including Algeria as head of mediation,
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the European Union - remains our
main priority. That close coordination has proved its
worth at critical moments, as reflected in the results
achieved in the 2018 presidential elections. That is also
true of the Agreement Monitoring Committee, whose
decisions are now binding, and in efforts to encourage
full Malian ownership of the agreement.

In order to maintain this momentum, several of the
options highlighted in the Secretary-General's report
are aimed at adjusting the composition of MINUSMA's
civilian and uniformed components so as to promote
greater mobility. That is the reason behind the proposals
for the reassignment of certain specialized units and
the possibility of transferring certain camps, starting
with Diabaly, to the Malian authorities, as mentioned in
the Secretary-General's report.

In adopting resolution 2423 (2018) in June of last
year, the Council reinvigorated MINUSMA by setting
clear objectives and calling for a series of adjustments
to carry out its mandate. The results of that initiative
are now a reality. As the Secretary-General notes in his
report, the peace process in Mali is at a decisive turning
point thanks to that initiative and the commitment of
the signatory parties to the agreement, as well as that of
the other partners I mentioned earlier. Only the support
of the Council through the extension of MINUSMA's
mandate will make it possible to consolidate those
achievements at both the political and security levels.

I once again thank the Council for its
renewed support.
