The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

Following consultations among Council
members, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses grave
concern about the ongoing violence and rapidly
deteriorating situation in Abyei since the Council
addressed the issue in its 22 May press statement,
in which the Council condemned the attack by
Southern forces against a United Nations Mission
in the Sudan (UNMIS) convoy escorting
Sudanese Armed Forces elements of joint
integrated units on 19 May in Abyei, and also
condemned the escalatory military operations
being undertaken by the Sudanese Armed Forces,
which have taken control of the area in and
around Abyei town.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the Government of the Sudan's taking and
continued maintenance of military control over
the Abyei area and the resulting displacement of
tens of thousands of residents of Abyei. The
Council calls on the Sudanese Armed Forces to
ensure an immediate halt to all looting, burning
and illegal resettlement. The Council stresses that
all those responsible for violations of
international law, including humanitarian and
human rights law, as well as those who ordered
those acts, will be held accountable. The Council
expresses grave concern about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the area and praises the
efforts of the humanitarian community to deliver
emergency assistance, including food, health
care, shelter and water, to those affected by the
conflict, despite continued insecurity in the
region and despite severe limitations on access.

"The Security Council condemns the fact
that two of the three main supply routes from the
North to the South have been blocked, and that
the Banton Bridge in southern Abyei was
destroyed by the Sudanese Armed Forces, which
impedes needed trade and makes the return of
civilians to Abyei more difficult. The Council
calls for immediate measures to restore full
access through all routes.

"The Security Council calls on all parties to
respect humanitarian principles and allow all
humanitarian personnel timely and unfettered
access to vulnerable individuals and communities
affected by the fighting. The Council further calls
for conditions to be created that would allow the
prompt and safe return of those displaced from
their homes.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
all attacks against UNMIS, including those of
24 May and 19 May, which are criminal acts
against a United Nations mission and its
personnel and which threaten to undermine the
commitment of the parties to avoid a return to
war.

"The Security Council recalls the
commitments made by Vice-President Ali Osman
Taha and First Vice-President Salva Kiir that both
parties shall remove any unconditional claims to
Abyei in their draft national constitutions and
urges the parties to avoid inflammatory rhetoric,
especially from the leadership, which undermines
the mutual commitment of the parties to resolve
all remaining Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA) and post-CPA issues peacefully through
negotiation. The Council again urges both parties
to honour these commitments.

"The Security Council expresses grave
concern following the reports about the unusual,
sudden influx of thousands of Misseriya into
Abyei town and its environs, which could force
significant changes in the ethnic composition of
the area. The Council condemns all unilateral
actions meant to create facts on the ground that
would prejudice the outcome of negotiations. The
Council expresses its determination that the
future status of Abyei shall be resolved by
negotiations between the parties in a manner
consistent with the CPA and not by the unilateral
actions of either party.

"The Security Council reiterates that the
continued military operations of the Government
11-36256

of the Sudan and militia activities in Abyei
constitute a serious violation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the Kadugli
agreements. The Council demands that the
Government of the Sudan withdraw immediately
from the Abyei area. The Council further
demands the immediate withdrawal of all military
elements from Abyei. The Council demands that
the Government of the Sudan and the
Government of Southern Sudan cooperate fully
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of UNMIS and the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel
(AUHIP), led by President Thabo Mbeki, to
establish immediately a viable security
arrangement for Abyei, supported by UNMIS, in
which all Sudanese Armed Forces, Sudan
People's Liberation Army and allied forces
withdraw from the Abyei area. The Council notes
that UNMIS remains ready to assist in the
implementation of all relevant agreements
reached by the parties. The Council underscores
that failure by the Government of the Sudan to
comply with and to fulfil the CPA jeopardizes the
benefits that could flow from such compliance.

"Given the ongoing insecurity in Abyei, the
Security Council believes that the security and
prosperity of both parties would benefit from a
continuing United Nations-mandated presence in
Abyei after 9 July, as well as from United
Nations assistance for the parties' management of
their border after the independence of Southern
Sudan. In this context, the Council urges the
parties to reach agreement on a continuing United
Nations-mandated presence.

"The Security Council stresses that both
parties will have much to gain if they show
restraint and choose the path of dialogue,
including ongoing high-level negotiations
between the parties and negotiations under the
auspices of the AUHIP and its Chair, President
Thabo Mbeki, instead of resorting to violence or
provocations.
11-36256

"The Security Council expresses deep
concern about tensions in Blue Nile and Southern
Kordofan States. The Council calls for
discussions about post-CPA political and security
arrangements for Blue Nile and Southern
Kordofan States to resume immediately and for
all parties to refrain from unilateral action
pending the outcome of those negotiations. The
Council stresses that the CPA structures intended
to stabilize the security situation in Blue Nile and
Southern Kordofan States, specifically the
deployment of joint integrated units, should
continue until their expiration on 9 July. The
Council calls on both parties to work to reduce
tensions and promote calm in this sensitive
region. The Council further underscores the need
for the parties to respect the mandate of UNMIS.

"The Security Council underscores the
responsibility of the parties to protect civilians,
and to respect the UNMIS Chapter VII mandate
for protection of civilians under imminent threat
of physical violence in Abyei. In this regard, the
Council condemns in the strongest terms ongoing
threats and intimidation against UNMIS
elements. The Council expresses its strong
ongoing support for the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan, under the able leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haile
Menkerios.

"The Security Council will remain seized of
this matter and will meet to review the
implementation of this statement in the coming
days."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2011/l2.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.
