Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): I want to start,
like others, by congratulating you, Sir, on your

 

assumption of office this month, and may I also
congratulate Ambassador Gambari, through the Nigerian
delegation, for the excellent conduct of our affairs last
month.

This draft resolution, of which the British delegation
is a co-sponsor, underlines the importance that the Security
Council continues to attach to the highest respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law in the former
Yugoslavia. The draft resolution makes it clear that there
are no exceptions to this, whether for this or that party, or
in this or that set of circumstances. All concerned must
comply fully with their obligations. Against that
background, however, it is right that the Council should
address three recent and deeply disturbing events in
particular: the disappearance of large numbers of civilians
following the fall of Srebrenica and Zepa to Bosnian Serb
forces; the brutal campaign of "ethnic cleansing" in the
Banja Luka region; and systematic violations of the rights
of Croatian Serbs in the Krajinas.

The Security Council's reaffirmation of the
unacceptability of any such actions comes at a time when
the parties are actively engaged in negotiations on a
political settlement to bring to an end the upheavals of the
last three years. This draft resolution is therefore a timely
reminder to those parties that they cannot expect to talk
peace while at the same time promoting or actively
condoning such activities as murder or ethnic cleansing.
They cannot expect the international community simply to
ignore events such as these. Nor can those parties expect to
enjoy the support or respect of the international community
unless they are prepared to demonstrate by deeds - not
words - their genuine commitment to upholding respect
for the law throughout their territories.

Over two years ago this Council decided to establish
an International Tribunal to investigate violations of
international humanitarian law throughout the former
Yugoslavia. The British Government is fully aware of its
responsibility to continue to support the work of the
Tribunal, both in terms of financial assistance and by
making any relevant information available to the Tribunal.
We remind the parties of their obligation to cooperate fully
with the work of the Tribunal. In particular, we call on the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro),
to facilitate the establishment of an office of the Tribunal
in that country without delay, and we call on the Bosnian
Serbs to comply with the orders and decisions of the Trial
Chamber of the Tribunal.

