Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me thank the
Prosecutor for her twenty-ninth report on the situation
in Darfur pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005) and
her briefing to the Security Council today. I would
particularly like to commend the Prosecutor and her
staff on their continued dedication and hard work on
the investigations in Darfur.

Let me take this opportunity at the outset to
reaffirm the United Kingdom's strong support for the
work of the International Criminal Court (ICC), both
as a State party to the Rome Statute and as a member
of the Council. We take note of the judgment of the
ICC Appeals Chamber on 6 May, dismissing Jordan's
appeal against the Pre-Trial Chambers' findings of
non-cooperation for its failure to arrest former President
Al-Bashir, and the United Kingdom renews its call on
all States parties to cooperate with the ICC in that case,
as, of course, must the Sudan.

I will focus my intervention on two issues: the
situation in Darfur and the wider situation in the
Sudan and its relevance to justice and accountability
for Darfur.

The situation in Darfur was the first case to ever be
referred to the ICC by the Council. In the 14 years since
our referral, the situation in Darfur has shown signs
of improvement. In particular, the United Kingdom
welcomes the reduction in large-scale conflict between
armed movements and the Sudanese security forces.
Despite that improvement, we should not forget the
reasons for our referral - a conflict that, according to
the United Nations, left 300,000 dead and 2.5 million
people displaced. We must not overlook the concerns
that remain in Darfur today.

As we have heard from the Prosecutor, violence
targeting the displacement of civilians continues in
Darfur, particularly in the Jebel Marra area. Moreover,
as we heard from Assistant Secretary-General Andrew
Gilmour last Friday (see S/PV.8549), the human rights
situation in Darfur has been alarming in recent months,
with increased reports of killings, abductions and the
burning of villages.

Today, on the International Day for the Elimination
of Sexual Violence in Conflict, let us not forget that
sexual violence continues to be perpetrated at alarming
rates in Darfur, often by State security forces and - I
am afraid - often with complete impunity.

In addition to those worrying trends, there have
also been negative impacts on the security situation
in recent months. The African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has verified
the deaths of at least 17 people during an incident
of intercommunal in Central Darfur, reportedly
involving militias and the Rapid Support Forces.
Humanitarian supplies at UNAMID'S headquarters
in West Darfur have been looted. The United
Kingdom urges all actors to respect international
humanitarian law and allow unfettered humanitarian
access. Sustainably addressing the situation in Darfur
requires commitment and investment. For our part, the
United Kingdom is committed to ensuring long-term
peace in Darfur, including through development and
humanitarian assistance.

As the Prosecutor highlighted, her briefing comes at
a time of political uncertainty in the Sudan. The United
Kingdom condemns the brutal attacks and violence by
the Sudanese security forces against peaceful protesters
in the streets of Khartoum. Those attacks are not the
actions of responsible and credible authorities and they
do not represent the will the Sudanese people.

In that regard, let me reiterate what I have said in
my recent statements on the Sudan, which is indeed
at a crossroads. The Transitional Military Council
has a choice. It has a choice to build a new future for
the Sudan, backed fully by long-term and extensive
support from the international community, including
for strengthening institutions, resolving conflict
and dealing with a legacy of long-term economic
mismanagement. The Transitional Military Council
should make the right choice, which would also bring an
end to the brutal cycle ofviolence, to which the people of
Darfur have been subject. The United Kingdom stands
with the people of the Sudan in calling for the swift and
inclusive transfer of power to civilian leadership.

We know from conflicts and post-conflict
situations across the world that accountability is a
key element in ensuring sustainable peace and giving
people confidence in the institutions that are then
developed. We therefore remain hopeful that the
Sudan's political transition will result in a civilian
administration that is committed to ensuringjustice for
the crimes committed against the people of Darfur that
were referred to the Court by the Council. We stand
ready to support a civilian administration as it seeks to
build the rule of law across the Sudan and ensure that
the horrors experienced by the people of the Sudan are
never experienced again.

Let me conclude by again thanking the Prosecutor
and her Office for their dedication to this case and their
pursuit ofjustice for the victims in Darfur.

