Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank Jeffrey
Feltman and Joao Vale de Almeida for sharing their
analyses with the Security Council today.

I am glad that my last open meeting in the Council
is focusing on one of the most important diplomatic
achievements in recent memory.

As the third report (S/2017/515) of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) shows, at its core, this is a
diplomatic achievement that endures. Earlier this
month, the International Atomic Energy Agency
confirmed Iran's continued full compliance with its
nuclear-related commitments. Iran's total stockpile of
uranium remains within agreed limits, and Iran has
continued to permit and facilitate monitoring of its
nuclear sites.

I reiterate in this Chamber today the United
Kingdom's commitment to the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) and our support for its full and
equitable implementation.

To ensure the deal's continued success, all parties
must fully uphold their commitments and improve
mutual trust and cooperation across a full range of
issues. Sadly, the latest report of the Secretary-General
highlights some less than positive issues, which must
be addressed in relation to the provisions of annex B as
set out in resolution 2231 (2015).

The first ofthose relates to the 29 January launch by
Iran ofa Khorramshahr medium-range ballistic missile.
Since we have already had several Council meetings
on this important issue and further consideration in the
"2231 format" of the Council, I will not dwell on it,
but just for the sake of clarity I want to reiterate our
position that this launch was inconsistent with the
provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). We reiterate, too,
the Secretary-General's call on Iran to refrain from any
future launches that contribute to regional instability.

We are also concerned by the continued reported
violations of restrictions prohibiting conventional
arms transfers, as set out in the Secretary-General's
latest report (S/2017/515), including new evidence of
an attempted arms shipment from Iran to Somalia.
Furthermore, the widespread reports of multiple
violations of travel-ban provisions, including new
infringements by Major General Qasem Soleimani, are
particularly worrying given the regional sensitivities.
So putting all these issues together, it is clear that these
activities are having a detrimental impact on regional
security. Yes, we agree with Iran that the biggest threat
to the region is a shared threat to us all. We all need
to combat the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
defeat terrorism.

Yes, we want the international community to work
with Iran, to encourage it to play a more transparent
and constructive role in regional affairs. But we cannot
turn a blind eye to activities undertaken by Iran that
violate Security Council resolutions and sponsor proxy
forces in regional conflicts. This further complicates
efforts to reach peaceful settlements and undermines
Iran's future prosperity and security.

Finally, it is important that we remember the
inherent reciprocity of the JCPOA, so we encourage all
Member States and parties to the agreement to uphold
their commitments, including ensuring that the Iranian
people gain further tangible benefits from sanctions
relief. We are encouraged by the progress being made
to promote trade and investment opportunities in Iran,
and we hope that the next six months will build on
these successes.

Full implementation of the provisions of resolution
2231 (2015) by all parties is the only way to ensure the
continued success of this important deal.

As this is my last meeting in the open Chamber,
I also wanted to say a very brief word of thanks to
the interpreters for making me comprehensible in six
languages. It is not easy; my aunt used to do it. Secondly,
I thank all Council members for the cooperation that
they have shown me and for the work that they do in
what is a massively important institution that is very,
very important for the most vulnerable people on
this planet.

