Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We would like to
commend the delegation of Egypt for its very able
presidency last month, as well as to congratulate our
Ethiopian colleagues on taking up the proceedings ofthe
Security Council. We thank the Ethiopian presidency
for the prompt convening ofthis meeting ofthe Council.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
for his briefing as well as the delegations of the United
States, the United Kingdom, France, Japan and the
Republic of Korea for calling for today's meeting on
this most flagrant violation by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

It is absolutely unacceptable for the international
community to have to see the detonation of bombs
by North Korea through the six nuclear tests it has
undertaken in the twenty-first century. Such actions
undermine the collective efforts of the international
community to establish a nuclear-weapon-free world. It
is even more frustrating to receive this news just as we
have celebrated the International Day against Nuclear
Tests. It should be noted that General Assembly
resolution 64/35, establishing the International Day
against Nuclear Tests, was unanimously adopted by
all Member States, including the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

The world once again calls on the North Korean
regime to abandon its nuclear ambitions and return to
the negotiating table. At the recent special meeting of
the General Assembly, all participating Member States
unanimously condemned the nuclear threat caused by
Pyongyang's provocative actions.

We believe that in the light of today's tensions,
we have to continue tirelessly to seek mutually
acceptable solutions, with a view to achieving concrete
agreements - both bilateral and multilateral - on
freezing the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
nuclear programme and to initiate the step-by-step
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. No matter
what the cost, we must not slide into fuelling the
conflict, the consequences of which will be most
hazardous not only for North Korea itself but also
for regional and international security. The military
approach has never led to any sustainable and lasting
solution of the problem.

Kazakhstan holds the firm conviction that nuclear
weapons are not a true guarantor of national security.
The global nuclear-weapon Powers and the international
community have demonstrated that ensuring one's own
defence through the possession of weapons of mass
destruction is not a viable strategy.

As a country that has survived the horrors and
tragedy of the consequences of nuclear testing, we
firmly believe that nothing can justify conducting such
inhuman acts. We stand in solidarity with the countries
of the region as well as the entire world to find a
comprehensive and collective solution to the situation.
A new bold diplomatic and political plan, combined
with smart and robust actions, is necessary if we are
to avert the dangerous trend towards nuclear-weapon
development on the Korean peninsula. We call on all
member States to join in this effort.

We strongly call on Pyongyang to change its course
and think about a prosperous and non-nuclear future
for itself and the region. We hope that the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and others can learn from
the very clear and undisputed example of Kazakhstan,
which not only renounced its nuclear weapons but,
together with its Central Asian neighbours, created a
nuclear-weapon-free zone.

Once again, we call on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to heed the message of humankind
and seek the path of prudence and dialogue.

