Mr. Ramos-Horta (Timor-Leste): I thank you,
Sir, and all the other members of the Council for
inviting me to speak here today. I am particularly
pleased that it is during your presidency that the
Council is once again considering the situation in
Timor-Leste. In View of your long involvement in and
experience with the issue of Timor-Leste since you
came to the United Nations as a young diplomat, we
feel even more confident that, under your leadership,
the Security Council will once again arrive at a
consensus on a continuing United Nations role in
Timor-Leste.

In View of time constraints - and despite your
generosity, Sir, in allowing me additional time for my
statement - I shall skip many pages of my written
text; the full text will be circulated to members. I shall
endeavour to address the substance of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/117).

First, I would like to congratulate the Secretary-
General and his staff on that outstanding presentation. I
myself could not have made a better analysis of the
situation in Timor-Leste, and I think the Secretariat
deserves high commendation for its professionalism.
Because of their having dealt with Timor-Leste for
many years, they truly understand the realities, the
challenges and the problems that we face - although I
would not subscribe to the report 100 per cent. I
probably would not subscribe to the Bible 100 per cent,
so I hope no one will take it too personally that I
subscribe not to 100 per cent of the report but to
perhaps 99 per cent of it.

The report refers to some key areas where we
have made progress, on which I shall not elaborate
now. It refers also to shortcomings in other areas, and
we are prepared to accept our failings and weaknesses
resulting, first, from the very fact that we have been
independent for less than two years; none of us had
ever governed a country before, whether in the
previous five years or in the previous 500 years under
various colonial experiments in our country. Those
failings have to do also with the lack of trained
personnel for the administration, particularly in the key
area where we acknowledge that we are most fragile:
the justice sector.

With regard to that sector, it is noted that the
Timorese side has much to do to strengthen its law
enforcement agencies, particularly the police. In the
past year and a half, our Government has invested
enormous effort in strengthening the judiciary and the
public administration. We believe that those two areas
constitute the foundation for peace and security in our
country, for development and for creating a climate of
confidence for investors.

The report of the Secretary-General recommends
a continuation of the United Nations presence in the
territory, based on three components. There seems to
be no disagreement on two components, but there
appears to be some on the continuation of a
peacekeeping component in the territory. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) - which have dealt with the situation in
Timor-Leste since 1999 - seem to know the situation
very well because of their close observation of the
conditions and the realities in the country: the
weaknesses of our police force and defence force; the
dynamics of our politics; the tensions in the border
area; the unresolved issue of certain elements of militia
gangs; the unresolved issue of the refugees; and the
still uncompleted talks between us and Indonesia on
the land border.

The land border is a porous one. We acknowledge
the good will and leadership of the Indonesian side in
addressing the refugee problem and, along with us,
towards concluding negotiations on land demarcation.
However, as the report of the Secretary-General notes,
the two sides - Indonesia and Timor-Leste - have
failed so far on three occasions to meet our own
deadline for signing an agreement on border
demarcation. But there is political will and
determination on the part of Timor-Leste and Indonesia
to continue the talks and to conclude the border
demarcation. On both sides, border demarcation would
help resolve some of the issues of illegal cross-border
activities.

Peace is a reality in Timor-Leste, as the report of
the Secretary-General and many observers
acknowledge. But it has also been acknowledged -
and we ourselves acknowledge - that peace is still
very fragile in our country. So are the institutions of
law and order and the institutions of the State public
administration. Therefore, the Government of Timor-
Leste, through our Prime Minister in a letter to the
Secretary-General (S/2004/114), has appealed for the
continuation of a peacekeeping component in a new
United Nations mission in Timor-Leste. We leave it to
the Secretariat and the members of the Council to
decide on the exact size of that peacekeeping
component, but it is our informed view - in the light
of the dynamics of the reality on the ground and in the
light of our experience, backed up by experience in
many other conflict situations - that a peacekeeping
component provides the best deterrence against any
potential violent conflict. We do not wish to underrate
an international police force, but a police force does
not have the same credibility or impact as a formed
military unit.
Obviously, we do not anticipate any external
threat. But can it be said that we are exaggerating the
potential threats in Timor-Leste? If we are, maybe it is
better and wiser to exaggerate and be over-cautious
than, because of other cost-saving calculations, to
witness a precipitate, too-early reduction of the United
Nations presence in the country.

It is for that reason - the respect that the people
of Timor-Leste has acquired with regard to a
peacekeeping force in the country - that we believe
that such a force provides the best deterrence to ensure
peace and security and to give the international
community and the Timorese Government time and
space to strengthen our police force and our defence
force, which we believe would be able completely to
take over all responsibilities by May 2005.

I have spoken here on numerous occasions in the
past. On all those occasions, one individual would sit
next to me, often here on my right. That individual was
Sergio Vieira de Mello. He was our most eloquent,
passionate advocate. I recall that the Council always
went along with his very persuasive arguments on
engaging the United Nations and the international
community in Timor-Leste. The job which he initiated
with tremendous success, carried on by Kamalesh
Sharma with equal competence and dedication, has not
been completed. Any miscalculation, for whatever
reason, in completely withdrawing the peacekeeping
force - a very important political and psychological
element - could betray and undermine the tremendous
success that has been the United Nations role in Timor-
Leste.

I believe that, as in the past, the members of the
Council will display their habitual wisdom and
experience and reach a satisfactory conclusion on the
basis of the Secretary-General's report. For us, it is
extremely important that the Council - which has
been united on the issue of Timor-Leste since 1999 -
remain united. But it is equally important that we
should not, for the sake of apparent unity, reach a
consensus that really undermines the recommendations
of the Secretary-General. The substance of those
recommendations with regard to maintaining a
peacekeeping element in Timor-Leste must not be
undermined because of the necessity of unity. I leave it
to the members of the Council, with their wisdom and
experience, to find a balance between the need for
unity and at the same time retaining what is important.
That is the substance of the Secretary-General's
recommendations.
