Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to join those who
spoke before me in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We wish to assure you of our cooperation and
support. We are truly confident that you will ably guide
our work.

We also wish to express our appreciation to
Ambassador Michel Kafando and his delegation for
their wise and effective leadership of the Council last
month.

We thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, and Ambassador Maria
Luiza Ribeiro Viotti of Brazil, Chairperson of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their briefings. We also welcome
Ambassador Cabral to this meeting.

In commending the efforts and achievements of
the Government of Guinea-Bissau and the international
community, we are compelled to acknowledge that the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/628) highlights
many causes for concern. The deepening political
crisis; the spectres of military tension and pressure; the
coup attempt; the withdrawal from the Government of
the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and

Cape Verde; the spread of organized crime, especially
drug trafficking; the rampant impunity that forces
people to take the law into their own hands; the modest
annual economic growth rate of 3 per cent; increasing
prices, especially for staples such as rice; and the
ongoing cholera epidemic: all of these are mentioned
in the report and in the two briefings we heard this
morning, and they are cause for grave concern.

Reason for hope, however, is seen in positive
developments and achievements with respect to the
role of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
endeavours of the Government and the United Nations
system to formulate an integrated framework for
peacebuilding. In her briefing, Mrs. Viotti spoke of the
adoption of the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding
in Guinea-Bissau and of the improved environment for
the holding of elections, for voter registration and for
the filling of the funding gap. All parties have shown
their commitment to that end.

Among the issues that require immediate
attention is drug trafficking, which endangers peace,
security and reconstruction in Guinea-Bissau, in the
subregion and throughout the continent. Regrettably,
owing to the difficulties faced by national and
international anti-trafficking institutions, the country
has become a transit hub. The report of the Secretary-
General makes this clear in referring to Operation
Bissalanca, and it was underscored by what the
Minister of Justice told the International Contact Group
on Guinea-Bissau: that there is involvement at the
national level. We therefore consider it important to
support the Secretary-General's recommendation that a
group of experts be established to investigate the
problem - in cooperation with the local authorities, of
course - and the activities, role and identity of those
involved in drug trafficking and other transnational
crime, with a View to taking the necessary punitive
measures against them.

We are gratified by the major role that the
Peacebuilding Commission is playing in Guinea-
Bissau, by the forthcoming establishment of a national
peacebuilding fund secretariat office for Guinea-Bissau
and by the four quick-impact projects approved by the
Commission, which are now under way. Here, we
commend the relevant United Nations agencies and
other partners and express our deep appreciation to
Ambassador Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti for her efforts.

In conclusion, I reaffirm my delegation's deep
appreciation for the efforts of the United Nations, the
donor community, the European Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, Brazil and other
partners. At the same time, we are of the view that they
should give priority to security sector and judicial
reform and to combating hunger and poverty.

Permit me to make a comment. The elections
mean a great deal to those who day after day suffer
hunger and who live in an environment marked by a
lack of respect and a lack of security, and I am not
minimizing the significance of the elections: I believe
they are indeed important. At the same time, I believe
that where there is hunger and a lack of safety and
security, the best option is to give priority to fighting
hunger and providing security.

We thank the delegation of Burkina Faso for its
initiative in drafting a presidential statement, which we
fully endorse.

