Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
debate. I would also like to thank all of the briefers
for their important contributions at the beginning of
this meeting.

The topic of our debate today is of special importance
for two main reasons. First, it is because this is the
first time this item has been included on the agenda of
the Security Council since the adoption of resolution
2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security. Secondly,
it is because we firmly believe that participation in the
development of young people in any society is closely
related to the development, progress and prosperity
of peoples and countries. The Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2250 (2015) on 9 December 2015.
It was the first resolution to directly highlight the
important and positive role played by young women and
men in maintaining international peace and security.
Over the past two years, many of the parties concerned,
including the United Nations, Member States and
civil society organizations and, most important,
young people themselves, have translated this historic
resolution into specific steps and actions.

I would like to commend the recently published
progress study on youth, peace and security (see S/2018/86), as well as the recommendations included
therein, which refer to the participation of young
women and men in peacebuilding and which include
practical guidelines for working together with young
people in new and innovative ways. I want to highlight
three aspects in today's debate. The first covers the
challenges hampering the implementation of the youth,
peace and security agenda. The second pertains to
positive examples of the implementation of this agenda.
And the third relates to steps that should be undertaken
in order to guarantee the implementation of the agenda.

With respect to the first aspect, many young people
around the world, especially those living in developing
countries or in countries affected by conflict, are
struggling for access to the most basic needs, including
education,jobs and health services, as well as to exercise
their civil liberties and political participation. Without
those essential needs being met, young people cannot
prosper, grow or participate fully in the development of
their societies.

In the Arab world, for example, the unemployment
rate among youth has reached 30 per cent. It is the
highest rate of unemployment in the world as a result
of being unable to translate progress in education
into decent jobs for young people, beside the fast
demographic growth which limits the benefits of
demographic dividends and fuels more social and
economic tensions in the region. There are also the
negative stereotypes associated with young people
that hamper their participation in and contribution to
security and peacebuilding, especially the stereotypes
that associate them with violent phenomena.

Conflicts are spreading throughout the world.
That is another obstacle to the participation and
the contribution of young people to safeguard and
strengthen peace and security. The Arab region has
regrettably experienced the most terrible conflicts, and
many of its young people face an enormous number of
obstacles and have no way of seeing their ambitions
fulfilled. Those conflicts have destroyed their dreams
and future. Unemployment has increased their despair
and insecurity. Poverty has stolen their legitimate right
to a decent life. Terrorism and extremism have taken
their innocence hostage. Those are serious threats to
the future and sustained development of countries. We
must therefore tackle the root causes of conflict.

Concerning the second aspect, the study points out
many positive examples of contributions to peace made
by young people around the world. We in the State of
Kuwait are aware of the importance of youth and their
central role in building the Kuwait of the future. We
therefore established a State ministry for youth affairs
in 2013, which enables young people to improve and
develop their skills so they can contribute effectively
to society, while disseminating the concepts of peace
and tolerance. The State of Kuwait was named the
capital for Arab youth 2017, with the slogan "The Youth
Are Here".
The third aspect pertains to the steps that need
to be taken in order to implement the youth, peace
and security agenda. We fully agree with what
was mentioned in the progress study prepared by
Mr. Simpson, namely, that young people are the
central pillar of developing and building societies, and
a key element in achieving security and peace. Any
Government that ignores the development of youth in
its society is losing the fundamental missing piece, and
disabling security and peace.

Moreover, we would like to stress the importance
of implementing the Sustainable Development Goals
and perceiving its principles as fundamental factors
for the sustainability of peace and security. That
cannot be achieved without supporting young people
and civil society institutions and organizations that
focus on them. We underscore the need to invest in
young people in order to help them build their abilities
according to principles and values that make them
avoid the scourge of crime and networks of corruption
and ideological extremism. That is done by supporting
and strengthening national, regional and international
peace networks that deal with youth and by providing
them with protection and education, particularly in
conflict-affected areas.

In conclusion, I would like to quote His Highness
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Amir of
the State of Kuwait, who spoke about today's debate
as follows:

"Young people are our greatest fortune and our best
investment. We must develop their skills, polish
their talents and exhort them to use education
and knowledge so that they can be more mature
and responsible and so they can be immune to
perverse ideologies".

