Mr. Menon (Singapore): I would like at the
outset to thank you, Sir, and the delegation of the
United Kingdom, for leading the effort on this
important subject, which has culminated in the
excellent report of the Secretary-General on the rule of
law and transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies (S/2004/616).

In his statement to the General Assembly two
weeks ago (see A/59/PV.3), the Secretary-General
pointed out that the rule of law starts at home, but that
in too many places it remains elusive. He further said
that it is by reintroducing the rule of law, and
confidence in its impartial application, that we can
hope to resuscitate societies shattered by conflict. With
those few words, the Secretary-General put his finger
on a major underlying cause of conflict and identified
the approach to putting a country back on its feet.
Nevertheless, we should not underestimate the
immense difficulties of trying to put a post-conflict
State back together once its political, economic and
social fabric have been torn apart. It can sometimes be
close to an impossible task - like all the King's men
trying to put Humpty-Dumpty together again.

It is therefore apt that the Secretary-General
stressed in his report that prevention is worth
significantly more than cure. We share the Secretary-
General's view on that matter, as well as the views
expressed by the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, Mr. Mark Malloch Brown,
an hour ago on the need to anchor justice and the rule
of law in societies.

As a multiracial, multireligious nation, we in
Singapore have never taken racial, religious and
political stability for granted and have always made
conscious efforts to promote social cohesion through
sharing the benefits of progress, equal opportunities for
all and a meritocracy - the best man or woman for the
job, especially as leaders in Government. Similarly, we
have always made it a point to ensure that the rule of
law is applied indiscriminately both to citizens and to
non-citizens. Singapore therefore welcomes the call to
strengthen the rule of law in the administration of
justice in all States, and the steps put forward to
address issues of transitional justice in conflict and
post-conflict societies.

The Singapore delegation has been involved with
a number of other delegations and external
organizations, such as the International Center for
Transitional Justice, in a series of useful discussions
and exchanges of views on the experiences of the
international community on this subject, especially
over the past 10 years. I would like to make some
broad observations on this subject of transitional
justice and the rule of law, in relation to which I would
like to highlight two aspects.

First, in a post-conflict situation, the challenge of
filling the rule of law vacuum is a key one for many
United Nations peace operations. The report recognizes
the large and growing demand for expertise in assisting
post-conflict countries to establish transitional justice
processes, restore shattered justice systems and rebuild
the rule of law. That is why it is vital that the United
Nations develop a framework to tap existing external
expertise and resources to complement the Secretariat's
in-house experience. In post-conflict situations, there is
also often a need to introduce immediately a
transitional set of laws, if the old bodies of law, where
they existed, had been unfair, abused or otherwise
discredited. In this regard, having a broad set of
internationally-accepted transitional criminal codes,
which should preferably have some built-in flexibility
to allow adaptation to the different local contexts,
could be invaluable to post-conflict work.

Together with that, where a culture of the rule of
law has been absent, one may need to provide for some
form of public education to instil such a culture - a
culture that most of us who live in functional societies
may take for granted.

The second aspect is that of transitional justice.
That should be neither an end in itself nor an exercise
aimed at salving the international community's
conscience for its past inactions. Rather, it should take
into account the best interests of the victims of
violence and grave injustice, while at the same time
serving a broader goal of sending a signal to all would-
be perpetrators of large-scale abuses that the era of
impunity is over. In this regard, it is important to bear
in mind that no two societies and situations are the
same, and that there are no model answers that one can
simply apply to a post-conflict situation.

The institutions and practices of established
States have evolved over time - sometimes over
centuries - while those of most new States, including
States in a post-conflict situation, have had to be either
created from scratch or elaborated immediately and put
into place. This is clearly not the best way to get things
done. It is therefore important that national
stakeholders be closely consulted with a view to
arriving at a solution that best serves the interests of
the people in terms of transitional justice, bearing in
mind what would work best to help heal wounds, using
the limited resources available and taking account of
the urgent competition for these resources, and, where
applicable, the risk of its impact on fragile peace
processes.

On the last point, unfortunately, the reality is that
in many post-conflict situations the international
community lacks either the political will or the
capacity to ensure the disarmament of armed groups,
which remain a source of lawlessness and a threat to
peace and stability, thereby creating the potential of
renewed conflict. It would be counter-productive for us
if, in our haste and impatience to pursue transitional
justice, we were to cause a return to conflict, renewed
violence and suffering.
The Secretary-General's report has also rightly
pointed out that the international community, in
helping to bring about transitional justice and the rule
of law, should bear in mind that its role is not to create
international substitutes for national structures but to
help build domestic justice capacities. This is
important because the goal is to leave in place a
sustainable independent system that works, even if
such a goal can be attained only after years, rather than
months, which is especially likely to be the case if
there is a need to train the local judiciary and judicial
personnel from scratch.

Questions have been asked as to what justice,
especially transitional justice, is worth. This is not an
easy question to answer. In this regard, I would like to
cite the reply to a question that the British
Broadcasting Corporation posed, in an interview on 4
October, to William Shawcross, a long-time advocate
of bringing the Khmer Rouge to justice. After noting
that the Cambodian Government had estimated that the
trials under the Cambodia Tribunal were going to cost
$50 million, Mr. Shawcross said: "that raises another
very interesting question: would that money not be
better spent for Cambodia by reinvigorating and
restoring the Cambodian judicial system?"

I leave that as food for thought. But before I
conclude, I would like to note that what we - that is, a
small number of delegations, including members of the
Security Council - have been doing on this issue can
be qualified as norm-making. This is why my
delegation welcomes this open debate. It is appropriate
that this issue now be discussed by the General
Assembly, the principal norm-making body of the
United Nations - especially if we acknowledge that
the rule of law is something that should be
mainstreamed into every part of the United Nations
system, which will require the universal support of all
Member States. In this regard, I understand that
discussions on this issue are being envisaged for later
this month in the Sixth Committee. My delegation
welcomes that development.

