Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank you, Sir, for organizing today's
meeting. We also thank Mr. Herve' Ladous, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
the three Police Commissioners of the United Nations
missions in South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Liberia for their briefings.

I also take this opportunity to thank all police
officers working within the United Nations system for
their selfless work, which they carry out in sometimes
very difficult circumstances.

The importance of the work of police officers
in contemporary peacekeeping operations is not
questioned by anyone. United Nations police, which
is a conduit of the Organization's peacekeeping work
worldwide, play a substantial role in helping national
authorities to assume their main responsibility for the
protection of civilians. This is accomplished not only
in the traditional formats of patrolling, observation and
suppressing disturbances of public order, but also in
growing the host country's national law enforcement
potential by assisting in security sector reform.

Extending such assistance on behalf of the entire
international community, the police and all United
Nations peacekeepers must adhere strictly to Security
Council mandates; abide by the basic principles of
peacekeeping; respect the sovereignty of the host
country, in particular the primacy of the national
responsibility of States for establishing their own
law enforcement; be impartial and not be the first to
resort to force except in self-defence or under a special
mandate of the Security Council.

The nature of conflicts has grown increasingly
complex in recent years, and peacekeeping operations
have grown increasingly manifold as they are assigned
ever-more burdensome tasks. Very good examples of
this include the challenges faced by the United Nations
Mission in Liberia in the outbreak ofEbola virus disease,
and the need to protect civilians in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo when illegal armed gangs were
rampant there. The role of the police component of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan has grown in
response to the need to implement the peace agreement
concluded in August. At a certain stage, the mandate of
that Mission will probably have to include a resumption
of State-building tasks in order to help the country to
establish effective law enforcement bodies.

In order to enhance the effectiveness of the police
and other components of peacekeeping operations,
the Council must ensure that every mandate issued
or extended is carefully considered in the light of
the specific conditions of the host country at the
time when the decision is taken. We believe that a
mere technical copy of settlement formulas will only
exacerbate situations. The Council will be unable to
adopt effective decisions unless it cooperates with host
and contributing countries in that task. We also need to
review police activities. Given the expansion of their
tasks and scope, they too need to be duly reviewed in
the light of the changes that arise in host countries.
Increasing the effectiveness, rapid deployment and
operational capacities of United Nations police can
impact a peacekeeping operation's ability to fulfilling
its mandate in unpredictable situations. In that
regard, we fully endorse the idea that it is necessary
to strengthen communication and coordination
among police contingents, local authorities and the
military component of a mission, as well as among
the various missions that operate within a region. In
future, what we need to improve is the process of the
organization and deployment of the police component
of peacekeeping operations and of formed police units.
We also need to optimize their equipment. Within
that process, the Secretariat must very carefully take
into account the opinions and recommendations of
the police-contributing countries. Missions need to
improve their planning and management, increase
the effectiveness of their use of resources and avoid
unnecessary expenditures and the duplication of
functions. The United Nations should expand its
activities aimed at strengthening the potential of police
peacekeepers from the various regional organizations,
first and foremost the African Union, and help them
play a greater role in maintaining regional peace and
stability.

With regard to the gender aspect of peacekeeping,
which has been widely discussed today, we are
convinced that, as we seek balance in that area, we need
to remember that the key factor remains the professional
qualifications of the individual. Otherwise, if we
simply try to reach numerical parity between genders,
we could put at risk the civilian population of those
countries that have requested international assistance.

Twenty-five per cent of Russian police serving in
peacekeeping operations are women. Russia contributes
considerably to efforts to increase the effectiveness
of United Nations police. Our training centre in
Domodedovo has trained more than 350 foreign police
peacekeepers, including commanding officers, from
more than 50 countries all over the world, most of
them African countries. Among them, more than 70
have been women. Russia has unique experience in the
area of professionally preparing peacekeepers, and we
would be happy to share that in future.

