Mr. Elbakly (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to welcome you to New York, Sir, and
to express our pleasure at seeing you preside over this
meeting.

We also welcome this open debate and the efforts
of the Security Council, along with the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, to
prevent the use of natural resources to ignite and fuel
conflicts. The Egyptian delegation would like to
associate itself with the statement of the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia on behalf of the African
Group on this issue.

Undoubtedly, the link between natural resources
and conflicts lies at the very centre of the intersection
between the prerogatives of the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council on an equal footing
with the Security Council, each within the limits of its
responsibilities as set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations. Such a matter requires us to address the issue
in all its aspects through full coordination and
transparency among the three principal organs in order
to ensure the complementarity of our efforts and the
effectiveness of international action to prevent the
illegal exploitation of natural resources from inflaming
conflicts and to orient the use of those resources
towards the realization of sustainable development and
peoples' aspirations to peace and prosperity.

The proliferation of the trade in small arms and
light weapons is intricately correlated with the illegal
exploitation of natural resources in the African
continent. That is especially true of oil, diamonds and
tropical timber, which are controlled by some States,
individuals and arms brokers in a manner that
endangers African States' capacity for socio-economic
development; leads to the spread of disease, poverty
and unemployment; and diminishes their institutional
capacity and the pillars of their economic
infrastructure. That highlights the need for the
international community to make concerted and
collective efforts to confront a phenomenon that
undermines all efforts to control conflicts. It also
contributes to the frustration of the efforts of the
Security Council in conflict areas, and those of the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council in post-conflict
peacebuilding.

In that context, the United Nations must act more
effectively and seriously and develop creative methods
to achieve the objective of maintaining international
peace and security, particularly in Africa. While we
appreciate the Security Council's eagerness to dispatch
special missions to conflict regions and to establish
direct communication channels with the parties to
conflicts and to mediate between them, as well as its
determination to coordinate with the peace and security
structures of the African Union, we foresee that more
will need to be done to settle and contain conflicts in a
manner that addresses their root causes and decreases
dependence on arms as a means of resolving disputes
and conflicts, while reinforcing the ability of the
Council to implement the collective security system
prescribed in the Charter.

According to the outcome of the United Nations
Expert Group meeting held under the theme "Natural
resources and conflict in Africa: transforming a peace
liability into a peace asset", which was hosted by
Egypt in June 2006, the main approach to developing
methods to deal with conflicts in Africa and other
regions of the world is based on lessons learned. Those
lessons highlight the fact that prevention is better than
exorbitant cure, and that there is a need to expand
cooperation and coordination and to establish a real
partnership among the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, regional
and subregional organizations, and the United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes dealing with the
development aspects of the causes of conflict.

Such long-sought cooperation between the
international and regional systems represents, in our
view, an effective early warning mechanism that would
protect all peoples from the atrocities of conflicts and
their destructive impact on the socio-economic and
political infrastructure, the rule of law and respect for
and reinforcement of human rights. The starting point
in that regard, in light of the outcome of the Cairo
meeting, is strengthening national capacities for the
management of natural resources in order to ensure
their optimal utilization, based on the principle of
permanent sovereignty over natural resources, as set
forth in the Charter and reiterated by the General
Assembly in its resolution 1803 (XVII) of 1962.

It follows that the international community must
address conflicts holistically in all their political, social
and economic dimensions, and in a framework that
harmonizes the security and political efforts of the
United Nations with the reconstruction and
rehabilitation of the infrastructures of States emerging
from conflict. That is particularly pertinent as regards
the implementation of programmes for institutional
capacity-building; the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants in civilian life;
demining; control of illicit trafficking in small arms
and light weapons; and the contribution to sponsoring
national reconciliation processes and to laying the
foundations for reconstruction and sustainable
development. It will surely require continued
international financial support to enable those bodies to
undertake difficult and critical peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions in various regions.

From that perspective, Egypt welcomes the
efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission to
reformulate the role of the United Nations in dealing
with the cases of such States in a manner that
transcends the traditional dimensions of peacemaking
and peacekeeping to achieve a balanced and
comprehensive vision for the transition from conflict to
reconstruction and sustainable development. That will
require a holistic and multidimensional approach that
rests on strengthening the institutional and human
capacities of those States and emphasizes the principle
of national ownership, without attempting to impose
trusteeship or conditionalities, and coordinates
international and regional efforts with the participation
of civil society and all relevant stakeholders towards
achieving that objective.

Clearly, our work to prevent the draining of the
natural riches of countries in conflict in exchange for
weapons that fuel the continuation and escalation of
such conflicts requires a special effort from the arms-
producing countries to guarantee their commitment to
international controls and to their legal and moral
obligations. It also requires the General Assembly to
continue to develop international arrangements
regulating arms tracing from the producers to conflict
situations and standardizing the rules of trade and
brokering.

Natural resources must remain the basis for
economic development and the realization of the
aspirations of future generations. They must not be
exploited so that States, individuals and corporations
can make greater fortunes. The Security Council will
therefore have to depart from a narrow framework in
dealing with this issue and extend a hand of
cooperation to the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council in order to undertake collective
efforts that will serve to realize our common goals.

In conclusion, we cannot fail to state the
importance of giving serious consideration to the
proposal made today by the representative of Tunisia:
to hold an international conference on this issue. Such
a conference should take place in the context of the
General Assembly and should address all aspects of the
issue.

