Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their reports (see S/20l3/463 and S/2013/460, respectively) and comprehensive briefings.
I would also like to commend the work of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, under
the highly professional leadership of Ambassador
Rosenthal of Guatemala and his entire team, and of the
United Nations Office of Legal Affairs in assisting the
Tribunals and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals in their activities.

We welcome the efforts and commitment of
both Tribunals towards completing the outstanding
proceedings within the established time frame and
the progress made in the transition of the Tribunals'
functions to the Residual Mechanism. We note that the
ICTY has concluded proceedings against 136 out of 161
indicted individuals and that four individuals are on trial
and 21 others are in appeals proceedings. However, the
trials and appeals continue to be affected by a number
of factors. We take note ofthe clarifications provided in
that regard by the President of the ICTY in his written
report and in today's briefing given to the Council.

With regard to the loss of the highly experienced
staff members, we commend the measures taken by
the Tribunal, including those aimed at improving job
security, conditions of work and providing a range of
training and career development opportunities. The
recent election by the General Assembly of Mr. Koffi
Afande (see A/68/PV.53) and the appointment by
the Secretary-General of Mr. Mandiaye Niang as
Permanent Judge of the ICTR will definitely aid efforts
to complete remaining work expeditiously.

The ICTR has completed its work with respect to
substantive cases at the trial level for all 93 accused
indicted by the Tribunal, leaving only the appeals cases
to be completed. It is anticipated that all but one of
the remaining appeals will be completed in 2013 and
2014. At the same time, as we have been informed by
the President of the Tribunal, the ICTR continues to
face serious difficulties in relocating individuals who
were either acquitted or released after completion of
their sentences and who still remain in safe houses in
Arusha under the Tribunal's protection. We take note of
the Tribunal's efforts in that regard and look forward to
that issue being resolved as soon as possible.

Consistent with resolution 1966 (2010) and its
mandate, the Residual Mechanism has now commenced
its work in both Arusha and The Hague. We commend

the Mechanism for its efforts to maintain and build
upon the achievements of the Tribunals and for its
commitment to staying focused on its mandate and
running as a small and efficient organization. The
cooperation of States and their continued support
remain a critical pillar of the work of the Tribunals and
the Residual Mechanism. It is important that States
remain committed to meeting their relevant obligations
in that regard.

The international community, including the
Security Council, should spare no effort in providing
the Tribunals with the necessary support to achieve
completion of their mandates and in preserving
their legacy. The activity and jurisprudence of both
Tribunals have helped to develop international law,
fight impunity and deliver justice. The practice of
the Tribunals can obviously benefit national efforts
to pursue post-conflict justice, especially in those
situations where the prevailing culture of impunity
for serious crimes represents a considerable obstacle
to peace and reconciliation. It is essential to recall
once again the importance above all of human rights
doctrine, which is based on the need to respect human
dignity and consequently punish all those who seriously
attack that dignity.

