Mr. Jallow: I am pleased to join Judge Erik
Mose, President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), in reporting progress at the ICTR
in the implementation of the completion strategy. The
Council has before it a revised completion strategy
document, as at 23 May 2005. The focus and the
strategies of completion remain the same. As time
unfolds, however, the statistics and details will
continue to be adjusted accordingly.
The end of 2004 marked a significant stage in the
implementation of the completion strategy. In
accordance with the terms of the strategy endorsed by
the Security Council in its resolution 1503 (2003) of
27 August 2003, we were able to conclude all the
remaining investigations into the genocide by 31
December 2004. Before then, 16 targets had been under
investigation. We have furthermore concluded the
evaluation of the evidence available on those cases. I
have, based on the evidence and on the law, determined
that indictments should be filed in respect of eight of
the accused persons who had been under investigation.
Accordingly, the indictments were filed by last week
for confirmation, ahead of the original deadline, which
had been the end of October 2005. The remaining eight
files have been closed for lack of prima facie evidence
to support any charges. However, I must point out that
the conclusion of investigations and the filing of those
indictments relate only to charges of genocide, and do
not include the allegations against the Rwandan
Patriotic Front. Work continues in respect of those
allegations.

The conclusion of the investigations will lead to a
progressive downsizing of the strength of the
Prosecutor's Investigations Division in Kigali and to a
redeployment of personnel from that Office to other
organs of the Tribunal, in order to reinforce their
capacity. However, some investigative capacity will
need to be, and will continue to be, retained at the
Kigali Office, albeit in declining numbers, until 2010,
in order to provide for trial preparation, trial support,
appeal support, the tracking and apprehension of
fugitives and the management of informants and
sensitive witnesses.

The focus of our prosecution work in the months
that lie ahead will be the courtroom prosecution of the
cases of the 25 accused who are currently on trial and
the preparation of the cases of the 16 remaining
detainees and the final group of persons indicted for
genocide, in order to ensure their trial readiness; the
implementation of a more effective tracking and
apprehension strategy for fugitives; and the
commencement of referral proceedings in respect of
indictees to national jurisdictions for prosecution.

The President of the Tribunal has just briefed the
Security Council on the progress in the cases since our
last report, in November 2004. I therefore do not wish
to repeat the details of the progress in those cases.
Suffice it to say that at the moment there are 25
accused on trial, which is the highest number that we
have ever had in the Tribunal, and that that level is
expected to continue until 2006 before it declines.

I also wish to bring to the Council's attention the
fact that the Prosecutor's Office negotiated and
concluded a guilty plea agreement with one of the
accused, Rutaganira; that was the first such agreement
in many years, and it led to his conviction. We remain
open to such negotiations for guilty pleas. As a matter
of fact, discussions are ongoing in respect of other
cases.

My Office also proposes to ensure that the cases
of the remaining detainees and other indictees are
ready for trial by early next year. All the steps
necessary to ensure trial readiness will be taken so that
some of the cases can commence when judicial time
and space in the Trial Chambers is available. For the
remainder of 2005, the Office of the Prosecutor is
ready to commence trials in respect of cases against
five accused persons, three of whom - Zigiranyirazo,
Mpambara and Bikindi - have already been scheduled
for trial this year.

As I said, the ensuing year is therefore
anticipated to be the busiest in the life of the Tribunal,
with the largest number of accused ever on trial. But I
believe we have adequate capacity at the Office of the
Prosecutor to handle that workload with the lifting of
the freeze on recruitment and with appropriate
redeployment of staff from the Kigali office.

The tracking and apprehension of the 14 fugitives
continues to rank as a very high priority. The
organization and strategies of the Tracking Unit have
been the subject of review, as a result of which three
measures have been taken. The capacity of the Unit has
been increased with additional staff. The Unit has also
now adopted a strategy of ensuring greater physical
presence of its members in the field rather than at
headquarters in Arusha and Kigali. Contact with
political and law enforcement authorities has been
initiated and maintained with the countries in which
the fugitives are suspected to be taking refuge. I myself
undertook missions earlier this year to five such
African countries, where I was able to engage in high-
level consultations with the political leadership. I
received assurances of cooperation with the ICTR in
all the countries concerned. Each of those five
countries has agreed to establish a joint mechanism
with the Prosecutor's Tracking Team through which
they can collaborate in tracking and apprehending
fugitives. The creation of those joint mechanisms is in
progress. I have also had the opportunity to hold useful
discussions with the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
well as with the African Union on modalities for
collaboration in that respect, particularly relating to
fugitives in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The implementation of the strategy of referring
cases to national jurisdictions, endorsed by the Security
Council in resolution 1503 (2003), began in February
of this year, when I handed over 15 files to the
Prosecutor General of Rwanda. Those files relate to
accused persons who had been under investigation but
in respect of whom no indictments will be filed at the
Tribunal. I propose to hand over an additional 10 files
to the Rwandan authorities shortly. All of these form
part of the 41 cases that, under the completion strategy,
had been earmarked for transfer by referral or by the
handing over of files to national jurisdictions. With the
eight new indictments, that total will now rise to 45
cases.

A substantial number of the remaining cases for
referral relate to indicted persons who are either at
large or in custody in the United Nations detention
facility in Arusha. The referral of such cases to a
national jurisdiction will, upon application by the
Prosecutor, be decided by the Trial Chambers. All
referrals of indicted persons will be based on whether
the accused will have the benefit of a fair trial and
whether the accused will not be subject to the death
penalty in the country of referral.

As I reported to the Council in November 2004,
not many countries have demonstrated willingness to
take on cases from the Tribunal or an interest in doing
so. Rwanda continues to be the country that is
primarily interested. In my discussions with the
Rwandan authorities, I have pointed out to them the
measures that need to be taken by them in respect of
guaranteeing fair trials and the exclusion of the death
penalty as a precondition for any applications to be
made by the Prosecutor to the Trial Chambers. I await
such measures.

Three European countries have also in principle
expressed an interest in taking on some of our cases.
Six such cases are respectively under consideration by
those jurisdictions, and I expect a decision shortly from
the authorities as to whether they will accept those
cases. One case file that was transferred by my Office
in 2004 has already resulted in the indictment and
arrest of an accused person in one of the European
jurisdictions. His trial is expected to commence
shortly.

I propose in the next few months to submit
referral applications to the Trial Chambers in respect of
some of the remaining 13 indictees. In the event that
for any reason - whether due to the reluctance of
States to accept the cases or because of an inability to
secure referral orders from the Trial Chambers - the
transfer of cases becomes impossible, those 13 cases
will have to be prosecuted at the Tribunal. That would
be an additional workload that will also have to be
accomplished by the deadline of the end of 2008.

We remain firmly committed to the completion
strategy and optimistic that, with the continued
provision of the necessary resources, the deadlines for
the conclusion of trials at first instance by end of 2008
and the conclusion of appeals by the end of 2010 can
be met. We shall continue to strive relentlessly to that
end. All the three organs of the Tribunal, under the
leadership of the Coordination Council and its
President, Judge Erik Mose, are determined to reach
that goal. In that respect, we look forward to a very
sympathetic consideration of our budget proposals for
the biennium 2006-2007, which bear on the provision
of the necessary resources for completion.

However, we continue to emphasize the need for
the fullest international support and cooperation,
particularly in respect of the tracking and apprehension
of the 14 fugitives who are at large, as well as
cooperation in the referral of cases and the relocation
and protection of witnesses whose testimony has been
crucial to the success of the Tribunal but who often
face continuing threats to themselves and their families
because of their courage in coming forward to testify.
Rwanda, as the State with the primary jurisdiction over
those genocide cases and the one, as I said,
demonstrating so far the greatest interest in referrals,
has indicated that it will require resources to enhance
the capacity of its legal and penitentiary system to
handle such cases. In resolution 1503 (2003), the
Security Council, noting in the tenth preambular
paragraph that the

"strengthening of national judicial systems is
crucially important to the rule of law in general
and to the implementation of the ICTY and ICTR
Completion Strategies in particular",

called in paragraph 1 on

"the international community to assist national
jurisdictions, as part of the completion strategy,
in improving their capacity to prosecute cases
transferred from the ICTY and the ICTR".

The international community should now fulfil those
expectations of eligible and willing States so that the
strategy of transfer of cases can become a reality.

Relations between Rwanda and the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Tribunal as a whole continue to be
very good, with support in the facilitation of access to
witnesses and evidence. I would like to seize this
opportunity to thank the Security Council, through you,
Sir, the Member States and the members of the
Secretariat, who all continue to actively support the
Tribunal towards the successful implementation and
completion of its mandate.

