Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I welcome Mr. Christian Schwarz-Schilling,
High Representative of the Secretary-General and
European Union Special Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and thank him for his briefing to the
Council.

We also appreciate the objective, set by his Office
since he assumed his position early this year, to
transform the role of the assistance offered to Bosnia
and Herzegovina and to consolidate the country's
transformation into a democratic and peaceful
European State.

We also welcome the Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, who is here with
us today.

Ten years after the signature of the Dayton Peace
Accords, and following the great progress made in
their implementation, the time has come for that former
Yugoslav republic to enter into a new phase as a viable
European country based on modern and democratic
reform. In that regard, on 23 June the Peace
Implementation Council decided to close the Office of
the High Representative and to replace it in July 2007
by the European Union Special Representative.

If the Peace Accords are to continue to be
implemented, it will be necessary for all Bosnian
parties to cooperate fully with all of the entities in
order to achieve a peaceful compromise based on the
Accords. It is therefore up to the local authorities to
strive to keep the situation under control by making the
necessary reforms. The international community has a
cohesive management role to play in that regard.
Cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia is also necessary for the
capture of indictees who remain at large and for
bringing them to justice. That is the only area of the
Dayton Peace Accords in which there has been no
progress. At the same time, pending regional issues -
such as the issue of the borders, the dissolution of the
union of Serbia and Montenegro and the uncertain
future of the situation in Kosovo - should not
influence the political discussions taking place in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There have been many positive developments of
late, including the success of the presidential elections,
defence sector reform, the transfer of certain aspects of
defence from the police to the State, reform of the
intelligence apparatus, the strengthening of the rule of
law, high economic growth and the adoption and
implementation of a comprehensive action plan for
public administration reform.

Among those priority issues that must be resolved
in the next phase is the unification of Mostar based on
its statute and finding a long-term political solution to
the problem that is poisoning relations between the
State and the people of Brcko. The matter of the return
of refugees must also be resolved in order to achieve
lasting peace.
We believe that the commitment of the European
Union and NATO will be necessary in the next phase
because the European Union Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and NATO have made an essential
contribution to the strengthening of peace and the
maintenance of the overall stability of the military
elements, the Peace Implementation Council and other
critical entities. We believe that States that participated
in the multinational Stabilization Force and NATO
deserve our full praise and respect.

