Mr. Amayo (Kenya): I wish to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and the People's Republic of China on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November. May I also take
this opportunity to thank you, Sir, for providing us with
a detailed concept paper (S/2018/982, annex) to guide
this debate. We equally welcome the detailed briefing
on the subject provided earlier today by the Secretary-
General, the Acting President of the General Assembly,
the President of the Economic and Social Council and
the President of the International Court of Justice.

Kenya welcomes this timely debate and is ever-
conscious of the fact that its pursuit of foreign policy
objectives is guided by certain important principles.
Among them are the pursuit of peaceful co-existence
with neighbours and other nations, the resolution of
conflicts by peaceful means, respect for the equality,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, as well
as respect for international norms, customs and laws.

Our common humanity has become a constant
element in the modern globalized world. Kenya
places great emphasis on cooperation, collaboration
and building partnerships in tackling our common
challenges and utilizing the available opportunities.
That is what the Charter of the United Nations calls
upon us to do. We believe that is the essence of
multilateralism.

However, the apparent fundamental disconnect
between a growing number of global challenges and the
current inadequate structures for international problem-
solving and decision-making call for a fresh relook at
the seven decades of the United Nations existence and
what the future holds.

We must ask ourselves why it is that globalization
has, to some extent, led to the loss of momentum in
multilateralism. Globalization is about the cherished
ideal of open markets driving the global economy to
achieve unprecedented levels of economic growth and
development. It has lifted individual standards ofliving
in many parts of the world and lifted masses up from
abject poverty across the world. As a result, many people
have experienced newfound political and economic
freedoms and many countries have graduated from
lower income to higher income within a relatively short
span of time. Paradoxically, however, as globalization
deepens, multilateralism is retreating. Why? We know
that at the individual, societal, national and international
levels, both globalization and multilateralism have a
tendency towards universality - the former for markets
and the latter for governance.

In essence, this means that multilateralism requires
sovereign responsiveness and purposeful adaptability
to keep up with globalization. Unfortunately, that is the
challenge of multilateralism, as many modern States,
big and small, rich and poor, remain reluctant to shift
away from the pre-nineteenth-century nation-State
model of governance, which closely reflects the Treaty
of Westphalia. Unless the delicate balance between
globalization and multilateralism is restored, change
will be upon us. We believe the United Nations
should be at the forefront of restoring multilateralism
to bridge its gap with globalization. The question is
whether the United Nations can stand up to the task
of restoring that delicate balance between globalization
and multilateralism in order to bequeath peace to
future generations. Opportunities to strike that balance
abound and are in plain sight.

Some of the most intractable challenges of our time,
such as climate change, terrorism, the protection of the
oceans and of natural fauna and flora, tackling serious
pandemics and the governance of outer space and the
cyberdomain, call for concerted multilateral action
based on consensus and adherence to international law,
not unilateral arrangements. My delegation believes
that adherence to international norms and practices

developed through mutual consensus should be the
guiding light for the restoration of multilateralism.

