Mr. Lee See-young (Republic of Korea): Only five
months ago, in May, the long-awaited historic drama started
to unfold in East Timor when the critical mass had finally
been reached with the signing of the May 5 Agreement and
the adoption of Security Council resolution 1236 (1999).
However, at that time no one was quite sure about the
prospect for the three-phased process that the international
community and the parties directly concerned had just
agreed to embark on together.

The adoption today of this Security Council resolution
is of great significance because it demonstrates that, despite
all the initial uncertainties and ensuing months of untold
difficulties and unforeseen tragedies and sacrifices, we
have been able to come through phases I and II in just
half a year. We are now headed for phase III with a
certain degree of confidence. As we stand at this
important juncture, my delegation wishes to pay tribute to
all those who have endeavoured tirelessly to make this
happen.

First and foremost, we pay tribute to the Indonesian
people and the Government of Indonesia for their
courageous and monumental decision to allow the popular
consultation among the East Timorese and for their recent
endorsement of the outcome of this consultation in favour
of independence for East Timor. Secondly, we pay tribute
to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his bold
and timely initiatives and crucial role and to his Personal
Representative, Ambassador Marker, for his untiring
efforts and invaluable contributions. Thirdly, we pay
tribute to the personnel of United Nations Mission in East
Timor (UNAMET) and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian
workers for their dedication, courage and hard work under
dire circumstances. Finally, we pay tribute to the
multinational force now in operation in East Timor under
the leadership of Australia for its important
accomplishments so far in restoring law and order, thus
laying the groundwork for phase III.

The Security Council's authorization today to
establish the United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET) is indeed a huge step forward
taken by the international community to embark on the
daunting task of helping the East Timorese to build an
independent nation from scratch: establishing law and
order, facilitating the safe return of refugees and displaced
persons and the effective delivery of humanitarian
assistance, rehabilitating the economy, building social
infrastructure and political systems and, finally, achieving
reconciliation among the East Timorese themselves.

My delegation fully supports the draft resolution to
be adopted this morning, and wishes to reaffirm the
commitment of the Republic of Korea to join the
international community's effort to implement it in the
months to come. It is in this context that my Government
has already pledged to make its troop contribution readily
available to the United Nations peacekeeping operation as
soon as the transition has taken place.

We are also of the view that the replacement of the
multinational force by the military component of
UNTAET should take place as soon as practicable, in

 

accordance with paragraph 9 of the draft resolution.
Furthermore, it is imperative that UNTAET start its
operation with its own military component at its full
disposal, given the primary importance of establishing law
and order throughout the territory of East Timor. Having
already made a modest contribution to the trust fund and to
the United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET)
during phases I and II, my Government is prepared to
consider making a further contribution to UNTAET
operations within its capacity.

Looking ahead, we very much hope that UNTAET
will be able to fulfil its mandate as early as possible, even
before the time-frame envisaged in paragraph 17 of the
draft resolution, in full cooperation with Indonesia, Portugal
and other contributing States, and, most important, with the
full support and participation of the East Timorese people
and their leadership. We believe that an early transition to
full independence would be desirable not only for the East
Timorese people themselves, but also from the wider
perspective of ensuring peace and stability in the region as
a whole and helping the Indonesians to move forward, in
particular towards achieving a strong, democratic and
prosperous nation.

Before concluding, I would like to express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having given non-
members of the Security Council the opportunity to take
part in the Council's proceedings. The Council is about to
take very important decisions for the future of East Timor,
decisions with considerable short-term and medium- to
long-term implications, financial and otherwise - not only
for Council members, but also for non-members of the
Council that are already heavily engaged in the related
United Nations activities, as well as for potential
contributors. Consequently, as a matter of principle and in
accordance with the letter and spirit of the Charter, we
believe that in making such important decisions the Security
Council should encourage wider participation by concerned
Member States in the debate and in the decision-making
process, with a view to enlisting from the general United
Nations membership broader support and cooperation,
which are indispensable for the success of any operation
envisaged by such decisions.

