Mrs. Senewiratne (Sri Lanka): At the outset, I wish to join other delegations in congratulating the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on its presidency of the Security Council and for organizing today's important open debate at the very beginning of the year marking the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations. The participation of His Excellency the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam and similar high-level representation by other Member States in today's debate is a demonstration of the importance of the subject matter. Sri Lanka aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. Today's debate takes place at a crucial time, when the global landscape is facing a number of challenges and threats, requiring concerted efforts to adhere to multilateralism, diplomacy and the further strengthening of our collective measures for the maintenance of international peace and security, in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and international law. More than seven and a half decades ago, 50 representatives signed the United Nations Charter, which created the Organization. In the name of we the peoples of the United Nations, they pledged to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war. Those words remain etched in our collective memory to ensure adherence. The Charter of the United Nations has been deemed a living document because its core principles are those we hold dear and to which we adhere, including human rights, the dignity of the human person, the equality of gender and of nations, large and small, the principles of non-intervention and non-violence, the peaceful resolution of disputes and building consensus and peaceful coexistence. Those principles are the bedrock of the Organization, reflected in its Charter, and have been central to global values, norms and principles for decades. As we entered this milestone year for the United Nations, it is timely to rededicate our collective commitment to the Charter and reflect on our past successes and challenges in the maintenance of international peace and security. Today the world is confronted by numerous challenges, which include terrorism and the rise of extremism, giving way to radicalization, grave environmental degradation, social upheaval, post- conflict situations, refugees and mass migration, financial crises, growing inequality and _ poverty. No country is immune to those challenges, and they therefore need to be addressed collectively, with the United Nations providing the framework to that end. The efficacy of the Organization is determined by we the Member States and will be shaped by our ability to work together to support multilateralism and confront global issues with determination and cooperation to forge global consensus in achieving peace and security, development and human rights. At the same time, we must ensure that the solutions also mirror the hopes and aspirations of all States and their peoples equally, not just those of a select few. Therefore, the looming threat to multilateralism must be arrested forthwith by adherence to the rules-based international order, based on the United Nations Charter. I am pleased to note that, this year, Sri Lanka also commemorates the sixty-fifth anniversary of its admission to the United Nations in 1955. Since then, Sri Lanka has continued to contribute to the collective work of the United Nations, including by having been a member of this organ from 1960 to 1961. Sri Lanka has engaged significantly in the area of United Nations peacekeeping operations as a_ troop-contributing country since 1956, thereby demonstrating the country's commitment to global peace and security. In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Sri Lanka's commitment to a rules-based global order, firmly supported by its full respect for the United Nations Charter and the primacy of multilateralism and cooperation. At this important juncture, let us all rededicate ourselves to United Nations processes with renewed vigour and commitment. I am confident that our deliberations today will inspire us to search for collective, constructive and cooperative ways to work with greater purpose for the betterment of all and our future generations, to leave no one behind.
