Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (interpretation from French): I would like to thank you, Sir, and your
delegation, as well as members of the Security Council
for having organized this debate. As depositary of the
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols,
Switzerland attaches major importance to respect for
humanitarian law and sincerely appreciates your
commitment to the protection of civilians affected by
armed conflict. It was with particular interest, therefore,
that my delegation listened to the statements just made, as
well as those made in the Council on 21 January and 12
February 1999.

The Presidential Statement dated 12 February
reflects the conviction that humanitarian law is based on
universal values. The celebration of the fiftieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions and the
commemoration of the centenary of the first international
Hague Peace Conference affords States an opportunity to
take a comprehensive look at the way in which this law
has been respected and the possibility of taking specific
steps to prevent and punish violations of that law.

Crises which have recently broken out in various
parts of the world have inflicted great suffering on the
civilian populations, particularly the most vulnerable
groups such as children, women, the elderly, refugees and
displaced persons. The sufferings of civilians are

 

particularly great when the parties involved do not have, or
no longer have, chains of command and are thus acting
without any instructions or control, or when their actions
are based on ethnic considerations and are designed to
eliminate the other.

The appearance and persistence of these new types of
conflict confront the staff of humanitarian organizations
with specific challenges. The President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Cornelio Sommaruga,
mentioned this in his statement to us.

In recent conflicts, weapons with indiscriminate effects
have inflicted heavy casualties on the civilian population.
The use of anti-personnel mines has defied some of the
elementary principles of humanity. The proliferation of
other conventional weapons, such as light arms, has also
had an impact on hostilities and has had devastating effects
indeed.

In the light of numerous violations of humanitarian
law committed throughout the world, punishment is of
particular importance. Although the instruments of
humanitarian law contain rules governing this matter, the
perpetrators of these offenses are not always tracked down,
persecuted and punished.

Like other States, Switzerland has given thought to
each of these topics. We are particularly anxious to define
the scope of common article 1 to the Geneva Conventions,
as well as machinery which could help promote respect for
humanitarian law. We were responsible for convening the
first periodic meeting on international humanitarian law,
which in January 1998 dealt with the protection of
humanitarian personnel and so-called unstructured conflicts,
and also the expert meeting on the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which in October 1998 considered general
problems relating to the implementation of the Convention
in general and in occupied territories.

These meetings were concerned with promoting the
protection of civilian populations in armed conflicts. They
confirmed that the difficulties which impede respect for
humanitarian law may have diverse causes, which may be
either technical or financial. They may also be related to
insufficient norms or ignorance thereof. But their main
source without doubt lies in the determination not to apply
that law. Thus it is essentially political and legal disputes
relating to the applicability of the Fourth Geneva
Convention which have so far hampered the application of
that instrument.

 

We are aware that States have to respect and to
ensure respect for humanitarian law, which means in
particular that States must protect civilians against the
effects of armed conflicts. The obligation enshrined in
common article 1 of the Geneva Conventions clearly has
a legal scope. But the content of that obligation is not
spelled out. Hence the law essentially leaves it up to the
political evaluation of the States concerned to identify
measures to be taken in a particular case. States must
respect the principle of good faith in making such a
choice.

The obligation to respect and ensure respect for
humanitarian law above all has an effect at the national
level, but it can also have consequences internationally. It
can, inter alia, result in creating international cooperation,
bilateral or multilateral.

The reports drawn up by the chairmen of the
meetings held in January and October 1998 set forth a
series of steps to remedy the problems identified. These
steps can be taken before, during or after a conflict. They
have legal, political, economic or social dimensions and
can also be unilateral, bilateral or multilateral in nature.
States may also rely on the support of relevant organs
such as the International Committee of the Red Cross,
and they can envisage increased cooperation with them
and with international organizations, first and foremost the
United Nations, as indicated in article 89 of Additional
Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions.

More specifically, Switzerland believes that, first, the
international community must promote the universal
application of international humanitarian law, for example
by encouraging the ratification of pertinent instruments.
Second, we should intensify dissemination of
humanitarian law and fundamental humanitarian values so
as to counteract the development of a culture of violence,
while taking into account local customs and situations and
the possibilities provided by modern means of
communications, as well as the need to educate civil
society as broadly as possible. Third, we need to promote
respect for humanitarian law by non-State entities and to
confirm the fundamental nature of the rules enshrined in
common article 3 of the Geneva Conventions. Fourth, we
should make it possible for the interested parties to
establish and maintain appropriate lines of communication
with all the parties to an armed conflict, be it international
or national in character.

Fifth, we should take specific steps to punish acts of
violence directed against civilians and, in particular, to

 

promote the International Criminal Court becoming
operational as soon as possible. Sixth, we need to guarantee
that the obligation to punish violations of humanitarian law
is supported by complementary efforts to achieve national
reconciliation.

Seventh, we should make better known the statutes
and the competencies of humanitarian organizations and
encourage these organizations, insofar as possible, to
coordinate their activities, both with one another and with
other actors working in the field.

Eighth, we must pursue the elimination of anti-
personnel mines, particularly by promoting the
implementation of the so-called Ottawa Convention and by
giving increased priority to demining and to international
cooperation in this area. Ninth, we should establish tighter
control over the transfer of light weapons and substantially
reduce the existing stocks of these weapons.

Tenth, we need to promote the rapid adoption of an
instrument banning the recruitment of children below the
age of 18. Eleventh, in the same spirit, we must prevent the
enlistment of such children and their direct or indirect
involvement in hostilities and promote the demobilization
of children thus recruited.

Twelfth, and finally, we need to give much more
thought to identifying machinery that could be set up to
monitor the implementation of humanitarian law in specific
situations, bearing in mind already existing organs such as
the humanitarian International Fact-Finding Commission.

The Swiss delegation cannot conclude its remarks
without addressing more specifically the role of the United
Nations in protecting civilians affected by armed conflict,
as well as the specific responsibility of the Security Council
in this field.

In the view of Switzerland, the actions of the United
Nations should be aimed at preventing conflicts and
promoting the reconstruction of local capacities after
hostilities end, by contributing to appropriate economic,
political and social development. Following the example of
the ad hoc tribunals set up to try offences committed in the
former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda, these actions should
also aim at guaranteeing respect for humanitarian law and
punishing violations that may have been committed. We
believe that the Security Council should take due account
of possible negative repercussions of economic sanctions on
the civilian populations of the State concerned and on third
States. Finally, Switzerland believes that humanitarian law,

 

the needs of the civilian population and the particular
problem of child soldiers should be duly taken into
account when crafting the mandates for peacekeeping
operations.

