Mr. Corman (Turkey): We welcome the
Secretary-General's reports (S/2009/297 and S/2009/352) and thank Under-Secretary General Le
Roy for his briefing. We also appreciate the presence
and contribution of His Excellency Mr. Mikhail
Margelov, Special Representative of the President of
the Russian Federation.

Turkey welcomes the progress made so far in the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The many
challenges intrinsic to the complex setting in which
that deployment is ongoing have made it hard for
UNAMID to reach full operational capability. The
Secretary-General's projection that UNAMID will
reach 92 per cent of its authorized strength by the end
of the year is very noteworthy. That goal must be met.

Turkey commends the significant progress
already made possible through the work of the
Tripartite Committee, comprised of the African Union
(AU), the United Nations and the Sudanese
Government. But much more needs to be done. The
coming months will show whether that mechanism is
able to reach its full potential. Alleviating operational
difficulties faced by UNAMID, whether in the
deployment and rotation of forces, the timely flow of
equipment or local restrictions on its freedom of
movement, is of immediate priority.

UNAMID is already an anchor of stability in
Darfur. Once fully operational, it can begin to help turn
back the tide. However, there can be no alternative to a
political solution to the Darfur crisis. Turkey welcomes
and fully supports the Doha process, the work of the
AU-United Nations Chief Mediator and the roles being
played by Qatar and Libya. While some important
progress has been made, a cessation of hostilities that
can lead to a lasting ceasefire has not been possible.

In the coming days and months, the Council will
have to closely monitor developments in the Doha
process and apply pressure when and where necessary.
The peace process must be inclusive of all. Certain
rebel groups must not be allowed to monopolize the
process or dictate the pace, or indeed the terms. All
groups must come to the table without preconditions
and work with the mediation and their counterparts to
bring about viable compromises. In order to facilitate a
solution, the Council has to become more involved in
the political process and make it clear to all the parties
that intransigence comes with a price.

Turkey continues to be concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Darfur. The Council has
pronounced itself clearly on developments in that
regard over the past several months, as has the
Secretary-General. We are happy to note the important
progress that has been made in filling the gaps that
have emerged in the post-4 March environment.
However, more needs to be done. In moving forward, it
is critically important to keep the humanitarian aspect
of the equation apolitical. The humanitarian aid
community, working with the United Nations and the
Sudanese Government, must be allowed to do its
crucial work and should be supported and protected.
Developments on the Sudan-Chad border are a
source of growing concern for Turkey. Cross-border
aerial bombings, in violation of international law,
cannot be condoned. Both countries need to understand
that their interests lie not in conflict, but in
cooperation. A change of tone and approach is sorely
needed. Many agreements have been enacted and not
implemented by the two neighbouring nations. A high-
level mediation effort building on existing agreements,
that takes into consideration the complex dynamics at
play and includes the right incentives, is the way
forward for lasting political rapprochement.

In all of our efforts with regard to Darfur, be they
through UNAMID or the joint mediation effort, the
African Union continues to be a vital partner. In that
regard, Turkey believes that it will be important for the
Council to keep listening intently to the calls made by
the African Union on different and sensitive aspects of
the Darfur crisis.

We welcome the draft resolution prepared by the
delegation of the United Kingdom to extend the
mandate of UNAMID for one more year. Turkey will
continue to participate actively in the deliberations to
finalize that text, with a view to ensuring as balanced
and productive an end result as possible.

Finally, Turkey commends all UNAMID
personnel and the humanitarian aid workers on the
ground for their courage, commitment and composure
under fire. We reiterate here that they have our full
support.

