Ms. Viotti: I am honoured to read out this statement
on behalf of the Secretary-General.

"I thank the Government of Poland for
organizing this important debate on the role of the
Security Council in upholding international law.
International law is foundational to the Organization,
and the Security Council has a special role to play
in ensuring that it is respected. I welcome Poland's
suggestion that today's debate pay special attention
to promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes
and the Council's involvement in that process.

"The Charter of the United Nations does
not prescribe the use of any particular means of
settlement for disputes between Member States,
nor does it establish any particular hierarchy among
them. Member States are free to choose between
negotiation, inquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional
agencies or arrangements or other peaceful means
of their choice. The Security Council, for its part,
has many options. It can call on States to settle their
disputes and draw their attention to the means that
are available to them. It can recommend to States
that they use a particular means of settlement, a
power the Council has rarely employed.

"The Council can support States in using the
means they have chosen. It can support the initiatives
of States and other international organizations,
institutions or people that try to assist States in
resolving their differences. The Council can also
task the Secretary-General with trying to assist
States to reach a settlement, or even establish
a subsidiary organ for that purpose - again, a
power that, since its early years, it has not often
employed. And where States have agreed to use
the International Court of Justice, there is a role
the Council may play in ensuring that the Court's
judgment is properly observed. Allow me to take this
opportunity to call on Member States to consider
accepting the Court's compulsory jurisdiction.

"Let me turn now to another issue of relevance
to today's discussion, namely, accountability
for international crimes. Through its resolutions
establishing the International Tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia, in 1993, and for Rwanda, in
1994, the Security Council has had an undeniable
impact on international law. The two Tribunals
have laid the groundwork for the development
of international criminal law, a field that barely
existed before. At the same time, the Council has
advanced the interpretation of the Charter and of
its own functions, acknowledging the close link
between international criminal justice and the
purposes of the United Nations. The advancement of
international criminal justice therefore falls within
the scope of the Security Council's responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security. The Security Council was also involved
in the establishment of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone and the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.

"But the Security Council's role in the fight
against impunity has gone beyond creating
tribunals. In the Central African Republic, it
mandated the United Nations peacekeeping
operation, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic, to support the Special Criminal
Court, a national court established by national law.
The Council has also requested the Secretariat to
work closely with the African Union Commission
in support of efforts to establish the hybrid court
for South Sudan. Moreover, in cases where it is
difficult to foresee the establishment of effective
accountability mechanisms in the immediate
future, there is increasing momentum for gathering
and securing evidence for use in national, regional
or international courts that might in future have
jurisdiction over relevant crimes. In the case of
Iraq, the Council unanimously adopted resolution
2379 (2017), which established an independent
investigative team to support domestic efforts to
hold Da'esh accountable for its actions in Iraq.
The Secretariat has been working closely with the
Government of Iraq and other key stakeholders to
operationalize that important mechanism.

"International criminal accountability is
still a relatively new area of work for the United
Nations, but it is already clear that there is room
for improvement in three specific areas. First, the
Security Council needs to be the driving force
to ensure that international humanitarian law,
international human rights law and other relevant
rules, norms and standards are fully included
in any accountability process. Secondly, those
institutions require sustainable funding. Yet, even
as the international community considers creating
new institutions, funding for some of the existing
hybrid institutions has largely dried up, thereby
putting at risk the gains of judicial efforts. Thirdly,
effective accountability requires the constructive
engagement of the international community. I
encourage Member States to engage with the
Secretariat during the process of establishing and
supporting accountability mechanisms to help
ensure that the framework for the establishment
of any mechanism conform with applicable United
Nations standards and policies.

"The Security Council has played a critical
role in upholding international law, supporting the
peaceful settlement of disputes and advancing the
fight against impunity. Against a backdrop of grave
threats and growing turmoil in many regions, the
unity of this organ and the serious commitment of
the entire international community will be crucial
to preventing human suffering and defending our
common humanity. The Secretariat stands ready to
support such efforts."

