Mr. Barry (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): Allow
me, at the outset, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
behalf of all my colleagues in the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-S Sahel) on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for inviting us to take part in
this meeting on the consideration of the report of the
Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel
(S/2019/868). Rest assured of the full support of the G-5
Sahel countries.

Through Ms. Keita, I would like to commend the
Secretary-General for the quality of his report, which
was just presented to us. We take due note of the
relevant observations and recommendations included
in the report, which illustrate the grim reality on the
ground as well as the commitment of the United Nations
to remain alongside the Sahel region, one that has been
assailed by ongoing terrorist attacks. Together with the
United Nations, many multilateral and bilateral partners
support the efforts of Member States to operationalize
the Joint Force on the ground. First and foremost, I
would like to mention the European Union, whose
financial support makes it possible to implement the
technical agreement with the United Nations in terms
of logistics and supplies for the Force.

As the report rightly points out, the situation in
the G-5 Sahel region is most worrisome. The heavy
human toll during the reporting period has now been
surpassed. The security situation in the G-5 Sahel
region has deteriorated significantly in recent months.
Attacks and ambushes have proliferated and claimed
more lives in less time than in the past. The enemy has
become more active, mainly in Burkina Faso, Mali,
the Niger and Chad, while the Joint Force, which is
still scaling up, continues to grapple with recurrent
functional obstacles. In concrete terms, armed terrorist
groups have redoubled their activities against the
security and defence forces, the civilian population and
symbols of the State, especially in Burkina Faso, Mali
and the Niger.

The numerous improvised explosive device attacks
recorded in the area for some time now serve to confirm
that those armed terrorist groups are experienced
in the manufacture and use of improvised ex-plosive
devices. That also points to their strong determination
to exert enormous pressure on our forces. Attacks on,
and the destruction of, public buildings ultimately aim
to prevent any presence of the State and its entities in
various areas. That is already the case with whole areas
that do not have direct administrative authority, security
nearby or schools and health centres. Terrorists aim to
control and exploit those areas and communities for their
benefit in order to pursue their illegal activities, while
maintaining a stranglehold over the local populations.
Their dream to establish an actual haven or caliphate
in the Liptako-Gourma region - the border areas of
Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger - is a timelier issue
than ever.

In the wake of the complex attacks on positions
in Koutoukou in Burkina Faso, and Boulikessi and
Mondoro in Mali, it is reasonable to believe that there
are genuine operational and logistical ties among
the various armed terrorist groups in the Sahel that
are affiliated with Al-Qaida and the Islamic State.
Undoubtedly, those terrorist operations are becoming
increasingly numerous and meticulously prepared.

The last few weeks have been particularly trying
for Mali and Burkina Faso, notably following the heavy
losses suffered by the Malian army in Indelimane at
the beginning of this month and again the day before
yesterday south of Menaka. On the Burkinabe side, we
are still recovering from the shock of the cowardly and
barbaric murder of the Deputy Mayor of Djibo earlier
this month and a few days later from the particularly
bloody attack on a convoy of workers from the
SEMAFO mining company in Boungou, in the eastern
part of the country.

That enemy pressure calls for greater efforts on the
part of our States and their respective armies. As for
the Joint Force, in spite of the difficulties encountered,
it has been able to carry out a number of operations to
mark its presence and commitment. There were eight
such operations during the first half of 2019, which
focused on three zones. The activities planned for the
third quarter of the year were well carried out. For
the final quarter of the year, despite the difficulties
associated with relief operations and the rainy season
in some areas, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force has committed
to three joint operations with national armies and
partner forces.

In that context, a large-scale operation called
Operation Amane 2 took place from 1 to 10 October
in the central zone. It was part of the overall aim to
deter, break up and interfere with the logistical flow
of organized criminal groups and armed terrorist
groups in the Libyan border area between Chad and
the Niger. During that operation, different missions
and procedures were implemented, including
reconnaissance, zone control, checkpoint, interception,
neutralization, disruption, compilation, escort, battle
rations release and air transport.

In addition, during the first two weeks of November,
the Joint Force conducted a major operation supported
by Operation Barkhane, jointly with the armies of
Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, to track down
armed terrorist groups in Gourma and challenge their
refuge, transit and storage areas. That major operation
mobilized more than 1,400 men and considerable
ground and air resources in the area of Gourma, as well
as in part of the Gao and Timbuktu regions and even a
little in central Mali.

Looking forward, a campaign plan covering a longer
period between one to two years is being considered
and will be the subject ofplanning in the coming weeks.
The objective is to harmonize the future operations
of the Joint Force with the various efforts undertaken
by the national armed forces and the partners of the
Force, Operation Barkhane and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA).

With regard to the partnership with MINUSMA, the
additional support secured by resolution 2480 (2019),
which was unable to be previously established, is now
being resolved with some practical implementation
measures being rolled out. However, it is clear that
the implementation of the amendment to the technical
agreement, whose signing is pending, could encounter
significant difficulties in terms of supplies on the
ground due to the distance of some areas of operations
from MINUSMA bases.

Despite the progress made by the Joint Force in
an increasingly difficult security context, significant
constraints remain and merit the attention of the Council.

In terms of the Force's equipment, the strong
international commitment to the Force since its
establishment clearly made it possible at the time
to announce significant international assistance to
support national efforts. Indeed, €414 million of the
€423 million expected were announced at the donor
conference held in Brussels in February 2018. However,
the implementation of the equipment to be financed by
those various pledges is taking time to materialize on
the ground. That can be seen from what I am about
to say.

For example, of the 40 or so requests submitted to
our partners, only 10 have been approved by them and
only 4 of the 10 have been implemented or are in the
process of being implemented. In general, therefore,
for a majority of the battalions, the level of funding
is still low with regard to material equipment. The
rolling military munitions, for instance, are still in the
process of being delivered. In addition, in the area of
logistics, some capacities remain largely dependent on
the partners present in the area of operation.

It is also necessary to mention the situation of
the police component, which exists but is difficult to
deploy because of a lack of equipment, especially in
terms of specialized investigation units. Fortunately,
the implementation of the compliance framework has
enabled significant progress thanks to the support of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and of some technical and financial
partners. That made it possible, on the one hand, to
make a genuine start in the judicialization of actions
particularly by some deployed provost corps and, on
the other hand, to take better account of the rules of
conduct and engagement of soldiers.

In operational terms, the Force does not have its
own air assets, although the current counter-terrorism
efforts cannot be carried out effectively without the air
component, which the military calls the third pillar. We
must therefore seek alternatives to make the Force fully
operational in the field.

In addition, with regard to the intelligence system,
which is another major weakness of the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force, requests have been made for the acquisition of
sensors and surveillance equipment but these have not
yet been met.

Despite the strong willingness to act on the ground
against a common enemy and the strong international
commitment, all of which raises a strong expectation
of results in a context where the affected populations
have even greater demands, with increasing anger
among the people, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force still faces
significant challenges.

However, the Force should not to be overlooked
in the overall fight against terrorism and organized
crime, which is rampant in the Sahel-Saharan region, as
shown by the few successes achieved during the latest
operations. It can even be said to be the only alternative
currently available in the fight against terrorism and
cross-border crime in that common space. However, as

the security situation in the area is constantly changing,
there is clearly an urgent need for the coordination and
pooling of capacities by the States members of the G-5
Sahel, as well as with regard to other initiatives of the
entire subregion and the international community,
which remain crucial for the further operationalization
of the Force.

The commitment of all stakeholders is necessary
in the fight against terrorism. The President of Burkina
Faso and current Chair of the G-5 Sahel, His Excellency
Roch Marc Christian Kabore', and his peers from other
States welcome the outcomes of the Extraordinary
Summit of the Heads of State and Government of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), held in Ouagadougou on 14 September and
which was broadened to the G-5 Sahel and focused on
the fight against terrorism in West Africa and the Sahel.
The Summit adopted a counter-terrorism action plan
that will be funded with $1 billion over four years. The
funding by the 15 ECOWAS member States reflects the
seriousness with which the terrorist threat is viewed in
the Sahel and throughout West Africa.

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
the appeal made by Mr. Kabore to all States to join
the Partnership for Stability and Security in the Sahel
initiative, launched at the Group of Seven Summit in
Biarritz last August. This initiative will establish an
international partnership for stability and security in
the Sahel. The international partnership should lead
to a much stronger commitment by the international
community, with greater mobilization in this fight
against the terrorist scourge.

The war on terrorism is a global challenge, a concern
that affects the entire international community. It is a
matter of international peace and security, and we must
all learn from it. Particularly in the case of the Sahel,
the reality that is clearly seen on the ground cannot
be addresses simply with more meetings and pledges
without concrete and decisive results in practice.

Today, everything has already been said and
written about the situation in the G-5 Sahel region.
The populations are impatient. The humanitarian
consequences ofterrorism are tragic in our countries and
for our populations, with more than 1 million internally
displaced persons in Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger.
The populations are therefore expecting action and
there are increasing risks of the destabilization of our
States. We must therefore act rapidly. The situation is
deteriorating quite quickly. We must not wait until we
return here in six months' time to assess how much
worse the situation has become. I reiterate that the
G-5 Sahel must be supported in having operational
capabilities on the ground.

Before concluding, I would like to reiterate our
countries' sincere thanks to all partners that have
supported, and continue to support, the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force bilaterally and multilaterally.

Just as each of our countries alone cannot overcome
the terrorist threat, the G-5 Sahel cannot effectively
combat the phenomenon without partner forces such
as Operation Barkhane and MINUSMA. But for
MINUSMA to be effective, it needs a strong mandate.
That is why I would like to reiterate the appeal made
by the ECOWAS Heads of State at the Ouagadougou
Extraordinary Summit and the G-5 Sahel to the General
Assembly for a robust and more proactive mandate for
MINUSMA to enable it to provide greater security and
stability to Mali and to participate actively in the fight
against terrorism in the Sahel. I also reiterate their
appeal to the Security Council for a mandate under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations for
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force because, for us, terrorism is a
threat to international peace and security and the Joint
Force needs ongoing and predictable funding.

Every day, every forum is an opportunity for us to
sound the alarm. That is what we are doing now today
as a warning because it will be too late after that.

