Mr. Malok (South Sudan): Allow me to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November. I would like to assure you of our full
cooperation for the success of your presidency. I would
also like to acknowledge the positive role played by
your predecessor in leading the Council last month.

The United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA) is the best thing to happen to Abyei in
its long history of struggle, neglect and suffering from
insecurity. Although a great deal remains to be done,
notable progress has been made towards promoting
peace and security in Abyei, fostering reconciliation
and cooperation among the communities that converge
seasonally in the Area, delivering social services and
humanitarian assistance and initiating socioeconomic
development programmes. That would not have been
possible without the creative and determined efforts
of UNISFA.

Cooperation between the two countries is crucial
to any constructive and productive efforts in Abyei.
Indeed, even the progress made by UNISFA could
not have been possible without a degree of functional
cooperation by the Governments of the Sudan and South
Sudan. However, much more cooperation is needed if
the efforts of UNISFA are to continue to bear tangible
fruits that will benefit the two communities and help
to facilitate continued improvement in the relations
between the two countries.

We are encouraged by the recent improvement in
relations between the two countries. The Government
of South Sudan sincerely hopes that this will develop
into an even greater cooperation in the wide range of
areas of mutual concern and interest. In that connection,
it is our firm belief that the Abyei Area can contribute
significantly to the development of cordial ties between
the two countries. That can be done by building on
grass-roots intercommunal cooperation, which can
extend to the national level in the two countries.

As things stand now, it is obvious that the search
for a final solution to the Abyei problem has stalled
due to the differences between the two Governments,
despite the tireless efforts of the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel, under the leadership of
the former President of South Africa, Thabo Mbeki,
and the support of the African Union and the United
Nations. The people of Abyei and the neighbouring
communities, from both the north and the south, who
migrate into the Area seasonally in search of water
and pastures cannot be abandoned to suffer neglect
in a vacuum of State responsibility for their security
and general welfare. The international community is
called upon to step in and fill the vacuum, not only in
the immediate interests of the communities concerned
but also in the long-term interests of the two countries.
That is urgently needed to stabilize the situation in
the Area and to create an environment conducive to a
more constructive and fruitful dialogue on the future
of Abyei.

The report (S/2016/864) of the Secretary-General
indicates that significant progress has been made in a
number of critical areas, although the security situation
in Abyei remains precarious. UNISFA has continued
to conduct operations in promoting peace and stability.
While the establishment of the Abyei Police Service
continues to be elusive, the UNISFA police component
continues to support the maintenance of law and order
through community-based interactive patrols. In that
connection, the UNISFA police component has been
cooperating with leaders from both communities
to promote safer neighbourhoods and to protect
civilians. UNISFA has also continued to encourage
and support both communities to promote dialogue
and reconciliation.

In partnership with community leaders on both
sides, UNISFA has provided security and encouraged
joint peace committees to establish and manage the
common market for their communities. Indeed, as the
Secretary-General notes, Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya
leaders have made encouraging progress in addressing
issues affecting their people, including promoting
reconciliation between their communities.

The progress made in various areas was presented to
the South Sudanese members of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee (AJOC) when they visited the Area in
March 2015. The areas covered by the briefing included
the security and political situation, the resettlement
patterns in northern Abyei, the status of returnees,
the development of the common market, quick-impact
development projects and other development activities
being carried out by United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes. During the same week, the Acting
Head of Mission/Force Commander met in Khartoum
with the Sudanese members of the AJOC and briefed
them on developments in the Area. He was assured of
the support of the Sudanese Government for the work
being done, especially in promoting the peace process
at the local level.

Other areas in which progress has been made
include agricultural production; integrated health
care, including nutrition, hygiene and sanitation
services; educational services, including rehabilitation
of the schools and the provision of school materials;
protecting women and children against sexual violence
and related abuses; and mine-clearance services. Those
achievements have helped to reverse migration out of
the Area, encouraged resettlement and reintegration,
minimized disruptive activities that threaten peace and
supported the sustainability of local peace initiatives
in the Area.

Despite the progress made by UNISFA in various
areas, much more needs to be done to promote and
consolidate peace, security, stability and the prospects
for socioeconomic development in the Area. That
must first and foremost be the responsibility of the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan. Despite its
very limited resources and the severe challenges posed
by the current crises in the country, the Government of
South Sudan continues to do what it can to assist the
people of Abyei. The Government of the Sudan is called
upon to respond more positively to the needs of the
Area, which is both within its power and in its interests.

It is noteworthy that, as the report of the Secretary-
General observes, the restrictions imposed by the
Government of the Sudan on non-governmental
organizations have limited the implementation capacity
of humanitarian and development actors, especially in
the northern parts of Abyei. As the Secretary-General
also notes, in addition to a lack of adequate funds,
other challenges include high implementation costs
owing to security and logistical constraints, delays in
the issuance of travel permits and restrictions on the
movement of personnel and supplies by the Government
of the Sudan.

In conclusion, an issue that has continued to be a
source of deep grievance and anger among the Ngok
Dinka is the unresolved responsibility for the killing
of their Oaramount Chief, who was assassinated,
together with a UNISFA peacekeeper, by a member of
the Misseriya in May 2013. Although an investigation
committee was established to conduct an investigation
into the killing, its report has never been made public.
It is therefore crucial to the process of healing and
reconciliation between the Ngok Dinka and the
Misseriya that the findings and recommendations of
the investigation committee be made public in order to
enable the communities to find closure on the matter
and conduct the customary process of reconciliation.

The meeting rose at 5pm.
