The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Kuwait.

At the outset, I would like to thank the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, for the briefing she gave at the beginning
of this meeting.

We had hoped that the Security Council's unanimous
adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), in September
2013 following the first incident involving the use of
chemical weapons in Syria, would have resolved this
matter, since the Council had demonstrated unity
and determination in confronting that crime with a
View to ensuring that it not be repeated and that its
perpetrators be held accountable. Consequently, we
regret the substantial regression in addressing the
chemical-weapon issue in Syria, which is a result of the
divisions among Council members after the Council was
unable to extend the mandate of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism in Syria, which we feel
carried out its tasks in a very professional, impartial
and independent manner.

We express our deep concern about the allegations
of the continued use of chemical weapons in Syria, most
recently during the attack in Douma, in eastern Ghouta,
lastweek and during the attack that took place in Saraqeb,
in Idlib, yesterday. This is the third such attack during
the past few weeks, which means that the perpetrators
of those crimes will go unpunished and that there is no
guarantee that they, or anyone else, who commits such
crimes in the future will be held accountable, after we
lost the Joint Investigative Mechanism.

The position of the State of Kuwait is a principled
and steadfast one that strongly condemns any use
of chemical weapons, wherever, whenever and by
whomsoever, as this is considered a grave violation
of international law. We reiterate the need to hold
accountable those responsible for such use, be they
individuals, entities, non-State groups or Governments.

In that context, we condemn the use of heavy and
destructive weapons as well as the targeting civilians
and residential areas killing dozens ofinnocent victims.
These weapons target health facilities and civilian
locations in eastern Ghouta, Idlib and other areas.
We therefore support the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism for Syria in its quest to gather
evidence and investigate the crimes committed against
civilians in order to hold the perpetrators accountable.

The State of Kuwait will support any alternative or
mechanism that enjoys the consensus of all members
of the Security Council and ensures the independence,
neutrality and professionalism of any new future
mechanism. In that regard, we reaffirm that the
primary responsibility of any mechanism must be to
determine the identity of those using chemical weapons
in Syria, provided that the Security Council would then
play its role and hold the perpetrators accountable, in
implementation of the principle of ending impunity and
of resolution 2118 (2013), which undoubtedly stipulates
the imperative need for, and importance of, holding
accountable those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. We also look forward to receiving
the report that will soon be submitted by the Fact-
finding Mission, as mentioned by Ms. Nakamitsu in her
earlier briefing on the most recent incidents, as well as
her reports on the use of chlorine gas in Saraqib.

In conclusion, we reiterate our full readiness to take
part in any efforts that are aimed at reaching consensus
among Security Council members and at holding
accountable the perpetrators of such internationally
prohibited crimes. We assert that a political solution
in Syria is the only way to arrive at a comprehensive
settlement of the crisis, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, especially resolution 2254
(2015) and the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The representative of the United Kingdom has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

