I too would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Mr. Qu Dongyu and Mr. David Beasley for their additional briefings on the latest developments in the food situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo, north-eastern Nigeria, South Sudan and Yemen, where, according to the 2020 Global Report on Food Crises, 53 per cent of the population is facing a food crisis. We are very sensitive to the briefers' repeated poignant testimonies to the Security Council on the difficult situation of these populations having been exposed to food crises for far too long. These crises have been aggravated in recent weeks by serious flooding in the Sahel, the effects of the war in Yemen and the crises in South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo. In all of these situations, the populations are forced to leave everything behind to save their lives, when that is in fact still possible. On behalf of my country, allow me to renew my expressions of sympathy for the innocent victims of all these disasters. My country, the Niger, has in recent weeks experienced serious floods, which, according to the latest estimates, have affected more than 350,000 people. Entire families have lost their livelihoods. Populations facing multiple vulnerabilities, in particular refugees and internally displaced persons, have not been spared either: following these floods, some 9,000 people under the protection of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees now need shelter. At a time when we are debating the protection of civilians in relation to food insecurity, the combined effects of climate change and conflict remind us just how great the humanitarian impact can be for these populations. The Secretary-General's note to the Security Council of 4 September 2020 reminds us of the gravity of the situation and the increased risks of famine and widespread food insecurity in four conflict-affected countries - a total of 43.5 million people, including 15.9 million in Yemen, 15.6 million in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 7 million in South Sudan and 5 million in north-eastern Nigeria. Conflict is now the main cause of acute hunger in the world, forcing people to flee and abandon their fields, livestock, property and other sources of livelihood. Conflict also exacerbates food insecurity for both forcibly displaced people and host communities that are often the providers of relief, despite very often already limited resources. I would like to recall, for example, that, during the Arria Formula meeting we had on 15 July, the briefers unanimously illustrated for us, through poignant testimonies, the intimate link that exists between the activities of armed groups in the Great Lakes region, the massive displacement of populations and the situation of food insecurity to which these populations are exposed. Like those in the Sahel, South Sudan and Yemen, these populations, trapped by armed conflict and the activities of terrorist groups, are in urgent need of humanitarian aid. Women and children in particular continue to pay a heavy price; in 55 countries around the world, nearly 17 million children under the age of five are severely malnourished. This situation is worrying and requires urgent action. It must be said that the various factors linked to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic have, as we know, exacerbated the problems in these regions already hard hit by conflicts. The shortage of labour has substantially affected both the production and the processing of crops. Disruptions resulting from transport- related blockages and quarantine measures have prevented farmers from gaining access to markets and hindered humanitarian aid, thereby wreaking havoc in the urgent distribution of vital aid to refugees and displaced persons. In the light of the multiple disasters these populations face - the torments of armed conflict and the risks of a spread of the COVID-19 pandemic - it is more than urgent to act if we are to avoid witnessing tragedy on an even greater scale. In this regard, I would like to take this opportunity to pay a heartfelt tribute to all humanitarian workers for their remarkable efforts to provide a lifeline to these populations and to contribute to the protection of vulnerable communities, especially in these times of the COVID-19 pandemic. Humanitarian workers do this work with dedication and commitment - often, alas, imperilling their lives. For the humanitarian response to be effective, even more resources need to be mobilized, and efforts to ensure that they are better used must be made, removing all obstacles and freeing humanitarian aid from political considerations. On this latter issue, I thank Mr. David Beasley for his excellent advocacy. As everyone agrees, the most effective way to protect civilians is to prevent conflict. Prevention is first and foremost about identifying and addressing the chronic and deep-rooted vulnerabilities that affect these countries through concerted action by Governments, the humanitarian community and development actors. As the President of the Republic of the Niger, His Excellency Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou, has said, the zero-hunger objective set by the international community for the year 2030 is within our reach. For its part, since 2011, the Niger, through the Nigeriens Feeding Nigeriens initiative, has been implementing a programme to move from emergency to structural solutions, which has brought the country out of the chronic cycle of food insecurity it experienced in the past. In conclusion, I would like to recall that, in May 2018, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2417 (2018), which commits all parties to protecting civilian infrastructure essential for the delivery of humanitarian assistance and to ensuring the proper functioning of markets and food systems in situations of armed conflict. Resolution 2417 (2018) must continue to guide our actions to break, as soon as possible, the cycle of conflict-related hunger that inflicts untold suffering on already vulnerable civilian populations.
