The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

At the outset, I welcome His Excellency Mr. Tieman
Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali. We also thank
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), and Ambassador Olof Skoog, in
his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali, for
their briefings.

Despite some progress, Peru notes with concern the
deterioration of the security and humanitarian situation
in Mali, particularly in the central and northern regions
of the country. Clashes continue among armed groups,
as do the activities of terrorist groups in areas with a
weak State presence. We stress the importance of the
implementation of the 2015 Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. In accordance with the timeline
and the road map adopted in March, we encourage the
promotion of defence, security, decentralization and
socioeconomic development with a view to building
lasting peace in the country. We commend the work of
the Agreement Monitoring Committee, the independent
observer and the 2374 Sanctions Committee in support
of the implementation of the Agreement. We would also
like to highlight the role of MINUSMA.

(spoke in Spanish)

We also underscore the need to move forward with
the following three goals.

The first concerns the holding of free and fair
elections this year. We believe that it is important to
ensure that the process is conducted transparently and
inclusively, includes broad citizen participation, and
serves to bring more women and young people into
political life. Regional and international support are
also important.

The second goal concerns the implementation
of a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme for former combatants, as well as reform
of the security sector. In that regard, we commend the
efforts of the Malian Government and encourage it to
continue to move ahead and pick up the pace.

Nevertheless, we must bear in mind that the crisis
in Mali is connected with the entire Sahel region. We
consider it necessary to pay special attention to the
links between terrorism and cross-border organized
crime and to strengthen the regional response to these
scourges, inter alia, by increasing operational and
logistical support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). In that regard, we welcome
the signing of the technical agreement between
MINUSMA, the European Union and the members
of the G-5 Sahel, in accordance with resolution 2391
(2017), and encourage donors to continue to contribute
to that effort.

Thirdly, with regard to the strengthening of

MINUSMA's operational capabilities, we are concerned
that 100 per cent of the authorized force has not yet been
deployed and that it continues to lack equipment. We
look forward to the results of the MINUSMA strategic
review, which will help redefine the Mission's action
plan and strategies in the light of the challenges on the
ground in the forthcoming renewal of its mandate.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Mali.

