Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke in French): The Kingdom of the Netherlands thanks
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing. The
picture that he describes is bleak.

A year ago, faced with the threat of a crisis in the
Kasai region and in eastern Congo, the New Year's Eve
agreement brought about a glimmer of hope. Today
the challenge is to revive hope for a way out of the
crisis. At a time when the Security Council will soon
have to consider the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
three aspects have priority: the political climate, the
protection of the civilian population and the serious
humanitarian crisis.

With regard to the first aspect, on the political
climate, we welcome the publication of the electoral
calendar and the concrete measures taken with regard
to holding the elections. Congolese citizens hope to
have an opportunity to express themselves at the polls
in 2018. However, that hope is continually threatened.
Following the violent incidents of 31 December 2017,
the African Union and the European Union called for
respect for the fundamental rights and freedoms of the
Congolese people, for when peaceful political protests
are met with the use of lethal force and when religious
services are interrupted by tear gas, the goal of free and
fair elections becomes a mirage.

We wish to express our strong condemnation of the
violence committed by the security forces, and we call
for respect for human rights. The failure to implement
the agreed confidence-building measures undermines
the credibility of the electoral process. It is essential
to put an immediate end to the harassment of civil
society. All parties to the New Year's Eve agreement
must reaffirm their commitment to the spirit of that
agreement and to the electoral calendar, which is the
only viable solution to that toxic political climate.

The second aspect is the protection of the civilian
population. The Kingdom of the Netherlands supports
the establishment of a special investigation into the
recent attacks on peacekeepers in North Kivu. I take
this opportunity to reiterate our condolences over the
deaths of the MONUSCO peacekeepers. The special
investigation will make it possible to assess the level of
overall readiness and response of MONUSCO, as well
as to identify and to prosecute the perpetrators. More
generally, in the context of the strategic review, the
Security Council should consider how to ensure that
the reform of MONUSCO strengthens its capacity to
protect civilians.

With regard to the third aspect, on the humanitarian
crisis, the suffering of the Congolese people has reached
unimaginable levels. The Inter-Agency Standing
Committee has classified the new conflict as a level
3 emergency. Approximately 7.7 million people face
a severe food shortage, and nearly 2 million children
suffer from malnutrition, which will affect them for life.
The famine in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
man-made - civilians must be protected from it. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands advocates an integrated
approach that includes humanitarian aid.

In conclusion, the current crisis is enormous. The
Security Council cannot resolve it alone. It must listen to
the countries and organizations of the region, promote
their involvement and engage with them. While those
countries and organizations are affected by the crisis,
they also have the means and the duty to mobilize the
political will for peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

All the that requires unwavering determination
and tremendous efforts, as demonstrated by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. At the end of
his term, we would like to thank Mr. Sidikou for his
outstanding work at the Head of MONUSCO, which
today is the largest peacekeeping operation. We extend
our full support to Ms. Leila Zerrougui, who succeeds
him, and we are committed to working with her for
peace and stability for the Congolese people.

