Mr. Lauber: I am grateful to have this opportunity
to brief the Security Council today on my recent visit
to Burundi, Rwanda and Ethiopia and on the latest
discussions within the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Iam also pleasedthat
His Excellency Mr. Alain Aime Nyamitwe, Burundi's
Minister for External Relations and International
Cooperation, is participating in today's debate, and
I would like to use this opportunity to express my
gratitude to him for the cooperation that the PBC enjoys
with the Government of Burundi in its peacebuilding
engagement. The following remarks were discussed
and agreed on by the member countries of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
including the country concerned, Burundi.

From 15 to 20 February, I undertook my second
regional Visit as Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission. I held consultations
in Bujumbura, Kigali and Addis Ababa. The main
objective of my visit was to pursue the policy dialogue
with the Government of Burundi and other national
and international stakeholders in order to complement
ongoing peacebuilding efforts by the United Nations,
the African Union and the East African Community
(EAC). In Bujumbura I met with the President of the
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza,
and members of his Government, representatives of
political parties, religious leaders, representatives
of the opposition, the Commission for Truth and
Reconciliation, the National Commission for the
Inter-Burundian Dialogue, civil-society organizations,
international and regional financial institutions, human
rights and military observers of the African Union (AU)
and representatives of the international community and
the United Nations family.

From Bujumbura I travelled to Kigali, where I
focused on the humanitarian and regional dimension
of the crisis in my discussions with the Minister for
Disaster Management and Refugee Affairs of Rwanda
and with the country representative of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
In Addis Ababa I held consultations with high-ranking
officials ofthe African Union, including His Excellency
Mr. Smail Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, representatives of AU
member States and partners and the United Nations
Special Representative to the African Union. The
special focus of my discussions in Addis Ababa was the
AU engagement in Burundi and cooperation between
the AU and the United Nations.

I have shared the detailed written report of my
visit with members of the Security Council through the
established channel. Today, I would like to share with it
the main takeaway points of my visit and reflect on the
PBC's continued engagement with Burundi, including
recent contacts with the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank.

After my departure, and prior to the visit of
the Secretary-General and the high-level AU visit
of five African Heads of States and Government,
the Government of Burundi announced a series of
decisions, which included the release of prisoners, the
reopening of two radio stations and the revocation of the
arrest warrants against approximately 15 members of
the opposition, to which the Secretary-General referred
earlier. The members of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission welcome those
steps and encourage their rapid implementation, as
well as additional steps to reinforce the momentum
created by those measures and the recent high-level
political engagement.

The urgent need for a Viable, inclusive and
intensified dialogue process was underlined by most
interlocutors in Bujumbura, Kigali and Addis Ababa.
Diverging views on the specifics of an inclusive
dialogue persist, however. In Bujumbura, I had an
opportunity to meet with the National Commission
for the Inter-Burundian Dialogue. The Commission
depicted the dialogue as a series of large gatherings
in which participants elaborate their views on how
to create democratic conditions for the Burundian
elections in 2020. Preliminary findings by the National
Commission seem to indicate that a key request of the
population is to amend the Constitution and to revise
the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for
Burdundi, including with regard to ethnic quotas, term
limits for the President and dual citizenship. Some
national and many international observers I met with
expressed concerns that tensions in Burundi could rise
if the current process evolved into a campaign to revise
the Arusha Agreement.

My discussions in Bujumbura also showed that
there was a considerable risk that the economic
downturn could become an additional driver of the
crisis. After 10 years of steady economic growth, the
country experienced negative growth of 4 per cent in
2015. The Government of Burundi expressed its regret
about the fact that some partners had reduced their
cooperation with Burundi. The suspension of direct
budgetary support will have an immediate impact on
public expenditures, which will decrease by 22 per
cent in 2016. I was told by development partners that
the political crisis had slowed the implementation of
strategic programmes, such as those on infrastructure,
roads and electricity. Furthermore, I was informed
that the cycle of cooperation strategies and key
assistance mechanisms used by the main financial and
development partners of Burundi would end in 2016.
Negotiations on a new cycle might take place in a context
of uncertainty, if the current political crisis continues.
Consequently, envelopes allocated to Burundi might be
affected, or the disbursement of funds further delayed.
On the other hand, international donors appeared to be
ready to re-engage if they saw clear sigs towards the
resolution of the current crisis and a more conducive
environment being established. In parallel to a political
dialogue process, the Government of Burundi and
international donors might therefore want to intensify
their conversation on the socioeconomic impact of
the crisis.

I share the assessment of previous briefers that the
ongoing political crisis and insecurity persists, while
the patterns of violent acts committed by elements
of the security forces and armed opposition seem to
change. The use of grenades in public places appears
to be a new trend. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and
the human rights observers of the African Union,
whom I met with in Bujumbura, confirmed that current
incidents might be less Visible than those that took
place after the events of 11 December, but they reported
allegations of forced disappearances, killings, torture,
ill-treatment, hate speech and sexual violence.

On 9 March, I briefed members of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission on my
mission. In a subsequent discussion, the PBC members
reiterated their rejection of violence committed by
either side. Many members expressed grave concern
about the ongoing violence and human rights violations.
Members welcomed the work being done by the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General, Mr. Benomar, and
the deployment of his team in Burundi. They also
expressed support for the Special Adviser, particularly
for his efforts aimed at ensuring coherence between
the different actors. The members of the configuration
further welcomed the recent appointment of the former
President of Tanzania, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, to
facilitate the dialogue process under the East African
Community mediator, President Museveni of Uganda.
EAC members considered the AU decision to deploy
an additional 100 human rights monitors and 100
military experts a positive step towards achieving
general stabilization and an improvement in the human
rights situation. The Peacebuilding Fund is planning
to support the 32 AU human rights observers, who are
already in the country and are cooperating closely with
OHCHR. Other partners are encouraged to consider
contributions to the deployment of additional observers.

With regard to the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF), the
joint steering committee that oversees PBF activities in
Burundi decided, on 9 March, to launch new initiatives
in various areas of dialogue, including support for
women's roles in the dialogue process, the promotion
and protection of human rights, and support for
victims, youth engagement, community security and
social cohesion.

From my discussions in the region and within the
Burundi configuration of the PBC, I have drawn the
following conclusions.

First, the resolution of the current crisis in Burundi
will require maximum coherence among international
and regional organizations, in particular among the
United Nations, the AU and the EAC. Coordinated
efforts will be crucial for establishing a viable, inclusive
and intensified political dialogue. Such a process can
only benefit from the accumulated experience of those
three organizations, if the three join their efforts. In
that regard, the Security Council's overall guidance and
support will be critical.

Secondly, the increased international presence
in Burundi can considerably help to improve the
security and human rights situation and to reduce
violence. It therefore remains crucial that the Security
Council continue its discussion in consultation with
the Government of Burundi on the options for United
Nations engagement. I am glad that the African
Union and the Government of Burundi have agreed
to increase the number of human rights and military
observers. I also welcome the recent visit to Burundi
by three independent experts mandated by the Human
Rights Council, which will be followed by additional
visits between now and July. That sort of impartial
monitoring and engagement can also help to clarify
allegations and ease tensions within Burundian society.

Thirdly, there is a need to draw attention to the
possible regional implications of the crisis.

Fourthly, the socioeconomic dimension of the
current crisis must not be overlooked. In line with
the holistic approach to peacebuilding, the Burundi
configuration can continue to serve as a platform
for including the socioeconomic dimensions in the
international debate on Burundi. For my part, I will
continue the configuration's engagement with the main
development partners of Burundi. A systematic dialogue
between the Government of Burundi and international
donors would help to clarify mutual expectations. In
that regard, the next cycle of the Burundi poverty-
reduction strategy paper provides a crucial opportunity
to redefine the Government's vision and to reset
cooperation with international partners.

