Mr. Onanga-Anyanga (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November and for the contribution of
your country to efforts towards a more stable, peaceful
world.

The dominant development, beyond anything
else, is Burundi's entry into the campaign period for
the elections of 2015. Despite the negative impact of
the boycott of the 2010 elections, the entire Burundian
national political class expressed its will to turn the
upcoming vote into an opportunity not only to perfect
the electoral mechanisms but also to guarantee inclusive
participation in a more tolerant, peaceful environment,
which will contribute to building peace and national
reconciliation.

The President of the Republic himself best
indicated the link between the upcoming elections and
peacebuilding in Burundi when, on 1 July, he said,

"As we already announced to Burundians and to
the international community, our wish is for the
2015 elections to take place in a better way than all
those we have organized until now. The elections
will give the country, institutions and leaders who
have the people's trust. The elections will create
peace and consolidate and strengthen democracy
and independence in the country".

We share that aspiration and that very appropriate
comment by the Head of State.

However, we must redouble our efforts, since
we are approximately six months away from those
important elections and progress to that end continues
to be limited. The outstanding progress we have made
on the level of political dialogue is being subjected to a
difficult test. Although the entire legislative framework
is now in place, the setting up by CENI of divisions
on the provincial and communal levels has generated
controversy and rekindled accusations of partiality on
the part of CENI by the opposition.

The President of CENI is committed to correcting
the imbalances identified, even though he warned that it
would be impossible to satisfy all claims. Whether true
or not, the charges reflect the distrust of a significant
part of the political class with respect to the institution
responsible for organizing the elections in 2015, even
before they have begun. We deeply regret that situation,
which shows a lack of trust between the majority and
the opposition.

The tensions in the political climate are also
present in the various trials in which major opposition
figures are appearing. Through these lawsuits, a few
months before the elections, the opposition is saying
that the justice system is being exploited and not very
free, a charge the Government denies, saying it does
not interfere with the course ofjustice. It is not too late
to turn these misunderstandings into an opportunity to
build confidence in the whole electoral process.

The third evaluation of the road map, which was held
23 October in Gitega at the invitation of the Government
and the United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB),
within the framework of the inclusive political dialogue
initiated in March 2013, helped the entire Burundian
political class to exchange views on the political
situation of the country. Although no agreement has
been reached on the effective implementation of the
code of good conduct adopted, as the Council knows, in
June, the meeting in Gitega favoured a clarification of
the current political circumstances, while reaffirming
the principle of inclusion, without which the credibility
of the electoral process would be undermined.

The Government has clearly chosen to reaffirm
the rule of law on the basis of more overtly political,
previously approved recommendations, refusing to
operationalize the concept of the political operator
and inviting the opposition to frame its action in strict
compliance with the laws in force. We must nevertheless
welcome the commitment made by the Government to
continue the political dialogue. We also welcome the
reaffirmation by the opposition of its determination to
participate in future elections to completion, regardless
of the constraints. It is now important to focus on the key
issues set out in the code of good conduct, in particular
to create a more open political space and a reliable safe
environment to ensure the protection of all stakeholders
in the electoral process, guarantee the freedom and
fairness of the elections and condemn and ban political
violence in all its forms, especially those that involve
youth leagues affiliated with political parties.

The existence of a legal framework and operational
mechanisms of CENI will not by themselves be enough
to restore confidence in the electoral process. CENI
should provide further assurances by strengthening
its image as an independent and impartial authority,
especially by including all stakeholders in the key
pre- and post-election phases of the process, such as
in voter registration, whose launch is scheduled for
24 November, and in the management of electoral
disputes.

(spoke in English)
While the upcoming elections are by far the most
pressing and multifaceted political challenge facing
the country, other significant developments are worth
mentioning. Overall, Burundi has continued to enjoy a
rather stable security situation throughout its territory.
On a related note, during most of the reporting
period, a significant drop in acts of political violence
and intolerance perpetrated by youth affiliated with
political parties was evident, marked by a decrease in
the number of violations of the rights to life and physical
integrity. From a monthly average of 10 incidents
observed between January and July, the number of
incidents associated with the youth of the ruling party
documented by BNUB dropped to 7 in August and 3 in
September. Regular calls by the President of the ruling
party warning perpetrators of individual consequences
seem to have been heeded. Those incidents include the
banning or disruption of public meetings and threats
against or physical assaults committed on members
of opposition parties. Civil society organizations and
journalists were also affected.

In a positive development, on 29 September, human
rights defender, Mr. Pierre Claver Mbonimpa, was
released on health grounds. However, his case is still
pending in court.

It should also be noted that no significant progress
has been seen in the fight against impunity, including
in the cases of extrajudicial killings that BNUB has
documented since 2011, considering that only a small
number of cases have been tried in a court of law.
In a related development, justice reform has been
slow, especially with respect to the key issues of the
independence of the judiciary. It is, however, worth
mentioning that further to the adoption and promulgation
of the law on the Truth and Reconciliation Commission,
the process to select commissioners has been initiated.
Various national and international stakeholders have
made calls for a credible and inclusive Commission.

On 26 August, during an address to the nation,
President Nkurunziza acknowledged that corruption
remained one of the Government's major challenges.
He reaffirmed his commitment to a policy of zero
tolerance for corruption. In that regard, the work of the
Office Burundais des Recettes - the Burundian tax
collection authority - must be hailed and encouraged.
Exemplary action will indeed be needed to advance that
important objective.

I am pleased to report that, with respect to
transition, progress towards BNUB's end of activities
proceeded in accordance with the joint transition
plan. Symbolically, BNUB's activities will end on
12 December with the lowering of the United Nations
flag from its headquarters. A progressive reduction
in BNUB staff has continued as part of the staff
drawdown plan, balancing staff departures with the
conduct of BNUB's substantive activities until the end
of its mandate. The United Nations country team has
continued to beef up its capacity in the areas in which
BNUB will cease its activities, notably in governance
and rule of law, bearing in mind the need to avoid gaps.

The approval by the Government on 11 August of
the continued presence of a stand-alone office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
based on the 1995 agreement paved the way for ensuring
continued United Nations engagement in human rights
in Burundi. That is a very positive development, as it
will include capacity-building programmes with the
relevant Government institutions, the Independent
National Human Rights Commission and civil society
organizations. We call on the Council and Member
States to ensure that sufficient resources are allocated
for the new office.

Moving forward, Burundi will continue to need
strong support from all its partners to overcome
outstanding challenges and implement its national
poverty alleviation and development strategy. I
commend Ambassador Paul Seger for his leadership
and unflagging commitment to peace consolidation
and development efforts in Burundi. BNUB and the
entire United Nations family are mobilized to actively
participate in the round table scheduled to take place in
Bujumbura on 11 and 12 December.

In conclusion - and this point cannot be
overemphasized - the Government should continue
to do everything in its power to preserve peace and
stability and consolidate democracy. It should avoid
any posture that could lead to a reversal of the gains
achieved so far. I have every confidence that it will do
so. As the country prepares itself for the upcoming 2015
elections, there is no better way to achieve that goal
than to proactively implement inclusive and transparent
policies to ensure the credibility ofthe electoral process,
which will represent a critical test that Burundi cannot
afford to fail in its march towards greater peace and
prosperity for all of its people.

