I would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his briefing. I also welcome the participation in this video- teleconference of the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia as well as the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Diaspora of Kosovo. One of the main challenges facing Kosovo today is the full normalization of relations with Serbia through a final settlement of their dispute. Reaching a comprehensive, final and legally binding agreement is one of the preconditions for both Serbia and Kosovo making progress as concerns their prospects for joining the European Union. In that regard, we fully support the dialogue facilitated by European Union Special Representative Miroslav Lajeak, and we deeply regret the fact that he was unable to provide us today with an update on the dialogue between the two parties. The European Union's mediation, I would recall, is based on a General Assembly resolution. The dispute between Serbia and Kosovo is a European security issue, which fully justifies the role of the European Union in this matter. We welcome the fact that Serbia and Kosovo decided to resume their dialogue at the 10 July Paris summit, which was co-chaired by President Emmanuel Macron and Chancellor Angela Merkel. The dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina resumed in July following a 20-month hiatus. We welcome the initial progress made in the framework of that dialogue, particularly on three issues: economic cooperation; internally displaced persons and refugees; and missing persons. We call for those negotiations to continue and for concrete progress to be made. It is vital that all contentious subjects, including the most sensitive ones, be dealt with, in particular that of the Association of Serb Majority Municipalities. We invite the actors involved in this issue to support the European Union mediation and to coordinate their efforts with it. We welcome the work of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), which is working tirelessly to promote security and stability as well as the strengthening of the rule of law and the protection of human rights in Kosovo and the region. In particular, UNMIK and the United Nations agencies in Kosovo have played a major role in helping Kosovo cope with the coronavirus disease pandemic, in addition to the massive amount of aid provided by the European Union. UNMIK's efforts must continue, in coordination, of course, with the initiatives of other regional and international actors, in particular the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). France reiterates its full support for the EULEX mission, in particular in the context of its support activities for the Kosovo Specialist Chambers. France reiterates its commitment to the fight against impunity for perpetrators of serious crimes. We therefore call on all actors to continue to support and cooperate with the Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor's Office. Finally, France is absolutely convinced that Serbia and Kosovo have a common European future. The European Union, which is the largest trading partner of, the largest investor in and the largest donor to both countries, will continue its efforts to facilitate the conclusion of a comprehensive and legally binding agreement between the two parties, which will contribute to the lasting stabilization of the Western Balkans and the European rapprochement of the two countries. France remains deeply committed to this issue, in support of both parties and the European Union mediation.
