Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our gratitude for the
holding of this very important meeting. We would also
like to welcome the participation of Her Excellency
Ms. Julie Bishop, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Australia, and we would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing. We would also like to thank
His Excellency Mr. Gary Quinlan, Chair ofthe Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) and resolution 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities. We
also wish to thank Ambassador Raimonda Murmokaite,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-
terrorism.

We would like to express our support for the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/23) adopted today.

The President's concept note (S/2014/787, annex)
certainly sheds light on the challenges the international
community faces in fighting terrorism as well as the
momentous dangers the world faces in dealing with the
phenomenon of terrorism. In spite of the rather sombre
picture of the situation of terrorism and terrorists' efforts
to increase fear in societies by drawing inspiration
from violent ideologies, we need to remain optimistic
in coping with this challenge. Our determination and
cooperation are being sorely tested today. Achieving
our common goal will depend on pooling our efforts in
all spheres in order to cope with terrorist organizations.

In line with the policy adopted by my country in
cooperation with the international community to cope
with this common threat, we took part in the Security
Council meeting on this topic held on 24 September
(see S/PV.7272). We were among the countries that
supported resolution 2178 (2014). Qatar reiterated its
commitment to confront terrorism at all levels and to
continue its effective cooperation in order to combat
terrorism. We will do everything within our power
to achieve that goal. In line with that commitment,
Qatar has adopted a number of measures, including
the enactment of several laws to crimminalize the use
of electronic means in the service of terrorism. We
have been monitoring charity organizations so that
they are not used for terrorist operations. We have
also focused on international cooperation to combat
money-laundering by terrorist organizations, which is
an important area to scrutinize.

In December 2013, we also organized a joint
meeting of experts in order to implement a strategy to
combat the financing of terrorism; 120 experts from
46 States took part, 14 from regional and international
organizations. We also organized a joint seminar in
Doha to develop financial capacity in the Middle East,
North African and the Eurasian regions. With regard
to implementing the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, Qatar has been cooperating with
various United Nations agencies in different areas. In
January 2013, under the auspices of United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) and
the Centre on Global Counter-terrorism Cooperation,
we held a conference in Doha on preventing the use
of non-profit organizations to finance terrorism. We
have worked with CTED to strengthen national legal
institutions to cope with such challenges by training
legal experts and investigators to establish a network for
legal cooperation to stand up to terrorism, strengthen
the international campaign to combat terrorism and
promote the rule of law at the national and international
levels.

The increasing number of transnational terrorist
groups and their use of intimidation and committing
massacres run counter to human conscience and to
every religion.
We need to marshall political will and take into
account Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2170 (2014), in order to put an end to
anything that poses a threat to international peace and
security. The terrorism threat is substantial today, and
it has an impact on the international community. It is
impossible to deal with that threat in the absence of a
strategy that takes into account the deep-rooted causes
of terrorism, whether that has to do with the actions
of terrorist groups or the kind of terrorism carried
out by certain regimes. Terrorism serves as merely
an argument for certain groups. The fact that certain
regimes characterize terrorism as a threat becomes
a justification for them to carry out their own acts of
terrorism.

Our cooperation on terrorism requires more
institutional work to deal with it. We need to draw up
plans to fight terrorism in the short, medium and long
terms. We also need to raise awareness and to focus
on its deep-rooted causes and the reasons that young
people are recruited by terrorist organizations. We
need to prevent all policies that aim to violate human
rights, as well as to counter any unjust policies based
on intimidation and marginalization. Strengthening
international cooperation is a crucial element in putting
an end to the threat of terrorism. Terrorist groups
have taken advantage of the lack of cooperation at
the international level, which has made it possible for
them to take control of large regions. Their capacities
have strengthened, and they take advantage of a lack of
stability and of political and security vacuums.

Any attempt to link terrorism to a civilization,
nationality or group will be used as an argument by
terrorists to incite terrorism and justify their actions.
Experience shows that terrorism is not linked to any
single nationality or religion.

We have a great responsibility on our shoulders,
which requires that we adopt resolute steps - and
quickly - in order to stand up to terrorists. We need to
prosecute all those who encourage terrorism. We reject
terrorism and extremism. We will fulfil our obligations
in implementing resolution 2178 (2014) and other
relevant resolutions. We will support all international
efforts aimed at combating terrorism and putting an
end to its sources of funding.

