Mr. Quinlan (Australia): As itselfa Sahel country,
Mr. President, I particularly welcome Chad's leadership
in organizing this briefing. I would like to thank
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Hiroute Guebre
Sellassie for her update on the efforts and response of
the United Nations to implement the integrated strategy
for the Sahel, which is not an easy task.

Since June, we have seen a very sharp increase in
targeted attacks against United Nations peacekeepers
in Mali, a deteriorating security situation in Libya,
political instability in Burkina Faso, barbaric terrorist
acts by Boko Haram and the first cases ofEbola in Mali.
Chronic fragility and instability continue to impact the
region and to pose a direct threat to civilians. There
are almost 25 million people in the Sahel - certainly
more than 20 million - who face food insecurity right
now. That is over 65 per cent of the population, which is
substantially more than the entire population of my own
country. The region hosts over 1 million refugees. Its
population, which is the fastest-growing in the world,
is expected to double in the next 20 to 25 years, which
can only worsen the challenges.

The strategy can be a useful tool within the
United Nations system, and, more broadly, to provide
a multidimensional approach to address problems
that transcend the borders in the region. As always,
however, the challenge is in its implementation, which
has struggled to date. However, the strategy probably
remains the initiative with the most potential to bring
the existing plethora of security and development
actors under a single framework. With the large number
of actors in the Sahel, coordination is crucial but still
insufficient. A recent mapping exercise showed that
many of the core countries of the region were covered by
at least seven different regional or international Sahel-
focused strategies. We must enhance coordination, or
the United Nations Sahel strategy itself will fail. At
the same time, coordination cannot be a substitute for
concrete action.

It has been just over a year since the Secretary-
General's joint visit to region, together with the
Presidents of the World Bank and the African
Development Bank and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission. That is the model we need to achieve
results in complex situations like the Great Lakes and
the Sahel. When the Council last met on the Sahel in
June (see S/PV.7203), the Special Envoy spoke of the
importance of breaking down the institutional barriers
between those organizations to ensure better targeted
and coordinated action based on areas of comparative
advantage. I would welcome any further assessment
from her as to how that is being accomplished in
practice. Greater clarity on the division of labour
between her Office and the United Nations Office for
West Africa would also be useful.

We are encouraged by the growing leadership
from the region, including through the Ministerial
Coordination Platform. National ownership and political
will are obviously essential to achieve lasting progress.
The participation of the Group of Five Sahel in the
most recent meeting of the Platform, held in Bamako
on 18 November, was a necessary sign of increasing
coherence and cooperation. We welcome the Special
Envoy's information today about the establishment of
an international contact group on the Sahel.

Such cooperation is vital in particular in the
fight against terrorism and violent extremism. The
Sahel has been particularly affected by that scourge,
with Al-Qaida affiliates in the region exploiting local
conflicts and weak State authority and taking advantage
of trafficking and criminal networks to move around
arms and resources. The trend of small-arms smuggling
in the region is increasing. Nowhere is that more
prevalent than in Libya - a pressing problem given
weak institutions and the continuing flow of weapons
out of the country. Clearly, the Security Council needs
to give Libya more attention. The interphase between
terrorism and transnational crime in the region is
clear. It is obviously fuelling conflict. That is why
the debate to be convened by Chad's presidency next
week, as well as its initiative to put forward a draft
resolution to address the linkages between terrorism
and transnational organized crime holistically, will be
so useful. We pay tribute to French counter-terrorism
efforts in the Sahel through its regional military force,
Operation Barkhane. We also commend the efforts
to operationalize the Multinational Joint Task Force
to combat Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin. The
Council should support that initiative.

To deal with the terrorist threat we need not only
security and law-enforcement approaches, but also
efforts to counter violent extremism at the community
level. Programmes need to target youth in particular, the
largest demographic constituency in the region, perhaps
half of whom are without jobs and whom we know are
highly succeptible to radicalization. We urge the United
Nations to leverage the full range of development and
security entities to help build community resilience
against terrorism.

The Council's Al-Qaida sanctions regime remains
a critical partner for national and regional counter-
terrorism strategies in the Sahel. Despite the Council's
recent focus on Iraq and Syria, the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee and its Monitoring Team continue to target
Sahel-based Al-Qaida affiliates. The Committee's most
recent listings, on 19 November, included two Libya-
based entities associated with Al-Qaida in the Maghreb.
The key is for all United Nations entities, missions
and offices in the region, as well as agencies, counter-
terrorism bodies and the relevant sanctions committees
and groups of experts to work together in support of
joined-up solutions to address terrorism and organized
crime - for example, by helping to strengthen border
security.
Beyond security, we also need to ensure that we
tackle the root causes of cyclical crises in the Sahel
region, including by strengthening governance, in
particular at the regional level. Providing concrete
support and programming to strengthen governance
over such a vast and diverse expanse is obviously a
challenge, but it is one that must be prioritized. We
need to see concrete projects on the ground to kick-start
change. We would welcome any further views from the
Special Envoy on how greater progress can be made in
this area.

In conclusion, while we remain confident that the
Sahel strategy is the right tool to address the challenges
of the region in a coordinated manner - and while
we are thankful for the Special Envoy's efforts in that
direction - there is a very real risk that, absent concrete
programmes and real coordination, the strategy will
atrophy. We therefore continue to look to the leadership
of the Special Envoy to drive forward implementation.

