Mr. Prieto (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We want
to thank Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani for his
briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We commend him
and his team for their work and express our strong
support for promoting the full implementation by all
States of resolution 1540 (2004).

Peru would like to reiterate its resolute commitment
to efforts to achieve general and complete disarmament
and the non-proliferation of nuclear, biological and
chemical weapons and their means of delivery, which
pose a threat to international peace and security. We
are particularly concerned about their link to the
terrorist threat and the risk that non-State actors might
acquire, develop or use such weapons and their means
of delivery or engage in their trafficking.

Peru believes it is essential that the international
community remain united in responding effectively to
the serious challenges facing non-proliferation regimes.
In that regard, it is urgent and indispensable to address
the challenge posed by the nuclear and ballistic missile
programme of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. Peru supports and implements the sanctions
regime imposed against that country, and hopes that the
dialogue established with the North Korean Government
will pave the way for the complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

We also want to stress the importance ofmaintaining
the Security Council's steadfast and united commitment
to the case ofthe unacceptable use of chemical weapons
in Syria, with a view to fully investigating the facts
and ensuring appropriate accountability through the
mechanism for the attribution of responsibilities.

We are equally concerned that the inappropriate
use of scientific innovations may lead to proliferation
activities, in particular through the illegal transfer of
technology and illicit financial transactions. In that
regard, we wish to emphasize the importance of the
implementation, by all States, of measures to fulfil all
their obligations, especially those related to national
and export controls. It is necessary for all States to
have effective national controls, in accordance with
resolution 2325 (2016). In that regard, in order to
implement the measures set out in resolution 1540
(2004), last November Peru organized a round table
that brought together national authorities to discuss
aligning our national legislation in the area of biological
weapons. We are grateful for the support we received
from the Committee and its Group of Experts.

Finally, we underscore the importance of the
Committee's work, especially the work it is carrying
through its programme of work to promote the full
implementation of resolution 2325 (2016), which will
serve as the basis for its next comprehensive review
in 2021, in accordance with paragraph 3 of resolution
1977 (2011).

