Ms. Rice (United States of America): I am
particularly pleased that we are joined today by
President Jose' Ramos-Horta. We very much welcome
his very thoughtful and comprehensive statement to the
Council. We also appreciate the Secretary-General's
presence and his comprehensive statement.

We are very heartened to see the progress that has
been made over the past year, in particular in the wake
of the bloodshed of 2006 and last year's attempts on
the lives of both President Ramos-Horta and Prime
Minister Gusmao. The people of Timor-Leste and their
leaders have shown great courage as they strive to
bring peace and stability to their country. We also
commend the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative Mr. Atul Khare and the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) for the
key role they have played in assisting Timor-Leste in
that process. We concur wholeheartedly with the
Secretary-General's recommendation to extend
UNMIT's mandate for one year at its current
composition and strength. We will look to UNMIT to
continue to play a central role in Timor-Leste, in
particular as the national police prepares to resume
policing responsibility and as the justice sector builds
its capacity.

The United States believes that development and
security go hand-in-hand and that one cannot move
forward without the other. The Secretary-General's
report (S/2009/72) notes a rise in poverty in the
country. Our concern for the most vulnerable in Timor-
Leste - the poor and the displaced - is also indeed
growing. We commend the Government of Timor-Leste
for returning nearly all displaced persons to their
homes and for resolving the petitioner issue. For
lasting stability, however, Timor-Leste will need to
continue its development efforts, in particular in rural
areas, and work to lower unemployment rates.

Timor-Leste cannot stand on its own without a
fully functioning security sector. We very much
appreciate UNMIT's careful planning process to enable
the National Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL) to
gradually resume policing responsibility. Throughout
that process, Timorese officers will require continued
training in order to meet the security challenges in their
country. UNMIT must be diligent about delineating
responsibility between the PNTL and UNMIT police.
The leadership in Timor-Leste, in concert with the
international community, should work to clarify the
roles and responsibilities of the nation's military in
relation to the police. Civilian oversight of both the
police and the military should be strengthened.

Future progress in Timor-Leste will require a
responsive and independent justice sector. We support
the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to promote a coordinated approach to
justice sector reform, and stress the critical need to
reduce the backlog of cases and to establish a
comprehensive legal system to hold criminals
responsible.

Finally, we encourage the international
community to help the Government of Timor-Leste to
hold the local elections that are planned for this year.
We hope that UNMIT, acting under the terms of its
mandate to enhance democratic rule and advance
political dialogue, will also work to ensure that the
vote goes smoothly.

The achievements made in Timor-Leste give its
people a great deal to be proud of. We salute the
determination shown by President Ramos-Horta, Prime
Minister Gusmao and their Government. We also again
extend our thanks to Special Representative Khare, the
dedicated UNMIT staff who work alongside him and
the United Nations country team. We deeply appreciate
the labours and sacrifices of the bilateral and
multilateral partners in Timor-Leste and the diligent
efforts of the international security forces working
there to help maintain law and stability. The people of
Timor-Leste still have much to do, but they must know
that they do not stand alone.

