I would like to thank the Niger for organizing this debate, as well as Ms. Mushikiwabo, Ms. Keita and Minister Mnatsakanyan for their briefings. As you, Sir, recalled, it was in Niamey that 50 years ago 21 States established a cooperation agreement, which became the most universal international organization after the United Nations. Our meeting today has a symbolism that is all the stronger because five of the founders of the Security Council are among its current members. The commitment to the French language and multilingualism unites us, and that is why we are such fervent defenders of it. But, beyond that, we share a common identity among Francophones based on a set of values, foremost among which are solidarity, cultural diversity and human rights. During the crisis that we are going through, the International Organization of la Francophonie (IOF) has been able to mobilize to back innovation, ensure the continuity of education for millions of children and support the empowerment of vulnerable women and girls. I would like to emphasize two points. First, I want to commend the growing role of the Francophonie in peace and security, particularly since the adoption of the Bamako Declaration on Democracy in 2000. In that context, at the Francophonie summits, members reiterate their commitment to strengthening their participation in peacekeeping operations. The commitment of the International Organization of la Francophonie to democracy also guides its work in supporting the holding of free, reliable and transparent elections. One obviously recalls the important efforts made in some countries by former Secretary-General Abdou Diouf and the major role of his good offices in favour of reconciliation. In recent years, the OIF has been involved ina very large number of electoral processes, through actions ranging from the organization of training seminars to the deployment of electoral observation missions. Most recently in Mali, the International Organization of la Francophonie reacted in unison with the United Nations to condemn the 18 August coup de force. It is now essential that the civil political transition be put in place as quickly as possible and be accompanied by Mali's international partners, particularly the Economic Community of West African States. The OIF could opportunely play a role, in cooperation with the United Nations, in long-term support for the next electoral process, in order to allow a return to constitutional order. In Guinea, the International Organization of la Francophonie has again this year advocated for a resumption of dialogue. In the run-up to the presidential election of 18 October, which we remain concerned about, we believe that the United Nations and the International Organization of la Francophonie could usefully call on all Guinean actors to assume responsibility, engage in dialogue and exercise the utmost restraint. We welcome the deepening of the relationship between the International Organization of the Francophonie and the African Union and the contribution that this dialogue can make to preventive multilateral diplomacy. Secondly, I wish to emphasize that the United Nations could benefit more from the OIF's expertise, particularly in the field. As many peacekeeping operations take place in French-speaking countries, proficiency in French is a guarantee of effectiveness and should therefore more systematically be a precondition for deployment. The OIF is developing, alongside France and the United Nations, joint training for personnel, particularly women, deployed in operations. Similarly, the Boutros-Ghali Peacekeeping Observatory promotes discussion among French-speaking contributing States, the Security Council and the Secretariat. Its publications are valuable, and we would benefit from disseminating them and referring to them in our work at the Council. For its part, France will continue to work closely with its partners to develop cooperation among French-speaking countries at the United Nations and between the United Nations and the OIF. This has recently resulted in the establishment of a francophone platform of the Security Council, which makes our work more inclusive, and | thank the President of the Niger for activating it today. I therefore call for the continuation of this fruitful francophone cooperation and for the strengthening of ties between la Francophonie and the United Nations.
