Mr. Miranda Rivero (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefings by Judge Theodor Meron, President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the
Mechanism, and would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate our full support for their work in carrying out
their mandates. My delegation expresses its appreciation
to Judge Meron for his work during his mandate. We
also underscore our gratitude for the delegation of
Peru's active and diligent work in chairing the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, and we
thank the Office of Legal Affairs for providing its
assistance and cooperation for the Group's meetings.

The work done by the International Criminal
Tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia over
the past 24 years has made a significant contribution to
the fight against impunity and played a leading role in
the pursuit ofjustice. In that regard, given the closure of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in
December 2017, the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals has the major responsibility
of concluding the remaining trials transferred to
its jurisdiction in a timely and effective manner.
Accordingly, it must implement its mandate established
pursuant to resolution 1966 (2010) and the provisions
of resolution 2422 (2018) as effectively as possible, not
only while continuing to uphold the jurisdiction, rights
and obligations of both Tribunals, but also while taking
on the important role of strengthening and supporting
the work of national jurisdictions, in keeping with
its establishment as a small, temporary and effective
structure whose functions and size are to be reduced
over time. In that regard, we want to highlight the
assistance and cooperation provided by the Mechanism
and the Office ofthe Prosecutor to nationaljurisdictions
to strengthen and develop their capacities. We also
emphasize and acknowledge the work they are doing to
promote and preserve collective memory, as has been
done in Sarajevo, where the first public information
centre has been inaugurated, continuing and building
on the initiative of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia.

We have taken note of the progress in the
Mechanism's jurisdictional activities during the
reporting period, as well as its conduct of appeal
hearings and sentencing review proceedings. In that
regard, we would like to highlight the holding of remote
hearings as an innovative and effective initiative that
should continue to be enhanced so as to ensure the
greatest possible interaction among judges and address
the risks that might arise in connection with securing
data and confidential information in such cases. We
also want to emphasize the Mechanism's capacity to
perform simultaneous functions in cases transferred to
it from the two Tribunals, and we urge it to continue to
harmonize and integrate its work while ensuring that
the differences in working cultures between the offices
in Arusha and The Hague do not affect it. We also note
the issues related to the Mechanism's use ofits allocated
resources and urge that they be used effectively in order
to enhance and maximize the Mechanism's work.

Despite the progress that has been made, we are
concerned about the number of fugitives who have yet
to be tried before the Tribunal despite the Prosecutor's
continuing coordination efforts and requests for
assistance. In that regard, we should keep in mind that
States' cooperation is crucial to preventing impunity
from undermining the work of the Mechanism and
the international community in general. We therefore
urge States to support the Prosecutor's efforts by
collaborating and cooperating as much as possible. We
also believe that it is important to reiterate that criminal
responsibility lies with the individual and that no
community or nation is responsible for acts committed
by private individuals. In line with the spirit ofjustice
that the Mechanism pursues and with the importance
of ensuring accountability and reparation for victims,
such people must always answer for their acts.

Early releases and the problems that result from
such decisions are issues that urgently demand our
attention, since there are gaps in the criteria that must
be considered in their application. In that regard, we
call on the Mechanism to take the necessary measures
through its various bodies to resolve that issue and
ensure that the legacy and work of the Tribunals
for Rwanda and Yugoslavia are not undermined or
nullified by the release of individuals who either deny
or refuse responsibility for crimes against humanity.
Similarly, reducing and commuting sentences runs
counter to their very purpose, which is rehabilitating
and reintegrating perpetrators.

We take note of the progress reported regarding
the recommendations by the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on the Mechanism's functions and
work from 2016 to 2017, and we encourage its various
bodies to continue implementing them in full. Lastly,
we encourage the Mechanism to continue to develop
its jurisdictional activities with determination, while
making effective and efficient use of the resources
allocated to it, keeping its temporary status in mind and
taking the necessary steps to implement appropriate
measures for the short and medium term.

