Mr. Nsanze (Burundi) (spoke in French): The
Government of Burundi thanks the Secretary-General
for his fourth report (S/2008/745) on the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB), which
is a succinct, comprehensive and very detailed document.
The absence in the report of up-to-date information would
have detracted from its quality had the 4 December
summit at Bujumbura of heads of State of the Regional
Peace Initiative for Burundi not been a success.

Beyond expressing my gratitude for the report, I
would like to express the gratitude of the Government
of Burundi to the Secretary-General and his Executive
Representative for their commitment to ensuring the
success of the peace process in my country. The
Government of Burundi particularly thanks the
Secretary-General for his statement to the summit of
the Regional Peace Initiative for Burundi. His
contribution no doubt played a role in convincing the
Government and the Parti pour la Liberation du Peuple
Hutu-Forces Nationales de Liberation that concluding
the peace process was no longer subject to negotiation.
5
I would also like to take this opportunity once
again to warmly thank Minister Charles Nqakula,
Facilitator of the peace process, and the heads of State
of the countries of the Regional Initiative, who once
again responded promptly to the international
community's appeals to resolve a situation that had
become explosive. I should also like to thank the
President of the Commission of the African Union,
who travelled to Bujumbura to lend his presence to the
summit.

In commenting on the report of the Secretary-
General, allow me to begin by referring to the final
paragraphs of that document. In his observations, the
Secretary-General, confident that the peace process in
Burundi would be concluded in the near future,
recommends in paragraphs 90 to 93 that the Security
Council extend the mandate of BINUB for 12 months.
We fully support that wise and very sensible proposal.
We also support carrying out a technical assessment of
pending problems and the progress made in June 2009
so as to prepare for the transfer of BINUB from the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to the
Department of Political Affairs. The Government of
Burundi hopes to be involved in the assessment work
to be carried out in the field.

To return to the beginning of the report, I note
that the second part focuses on the main events that
took place between 15 May and 10 November 2008. I
shall not dwell on them; as I said earlier, the summit of
the Regional Peace Initiative for Burundi that took
place on 4 December 2008 in Bujumbura produced
positive results that restored hope for everyone. This
represents a decisive step, and the Government would
now like to move on to the next stage.

Moreover, we inform the Council that Mr. Agathon
Rwasa met yesterday with His Excellency President
Pierre Nkurunziza in order to decide together the first
steps to be taken in this regard. We hope that the other
partners in the process will rapidly implement their
commitments in order to allow the two stakeholders to
advance.

Allow me to comment, however, on paragraph 14,
which refers to incidents in which BINUB vehicles
carrying personnel on board were attacked. We would
like to inform the Council that the legal dispute
between the former employees of the United Nations
Operation in Burundi and of BINUB is currently being
studied by the national bodies responsible for labour
regulations in terms of international labour law. Their
conclusions should settle this issue once and for all.

The third part of the report concerns peacebuilding
and the integration of United Nations system activities.
Burundi welcomes all efforts deployed by the United
Nations system for the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Support Strategy
over the past two years. We hope that its extension
through 2009 will provide an opportunity to enhance
the implementation process, in particular through a
better alignment of all activities of United Nations
agencies with the priorities of the Strategy.

In the future, we will once again take up the United
Nations strategic priorities for the period from 2010 to
2014, which were discussed with the Government and
have recently been adopted. However, the issue of
democratic governance, which constitutes the fourth
priority, not the second, should be revisited, particularly
with regard to the organization of the 2010 elections, in
order to clear up any misunderstandings with regard to
the upcoming electoral process. The Government is
currently establishing an independent national electoral
commission. The names of the members of the
commission will be announced in the coming days. The
competencies of the commission will not overlap with
the initiatives of the United Nations system.

We were also struck by paragraphs 32 and 47 in
the report, which deal with freedom of opinion and
expression and by all paragraphs addressing human
rights in general, namely paragraphs 44 through 53.
The Government is currently setting up an independent
national human rights commission. Moreover, draft
laws, including a new penal code, and specific measures
are being developed in order to guarantee peace for all
citizens. Just recently, a high-level delegation travelled
to Geneva in order to explain all these human rights
issues in Burundi. A report was drawn up and discussed
and recommendations were issued.

We will not dwell on that debate, but we would
like to state that, while a number of cases of arrests and
imprisonment were reported, that should not overshadow
all the efforts of the Government to restore order in a
country that is emerging from 40-odd years of military
dictatorship with ethnic and regional dimensions and a
dozen years of inter-ethnic civil war. It is important to
reassert the value of the principle that no one is above
the law, including journalists who might be tempted to
08-64243
express themselves without regard to the ethical code
that governs their profession.

With regard to the economic situation, we
welcome the fact that our country has attained an
economic growth rate of 4.5 per cent. We take this
opportunity to warmly thank the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund, the Peacebuilding
Support Office and all our bilateral partners for their
support to our country in its journey towards social and
economic recovery. We encourage them to continue in
this direction. We are convinced that we will be able to
further enhance our performance if we reach the
completion point as planned and if our external debts
are forgiven.

We would like to encourage prospective investors
to visit Burundi. The Government has created an
environment conducive to foreign investment through
our new investment code. Tourism and the mining
sector are the main industries favoured by such
investors.

To conclude, we welcome the conclusions
reached at the summit of the Regional Peace Initiative
held on 4 June 2008 and the commitments made by the
parties concerned. We hope that the Security Council
will endorse them and support their implementation.

