Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): It is a great
pleasure to see you, Sir, the Foreign Minister of Malaysia,
in the Chair during this important meeting.

 

The Netherlands joins other delegations in welcoming
Malaysia's timely initiative to devote an open Council
debate to the subject of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. Like others, we have repeatedly advocated a
fully integrated approach to the familiar string of preventive
diplomacy, peacemaking, peacekeeping and post-conflict
peace-building, but any delegation that tries to put this into
practice by suggesting that the Council focus its attention
on an element of that sequence which comes after the
conclusion of a peace agreement will invariably meet the
objection that the matter is already being discussed in other
United Nations bodies.

We commend the Malaysian delegation for not having
allowed itself to be deterred by this objection. Excessive
fear of duplication stands in the way of the development of
an integrated approach. It is right for the Security Council
to discuss disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes because the success or failure of the
reintegration of ex-combatants may be largely determined
by decisions the Council will have to take in the earlier
phases, that is, while it is still occupied with its core task
of trying to bring an armed conflict to an end.

Over the past 10 years, a number of large-scale
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes
have been set up and implemented, increasingly with the
active involvement of the international community. The
Netherlands has contributed to some of these programmes,
such as those in Guatemala, Rwanda, Angola, Mali and
Albania. Not all of these were success stories, but important
lessons can be learned from all of them. In this connection,
we welcome the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration principles and guidelines, which the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations Lessons Learned
Unit has recently released.

One of these lessons seems an obvious one, namely
that without the political will of the parties concerned, it is
difficult, if not impossible, to implement a disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme. It is true that
political will cannot be enforced, but in the context of a
truly integrated approach more could perhaps be done to
stimulate it. From the very beginning of international
involvement, parties could be made aware of their
collective vital interest in a functioning disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme. They could
indeed be made to realize that a credible disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme serves as an
indication that parties take their commitment to peace
seriously, and that the international community's
willingness to contribute to the larger post-conflict peace-
building process will largely depend on that perception.

It is essential that the Security Council pronounce
itself on the importance of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration in any peace agreement. The fact that
the subject is discussed in other bodies does not detract
from that. It is the Security Council that can monitor and
influence the drafting of a peace agreement from its initial
stage and make sure that all elements conducive to a
durable settlement are adequately incorporated in the
document. Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
we believe, are among these elements. A conflict cannot
simply be switched off, and a country where the fighting
has ended must never be left to its own devices.

There is no issue where this is more evident than
that of child soldiers. The problem of demobilization and
reintegration, already quite intractable in general, becomes
critically compounded where child soldiers are concerned.
It is obvious that ex-combatant children will require a
high degree of supervision for a considerable length of
time. A country that demobilizes its child soldiers but
then fails to accompany them until they have been fully
integrated into civilian society, is placing a ticking time
bomb at its own foundations.

Child soldiers may need to be re-educated, they may
require treatment, but they cannot be held accountable the
way their adult fellow ex-combatants are. This will often
be difficult enough, for some of the worst atrocities have
been committed by child soldiers. As to the accountability
of adults, however, there should be no doubt. The
Netherlands delegation has consistently maintained that
accountability and reconciliation are not incompatible. On
the contrary, we believe that lasting peace is not
attainable without accountability. This principle should
always be fully reflected in every programme of
reintegration of ex-combatants.

The representative of Finland will later in the debate
make a substantive contribution to our deliberations on
behalf of the European Union. It goes without saying that
the Netherlands fully associates itself with her statement.

