Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium fully associates itself with the
statements made by the observer of the European Union,
by the representative of Canada, on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, and by the
representative of Aregentina on behalf of the countries
that have endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration.

At the outset, I would like to thank the speakers for
their stimulating statements, and Sweden for organizing
this debate and for giving Belgium the opportunity
to participate. We also reiterate our support for
resolution 2427 (2018), adopted this morning, which we
co-sponsored. In that regard, I would like to commend
Sweden's leadership on this issue, which has led, after
lengthy discussions, to a robust text that brings new
elements to the mandate.

We believe that prevention is the only lasting
solution to the problem of children's participation
in armed conflict. The Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/465) stresses that preventing violations against
children affected by conflict should be one of the main
concerns of the international community. We must
therefore do more to address the problem by ensuring
the inclusion of child protection as an integral part
of any comprehensive strategy to prevent and resolve
conflict with a view to achieving sustainable peace and
by encouraging the active participation of children in
the development of such strategies.

It is also very important to enable children affected
by armed conflict to undertake the journey from victim
to child in a peaceful society. We welcome the release
of more than 10,000 children and their reintegration
into their communities in 2017. However, that is just
a first step. We share the Secretary-General's View
that it is vital to ensure strong and ongoing support
for psychosocial and educational reintegration in order
to break the cycle of violence and consolidate peace.
Unfortunately, the psychosocial well-being of children
is often forgotten, even if those invisible wounds are
deep and take a very long time to heal. This work is
essential as a prevention tool and breaks the vicious
cycle of violence. I must underscore that long-term
reintegration, including psychosocial support that
exceeds the current six-month programmes is crucial.
In that regard, I also wish to draw attention to the
specific needs of girls. We must redouble our efforts to
address the impact of conflict on girls.

The issue of children in armed conflict is
multidimensional and requires a coordinated and
comprehensive response involving all the relevant
actors. Belgium therefore welcomes the approach
of the Special Representative, who has initiated a
process to strengthen cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations.

Belgium intends to engage specifically on this issue
during its term on the Security Council in the coming
two years. The challenges are enormous, as borne out
by the 35 per cent increase in serious violations in 2017
and the worrying trend of denial of humanitarian access
for civilians as a new tactic of war.

In conclusion, Belgium appreciates the close
cooperation with the Special Representative and looks
forward to the opening of an office of the Special
Representative in Brussels very soon.

