Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): I would like to
start by thanking the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2017/1056) on the situation
in Afghanistan and the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We
appreciate the briefing by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Yamamoto. We recognize the critical
role played by UNAMA, United Nations agencies and
the international community in supporting the Afghan
people and the National Unity Government. We are also
grateful to Ambassador Umarov, Executive Director
Fedotov and Ms. Wazhma Frogh for their briefings.

Afghanistan still faces multiple and complex
challenges to its security, stability and development.
Its people continue to pay a heavy price because of
the instability and violence affecting the country. We
note from the report of the Secretary-General that
the security situation remains highly volatile. That is
further compounded by the increasing activities of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in the country,
which has claimed responsibility for numerous attacks
over the past three months.

With regard to the political situation in the country,
we note the continued and cooperative relationships
among the top leadership, and the efforts of the
National Unity Government in building credibility
around its reform agenda are commendable. In that
context, the important measures taken by the National
Unity Government to fight corruption and enhance
accountability and electoral reforms are encouraging.
The holding of peaceful and democratic parliamentary
and district council elections within the set time frame
is indeed important. We note the activation of the
Independent Election Commission and progress made
in the preparations for the elections. Furthermore,
we appreciate President Ghani's increased political
outreach aimed at enlisting opposition movements so
as to ensure greater political inclusion.

However, the fact that there have been no
significant steps in efforts to move the peace process
with the Taliban forward remains a source of concern.
Undoubtedly, the long-term security and stability
of Afghanistan can only be ensured through a
comprehensive and inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned reconciliation and political process. We
welcome the National Unity Government's bilateral
and multilateral engagement with neighbouring
countries and the international community with a view
to making the regional environment more conducive
to facilitating the peace process. In that regard, the
efforts of UNAMA aimed at promoting and supporting
peace-talk initiatives, reconciliation, dialogue and
support for social and economic development with full
respect for the country's sovereignty and leadership,
remain very important.
Without sustaining inclusive economic growth and
development, the peace and security challenges faced
by Afghanistan cannot be effectively addressed. That is
why the National Unity Government needs coordinated
and comprehensive support from the international
community in order to move its political reform and
national development priorities forward, as envisaged
in the Afghanistan national peace and development
framework. It is vital that the international community
sustain its engagement and deliver on its various
commitments in that regard.

Lastly, concerning the engagement of the Security
Council, we welcome the recent visit by the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011) to Afghanistan and the Chair's engagement with
the leadership of the country. Next month, under the
Kazakh presidency, the issue of Afghanistan will be
high on the agenda of the Council, and we look forward
to the high-level ministerial discussion on the matter.

I should like to conclude by once again expressing
our support for and solidarity with the people and the
Government of Afghanistan in their Herculean task of
addressing the many challenges and threats facing their
country, as well as in the difficult process of fostering
peace and stability through reconciliation, dialogue,
inclusive growth and development.

