The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Australia, Botswana, Canada, Denmark, Finland,
Germany, Guatemala, Italy, Liechtenstein, Norway,
Peru, the Republic of Korea, Solomon Islands, South
Africa and Switzerland, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda.

In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Patricia O'Brien,
Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and Legal
Counsel of the United Nations.

It is so decided.

I invite Ms. O'Brien to take a seat at the Council
table.

I should also like to inform the members of the
Council that I have received a letter from His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, in which he requests to
be invited, in his capacity as acting head of the
2
delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Serrano.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Pedro Serrano to take the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2010/322, which contains a
letter dated 18 June 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Mexico to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Her Excellency Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro,
Deputy Secretary-General, and by Ms. Patricia
O'Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs
and Legal Counsel of the United Nations.

I now invite the Deputy Secretary-General to take
the floor.


