Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. China
appreciates and supports his good offices. I have also
listened very carefully to the statements made by the
Observer of the State of Palestine and the representative
of Israel.

Israel's military operation in Gaza has lasted for
halfa month. In spite ofrepeated appeals by the Security
Council and the international community, the Israeli
military operation has continued to expand in scope,
resulting in a serious deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Gaza. China is deeply concerned and
saddened by the situation.

China is resolutely opposed to any use of force
against civilians and is particularly opposed to
targeting residential areas and hospitals. Such actions,
which violate international humanitarian law, are
unacceptable.

China urges the parties concerned to stop firing
rockets into Israel. The vicious cycle of violence for
violence between Israel and Palestine must stop. China
urges Israel, Palestine and other parties to respond in
good faith to the appeals of the international community
and cooperate with international good offices, achieve
an immediate unconditional ceasefire and refrain from
taking any actions that might escalate tensions, so that
calm can be achieved as soon as possible.

China urges the international community to step up
its humanitarian assistance and calls for the opening of
all crossings in Gaza and the provision of all facilities
for humanitarian relief in order to ease the humanitarian
crisis in Gaza.

The negative effect ofthe conflict in Gaza has begun
to spill over into Syria, with security implications for the
borders between Lebanon and Israel and between Syria
and Israel. That has seriously threatened regional peace
and security. The Security Council and the international
community should take action to change that situation.
China supports the continued constructive role played
by Egypt and other countries in pushing for a ceasefire.

China's Special Envoy for the Middle East is now
visiting several countries in the region and is bringing
influence to bear on the parties concerned, with a View
to bringing about a ceasefire, a cessation of violence
and peace talks. China is actively following up on the
new delivery of humanitarian relief to Palestine.

China hopes that the relevant players of the
international community will enhance coordination and
work in synergy to achieve a ceasefire and the easing of
tension. China has always believed that the coexistence
of the two countries, Israel and Palestine - to be
achieved through peace talks - is the only and correct
way to resolve the Palestinian issue. It is also in the
fundamental interests of both sides.

We hope that Israel and Palestine will end their
conflict soon and make efforts to address the deep-
seated problems in their bilateral relations in order to
avoid a repetition oftragedies. We urge Israel to stop its
settlement activities and release detained Palestinians
so as to create conditions for the restarting of the
peace talks. We are ready to join with the international
community to work unremittingly for a comprehensive,
fair and lasting solution of the problems in the Middle
East.

China is following closely the situation in Syria. We
feel deeply for the suffering of its people. We welcome
resolution 2165 (2014), adopted not long ago by the
Security Council, on the humanitarian issue in Syria.
China has always believed that a political solution is the
only way out of the Syrian problem. The international
community should stay the course to work out a political
settlement on the question of Syria, continue to engage
in coordination and cooperation and sustain its positive
efforts. China calls on all parties in Syria to implement
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) as soon as
possible, start an inclusive political transition and find
a middle path that takes into account the interests of all
sides and which is based on the country's conditions, so
as to achieve a political solution of the Syrian problem.

China welcomes the appointment by the Secretary-
General of Mr. Staffan de Mistura as the new Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria and
Ambassador Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy as the Deputy
Special Envoy. We will continue to enhance cooperation
with the relevant players of the international community
to work towards a proper solution of the Syrian problem.

