Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his informative briefing and for
the report before us (see S/20ll/682). We welcome his
work and his contribution to peace and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Brazil is firmly committed to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
support all efforts to strengthen the State at the national
level while preserving the rights and prerogatives of all
communal entities. Respect for the international and
legal frameworks for the division of power is key to
stability.

We welcome the positive developments during
the reporting period. We encourage further efforts
towards the consolidation of institutions. Priority
should be given to reconciling different views and
establishing a fully functioning State-level
Government. We join previous speakers in expressing
concern at statements and measures by the entities that
question the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Challenges to the Dayton Peace
Agreement and its institutional arrangements, as well
as divisive rhetoric, should be avoided. We hope that
the dialogue among the stakeholders can move
decisively away from such statements and towards
constructive suggestions on the way forward. In that
regard, we call on all actors to respect the authority of
and cooperate with the High Representative.

We are encouraged by the initiation of talks
between party leaders on Government formation and
reforms. We encourage further efforts to consolidate
such talks and achieve inclusive participation. We are
also pleased that the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has remained calm despite confrontations
and rhetoric. We fully support the renewal of the
Security Council's authorization for European Union
Force.

A divided leadership in Bosnia and Herzegovina
can only bring more difficulties to the well-being of its

populations. We encourage all parties to put differences
aside and work towards a solution that strengthens
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The country should continue
to be supported in its pursuit of political stability and
socio-economic development. We remain convinced
that, with international support, the Bosnian people
will succeed in reaching that goal.

In concluding, let me associate myself with the
remarks made by Mr. Inzko on the very positive impact
of Bosnia and Herzegovina's Security Council
membership and on the quality of the work and the
contribution being made by Ambassador Ivan Barbalic'
and his team to the work of the Council.

