The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2009/267). I would also like to thank
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General Ambassador
John McNee, Chairperson of the Sierra Leone country-
specific configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
and Her Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Sierra Leone for their presentations.

Developments over the past months have shown
that the advances that have been made in Sierra Leone
in the consolidation of peace, reconciliation and
prosperity remain fragile. Nevertheless, the political
stakeholders in Sierra Leone have also proved that
when confronted by problems they are able to rise to
the occasion and address their outstanding problems in
a peaceful and constructive manner.

Turkey welcomes the joint communique issued
on 2 April in Freetown, and is pleased to see that
momentum in the right direction has been maintained
in Sierra Leone. That sets an excellent example not
only for Sierra Leone's immediate neighbourhood, but
also for Africa in general. Turkey applauds both the
Government and the opposition for showing leadership
in the face of adversity. We also congratulate the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) for continuing to play a
crucial role in consolidating progress in what was once
a war-torn nation.

Sierra Leone still faces important challenges, and
there is much work to be done. The task of
concurrently fighting corruption, drug trafficking and
youth unemployment cannot be taken lightly. Turkey
believes that, with the support of UNIPSIL and the
international community, the Sierra Leonean
Government will be able to effectively surmount those
obstacles. In that vein, we call on the international
community to keep supporting Sierra Leone as it
successfully navigates the challenges and difficulties
that it faces.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Von der Schulenburg
to respond to questions and comments.

