Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I should like to begin by thank Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for her briefing on the latest developments in the
situation concerning the Kerch Strait.

On 30 October (see S/PV.8386) and on several
other occasions, Equatorial Guinea encouraged the
parties to respect the full implementation of the Minks
agreements and to refrain from actions that could
aggravate and destabilize the situation in the country
and in the region. That is why my delegation regrets
the recent events in the Sea of Azov with respect to the
situation in question, and notes with great concern the
escalation of the situation that led to the convening of
this meeting.

The situation in the Sea of Azov poses new threats
to stability in the region. That is why reducing tension
so as to avoid an escalation of the situation is a top
priority at this time and requires the cooperation and
resolve of both parties. In that regard, we call on the
parties concerned to remain calm and refrain from
taking any action that could lead to a further escalation
of the situation. We also encourage them to resolve the
situation through political and diplomatic dialogue for
a peaceful and political solution to the crisis.

Given the complexity and fragility of the situation,
we believe that it is important to harmonize the
efforts of the parties. We therefore believe that only
the coordinated and harmonized efforts of the parties
involved will guarantee a fair and definitive solution
to the situation. In that regard, my delegation urges
the parties to find a political solution through dialogue
and negotiations, based on respect for international
law, the principles of international relations and the
maintenance of international regional peace, security
and stability. We emphasize the need for the parties to
respect the Charter ofthe United Nations and to resolve
their disputes in accordance with existing bilateral and
multilateral agreements.

In conclusion, we remind the parties once again that
a solution to the issue can be achieved only by peaceful
means, through direct, frank and inclusive negotiations.
In that regard, we urge the parties to exercise the utmost
restraint in order to defuse the situation, intensify their
efforts and commit themselves to avoiding actions that
could escalate tensions.

