The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Kuwait.

At the outset, we thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco,
Mr. Smai'l Chergui and Ambassador Jurg Lauber for
their briefings.

Ever since the constitutional referendum was
held on 17 May 2018, with the participation of most
Burundian political parties, the situation has been
relatively calm in comparison with the outbreak of
the crisis in 2015. We hope that this calm situation
will continue until the presidential elections take
place in 2020. We hope that the elections will include
all groups of the Burundian population and enjoy the
participation of all political parties, as well as being
free, fair, transparent and credible. We also hope that
freedom of expression will be guaranteed, along with
the participation of stakeholders from civil society,
including youth, women and representatives of regional
and international organizations.

I would like to pay tribute to the Government of
Burundi for its efforts to advance the political process,
such as the adoption of a road map before the elections,
the creation of the National Independent Electoral
Commission and the decision to fully fund the 2020
elections through the national budget.

President Nkurunziza's announcement that he
will not be standing for re-election in the upcoming
elections is an important guarantee that the Government
of Burundi is serious about holding these elections next
year and transferring power to a new President. In this
context, we would also like to commend the efforts of
the African Union and the East African Community
to achieve a peaceful settlement of the political and
security situations in the Republic of Burundi through
an inclusive dialogue based on the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement.

We also hope that the States members of the East
African Community will play a more active role and
engage with the Government of Burundi, as well as with
international and regional organizations such as the
United Nations, the African Union and the European
Union, to achieve the desired stability in Burundi.
Dialogue with neighbouring countries and international
and regional organizations is one of the most important
components of a lasting solution in Burundi.

The security situation in Burundi has been generally
calm of late and improving despite certain acts of
violence and the continued activities of armed groups.
In that regard, we hope that the security situation will
continue to improve as it has been since the beginning of
the year. We also hope that the Government of Burundi
will seize this opportunity of improvement and relative
stability to intensify efforts to convene the national
dialogue, bring all political parties to the negotiating
table and reach an agreement in order to ensure safe
and non-violent elections in 2020.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, the
human rights situation and the return of refugees,
there have been some improvements in comparison
with 2017. There has been a decrease in the percentage
of the population exposed to food insecurity. However,
that remains a concern, especially in the context of
continued human rights violations, acts of violence
and enforced disappearances. Those are all violations
of the principles of human rights and international
humanitarian law. We call for them to stop and for their
perpetrators to be held accountable and be brought
to justice.

With regard to the gradual return of refugees,
following the tripartite agreement signed among
Tanzania, Burundi and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, I would like to underscore
the need to intensify efforts and activities on the part
of the Burundian Government to ensure the economic
and social reintegration of the refugees and provide
them with the necessary guarantees once they return
to their homes.

On the development and socioeconomic situations,
I would like to stress that development and reform
efforts are key factors for any Government that wishes
to promote the well-being of its society and ensure a safe
future. The adoption by the Government of Burundi, on
22 August 2018, ofa lO-year national development plan
that includes goals linked to sustainable development
principles and a focus on Burundi's rural areas is a
step in the right direction towards reform, improving
the livelihoods and economic conditions of Burundi's
population and achieving mutual benefit for all social
groups. We therefore hope that the development plan
will lead to significant progress in the country's
economy and help contribute to stability in the security,
political and humanitarian situations.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Burundi.

