Mr. Zmeevskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Allow me at the outset to thank you,
Mr. President, and your country for taking the initiative
to hold a meeting of the Security Council on such an
urgent issue. We are also grateful to the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), Mr. Yury Fedotov, for their substantive
briefings.

The events of recent years have shown that
globalization provides mankind not only with new
possibilities for collective development but also with
new criminal challenges. The way we respond to such
challenges will determine the political stability of
entire States and regions.

We observe dangerous trends in West Africa and
the Sahelo-Saharan region. Unfortunately, in 2011
problems increased in that region, one of the top being
the task of ensuring security. That issue has grown
exponentially against the backdrop of terrorist events
in Libya and other criminal threats and challenges.

We note with concern the increased activity of
organized crime, particularly piracy, in the Gulf of
Guinea and the growth of illegal drug trafficking.
Smuggling and the sale of weapons, including in small
arms and light weapons, through the territories of a
number of countries in the Sahelo-Saharan region,
along with continuing illegal migration, pose a threat
to the international community. Experts believe that the
leakage of Libyan weapons is linked to the activities of
terrorist groups. Their activities have spread
geographically and the number of terrorist attacks is

increasing, as a result of interlinking with organized
crime and drug trafficking. The activity of terrorist
groups such as Al-Qaida in the Maghreb countries is of
particular concern.

Old forms of crime persist - human trafficking
for labour and sexual exploitation, the use of forced
labour. The smuggling of oil and diamonds continues.
Behind many of those crimes lies corruption.

Illegal drug trafficking provides considerable
financial support for terrorism, violent extremism and
organized crime. Not only has West Africa become one
of the main hubs for smuggling cocaine to Europe, but
the region has also adapted to the production of
synthetic drugs, and major new routes for Afghan
heroin have developed there. Tension is growing in
inter-religious relations. Suffice it to recall the
churches blown up by the terrorist group Boko Haram
during the Kurban Bayram holiday toward the end of
last year.

In the context of ensuring security in that region,
we propose that the main effort be conducted by the
countries of the region, in a leadership role, with the
support of the international community, in a
comprehensive effort focused on the following areas.

First, the flow of Libyan arms needs to be
addressed. Precisely with that goal in mind, Russia last
autumn launched the initiative for the adoption of
Security Council resolution 2017 (2011), which places
responsibility on the new authorities in Libya, its
neighbours and the international community for the
earliest solution to that urgent matter. The Panel of
Experts of the Sanctions Committee on Libya and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
have also noticed the significant threat to security
posed by the uncontrolled spread of Libyan weapons.

Of particular concern is the flow of man-portable
air defence systems (MANPADS) and missile
launchers, which threaten civil aviation not only in the
Sahelo-Saharan region but far beyond its borders.
Information has been received regarding interest in
MANPADS on the part of the terrorist organizations
Al-Qaida in the Maghreb and Boko Haram. We suggest
that work by United Nations bodies to resolve that
problem could be reinforced by efforts in the
framework of the Global Counterterrorism Forum. We
believe it is important that the Counterterrorism Forum
respond to the stated readiness of the Sahel quartet to
cooperate in preventing the spread of Libyan weapons
and in taking further steps to implement resolution
2017 (2011).

Secondly, given that it is more than likely that
Libyan weapons will fall into the hands of terrorists,
the growth in transnational organized crime and drug
trafficking means that the security capacity of the
Sahelo-Saharan Governments must be strengthened.
We must implement broad, integrated measures that
emphasize enhanced border security, protection of
airports, intensified exchange of information and the
training the staff of law enforcement bodies. None of
that can be accomplished without international support.

We support the activities of the United Nations
and its Office on Drugs and Crime, and we are
strengthening our partnership with the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and other African regional structures that
address the issue of combating criminal challenges.

It would also be useful to establish a broad
regional platform to combat such threats. That would
respond to the ECOWAS regional plan to combat
organized crime and drug trafficking and would
support specialized coastal initiatives for West Africa,
established with the support of the United Nations and
INTERPOL. We should maximize use of the platform
developed by UNODC for an integrated regional
programme for West Africa for 2010-2014, as well as
country-based programmes.

Thirdly, in the longer term, we must pay greater
attention to de-radicalizing the population, especially
the young. Emphasis should be placed on addressing
problems of employment and in the area of education.
Particular attention must be paid to increasing the
effectiveness of efforts to counter extremist tendencies,
which are the ideological basis and the breeding
ground for the actions of terrorist groups in the region.
It is essential to create in the region, under the auspices
of the United Nations and UNESCO, an atmosphere
that rejects new challenges and threats, and to work
with the media and with the structures of civil society
to achieve that goal. We must also cut off at the root all
attempts to draw the regional diaspora abroad into
terrorist activity.
Fourthly, ensuring an effective legal component in
order to combat those criminal challenges is of utmost
importance. First and foremost, that concerns, of
course, strict respect for the provisions of international
law and of the Charter of the United Nations.

Of great importance in establishing a broad
anti-criminal front is ensuring full-fledged
participation by States of the region in the fundamental
international agreements, including the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime of
2000 and its Protocols, the United Nations Convention
against Corruption of 2003, the United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances and the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. No less important
is ensuring the establishment and the implementation
of domestic laws in line with the provisions of the
international treaties. We note the key role played by
the UNODC in providing such technical support to
States of the region.

Fifthly, it would be useful to task UNODC, as
part of its global research into financial flows from
various types of criminal activities, to pay particular
attention to that problem as it relates to West Africa
and the Sahel region. Disrupting the financial basis for
international criminal syndicates has led to major
success in combating them.

Sixthly, we consider intrinsically related the issues
of security and development in West Africa and the
Sahel region. We advocate the design by countries of the
region, with the participation of the donor community,
of an integrated comprehensive socio-economic
strategy.

A significant role could be played here by using
the potential of international organizations such as the
United Nations Development Programme, United
Nations Industrial Development Organization and the
Food and Agriculture Organization in implementing
programmes aimed at job creation in countries of the
region and involving the business community in efforts
aimed at reducing the social influence in favour of
terrorism and other international criminal activity.

The Russian Federation has experience in the
implementation of such programmes, including in West
Africa. Our country emphasizes the provision of
humanitarian assistance through United Nations
channels. We are providing bilateral support to
countries of the region by training professional staff in
areas including health, construction and the staff of law
enforcement agencies.

We hope these thoughts will be taken into
account when the Secretary-General prepares specific
recommendations for the Security Council on further

steps to be taken in this area. We believe that their
implementation will comprise an important component
of global efforts of the international community aimed
at countering criminal challenges and threats and will
help to ensure security and stable development in the
countries of West Africa and the Sahel region.

It is important that this region be transformed into
a platform for cooperation among all interested parties
that is based on the principles of international law,
rather than an area of competition benefiting only
organized crime and international terrorism.

