Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
At the outset, my delegation wishes to associate itself
with the statement to be made on behalf of the
European Union by the representative of Ireland.

This public debate is taking place after several
weeks of work, during which the sponsors went to
great lengths to explain the draft resolution and closely
listened to Member States within and outside the
Security Council. This public debate is therefore taking
place at the right time and we hope that it will prove
constructive.

I understand that there may not be agreement on
the details of all the elements of the draft resolution as
it exists today, but I also understand from the
consultations that there is broad agreement. We are
clearly on the same wavelength. The very target of the
text - non-State actors and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery - is the subject of broad agreement. Each of
us is now aware of the aim of the text to fill a gap and
to strengthen the non-proliferation regime by asking
States to take the necessary measures, in particular
following the latest proliferation crises. Each of us is
aware of the gravity of the problem because we are
now in an era of wholesale terrorism and in which the
most dangerous technologies have become accessible
and are being trafficked. Each of us is aware that we
cannot remain passive.

As has been stressed by the European Union
presidency, Europe is resolutely committed to
strengthening the current non-proliferation system by
adopting a strategy in that regard. Others are
committed to that path, but, faced with this serious
threat, the Security Council has a role to play, which it
is doing through the draft resolution, based on the idea
that the measures to be taken to counter proliferation
activities are the responsibility of States. The Security
Council cannot take those measures in their stead, but
it can decide that they do need to take them.

That is what the text seeks to ensure in two
specific areas: the criminalization of the activities of
non-State actors and the establishment of security
measures for sensitive materials, export and border
controls, and the monitoring of export and transit
brokering activities. The Council is establishing the
goals, but it leaves each State free to define the
penalties, legal regulations and practical measures to be
adopted. The draft resolution does not establish those
aspects. It does not compel any State to abide by the
rules of instruments to which some States have chosen
not to accede.

The sponsors clearly realize that the text will
have even greater impact if it is understood by Member
States outside the Council. They have therefore
pursued broad consultations that have in particular led
them to meet with the Non-Aligned Movement and
other groups of States. That work has set the stage for
today's debate and increases the chances of seeing it
contribute to improving the text.

The consultations have forged broad agreement
on the gravity of the threat and have enabled us to
identify concerns. First, States have clearly expressed
the desire to incorporate a reference to disarmament.
Even if this draft resolution - which is exceptional
and highly targeted - does not solve every problem,
we understand that this issue is one of principle that is
very important to many. We have therefore supported
incorporating, at the beginning of the preamble, a
reference to disarmament obligations.

In addition, many countries have sought and
continue to seek clarifications on the follow-up
mechanism; on the timetable for reporting, which has
been deemed too brief; on the vague mandate of the
Committee; on the operating period, which has also
been deemed too brief; and on the unclear articulation
of its relationship to the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).

Lastly, there are widespread misgivings with
respect to the reference in the draft resolution to
Chapter VII of the Charter, which has sparked concerns
about a potential use of force to ensure the draft
resolution's implementation. I should like to allay that
fear by addressing the problem in depth. We believe
that we can mitigate this concern by enhancing the
follow-up mechanism, which must protect the
legitimate interests of States and coordinate Security
Council cooperation with them.

I should like to explain first that we believe the
reference to Chapter VII to be important for two
reasons. The first is a legal reason, as the reference
provides as a basis for the Council in this area the
notion that there is indeed a threat to international
peace and security. The second is a political reason.
Reference to Chapter VII reflects the seriousness of the
situation and the resolve of the Member States. Having
said that, I believe that we need to reconcile two
messages.

The first is that there is a serious threat, which we
need to meet with determination - hence, under
Chapter VII. The second is that we are resolved to
promote implementation based on cooperation and
respect for the sovereignty of States and to preclude
any coercion that is not justified, considered or
authorized by the Council. France is particularly
concerned to ensure such a balance and believes that
the draft resolution does just that, specifically by virtue
of the committee. We believe that it will go even
further towards giving States the necessary assurances
by providing that they submit their reports within an
improved timetable; by stressing the possibilities for
States that lack resources to be able enjoy international
assistance; by explaining that the Committee will
consider the reports on the basis of unanimity, with
expertise from the IAEA and the OPCW; and by
ensuring that decisions will be taken only by the
Council itself. We believe that the Committee will be
able to offer what is known in English as "due
process", providing all safeguards to States.

France believes that this public debate will help
the sponsors to spell out the provisions in this area with
respect to the committee which is, so far, that part of
the text that could be improved in terms of quality. We
have all said that we advocate effective multilateralism.
This text on weapons of mass destruction and non-State
players is, above all, implementation of the idea of
effective multilateralism on a subject that is of
particular concern for all countries. And this is the
belief that we have of the importance of what is at
stake, which means that France will not hesitate to
provide its support to this initiative and become a
sponsor of the text.

