Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic
of Korea appreciates the initiative of the United
States delegation in convening today's debate on this
important topic. We also thank Special Representative
Zerrougui, Under Secretary-General Ladsous, Deputy
Executive Director Brandt, Special Envoy Whitaker
and Sandra Uwiringiyimana for their participation and
for sharing their experiences. We also welcome Foreign
Minister Asselborn of Luxembourg.

As we speak in the Council today, millions of
children are trapped in armed conflicts all over the
world. Children in Syria are facing a dire situation
where they are killed, injured and displaced. Equally
horrible violations against children are taking place in
many areas, including Afghanistan, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq,
Palestine and South Sudan. With the changing character
and tactics of armed conflicts, children are facing
even more serious threats. The deliberate targeting of
schools, the military use of schools and children being
used to carry explosive devices are just some of the
despicable examples. Given those situations, allow me
to outline some areas where we could make greater
efforts.

First, more concrete and time-bound action plans
are necessary to protect children from the impacts of
armed conflicts. Despite increasing international efforts
to prohibit the recruitment of children as combatants,
non-State groups still constitute the large majority of
perpetrators. Different strategies of engagement, as
well as the identification of specific incentives, are
required based on lessons learned from previous cases.

Secondly, we need to offer greater support in
addressing the special needs of girls in conflict
situations. As demonstrated by the abduction of
schoolgirls in Nigeria and elsewhere, girls are under
constant threat of sexual violence and other forms of
abuse in conflict situations. They are often deprived of
education rights, raped and forced into marriage, which
has a lasting, detrimental impacts on their physical
and mental health. They are even rejected by their
own communities because of their association with
rebel groups, and are often bypassed in reintegration
programmes.

Thirdly, to protect children from being used as
combatants, it is critically important that armed groups
be kept from acquiring arms and weapons. The illicit
trade in small arms and weapons results in death,
injuries and maiming of children in armed conflicts.
The Arms Trade Treaty, adopted by the Generally
Assembly in April 2013, is a significant instrument for
arms control. It stipulates that exporting State parties
shall take into account the risk of covered arms being
used to commit acts of violence against children.

Lastly, we support vigorous measures to address
persistent perpetrators, who continue to commit
violations against children year after year, which
demonstrates the failure ofjustice. Ifwe are serious about
protecting children we should ensure accountability for
those perpetrators. Ending impunity is vital not only
for enhancing justice, but also for deterring potential
perpetrators. National legislations and judicial systems
should be empowered to protect and to prosecute such
crimes. International tribunals and Security Council
sanctions regimes should also play greater roles in that
regard.

