Mr. Simonovic': I thank you, Sir, for inviting me
to brief members of the Security Council on the human
rights situation in South Sudan.

When the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan was signed in
August 2015, it was largely received with optimism that
the parties to the conflict would abide by the declaration
of a permanent ceasefire and halt their attacks on the
civilian population. Small welcome steps have been
made in the implementation of the peace Agreement,
with crucial support from the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the wider international community. However, the
reconciliatory rhetoric propagated by Government and
opposition actors has deflected attention from the fact
that the parties to the conflict continue to attack, kill,
abduct, rape, arbitrarily detain and forcefully displace
civilians, and pillage and destroy their property.

In the six months since the signing of the peace
Agreement, a scorched-earth strategy has continued in
which civilians were burned alive in their homes, their
livestock raided and their means of livelihood destroyed.
In the greater Upper Nile region, Government forces
systematically razed villages to the ground in what
appears to be a deliberate strategy to deprive perceived
opposition supporters ofany means of securing a living,
thus forcing their displacement.

Attacks on civilians reveal horrific levels violence.
In Leer county, Unity state, a survivor told our staff
that her Village was attacked by a mix of Sudan
People's Liberation Army soldiers and armed youth in
late October. She described how the attackers shot and
killed her husband and then locked up her grandfather
in a storage room and burned him alive.

Children's rights violations and sexual violence
in conflict remain rampant, despite respective
commitments signed by the parties to conflict to cease
and prevent them. During an attack on Koch county,
one woman described how soldiers killed her husband,
then tied her to a tree and forced her to watch as her
15-year-old daughter was raped by at least 10 soldiers.
UNICEF estimates that about 16,000 children have been
recruited and used by all parties since the beginning
of the conflict, including over 400 children in the last
quarter of 2015.
Fortunately, violence in Unity and the greater
Upper Nile has subsided; however, new theatres of
violence are emerging in areas previously little affected
by direct hostilities, notably in the Equatorias. The
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has
received reports of killings, sexual and gender-based
violence, and the destruction and looting of civilian
property. In recent months, allegations of unlawful and
prolonged detention, mistreatment and extrajudicial
killings of civilians have been documented, particularly
in Western Equatoria state. An increasing number
of armed defence groups have emerged in response
to the Government's highly militarized approach to
addressing insecurity. With the diffusion of armed
conflict in all parts of the country, and the creation
of local armed groups fighting against Government
troops, South Sudan faces the risk of fragmentation and
related human rights violations.

While conflict-related violence remains a serious
concern, human rights are under attack throughout the
country. As UNMISS recently documented in a report
on the human rights situation, the space for freedom
of expression and dissent has narrowed considerably.
Several radio stations and newspapers have been closed
for having reported on topics deemed too critical of the
Government or, in the case of the Al Rai newspaper,
reportedly on the grounds that one of its board
members had recentlyjoined Sudan People's Liberation
Movement/Army in Opposition.

Human rights defenders and journalists have also
been intimidated, harassed, attacked, and detained. In
late December 2015, it was reported that ajournalist of
the El Tabeer newspaper had been arrested following
the publication of an article he had written, criticizing
the Government's economic policy. In 2015, seven
journalists were killed by unidentified gunmen. This
pattern of deliberately silencing dissenting voices
seriously contributes to the shrinking of democratic
space and negatively impacts the attainment of a
sustainable peace.

A series of reports have repeatedly concluded
that there are reasonable grounds to believe that gross
violations of international human rights law, serious
violations of international humanitarian law and
international crimes have been committed by the parties
to the conflict. These include human rights reports of
UNMISS, the report of the African Union Commission
of Inquiry on South Sudan, and the report of the Panel
of Experts established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015).
However, no action has been taken. Perpetrators of
these violations have not been held accountable. South
Sudan has a long history of forgiveness and amnesties,
even for the most serious crimes. To break this long-
standing cycle of impunity, and to prevent future
violations of international human rights law, we must
ensure that the transitional justice mechanisms outlined
in the Peace Agreement are implemented. Almost
total impunity so far contributes to incidents such as
the recent rampages, killings, wounding, burning and
looting in the UNMISS protection of civilians site in
Malakal. There needs to be accountability to contribute
to prevention.

Chapter V of the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict includes provisions to create a commission
for truth, reconciliation and healing, a hybrid court
for south sudan, and a compensation and reparation
authority. The establishment of these mechanisms in
line with international norms and standards is crucial to
achieving sustainable peace, but their formation faces
tremendous challenges. The need for resources will be
enormous and require the international community's
focus and funds over a long period of time. Once
established, an independent hybrid court will only be
able to put to trial the most senior officials responsible
for human rights violations and abuses. However, many
more perpetrators will need to face justice in South
Sudanese courts, which currently do not have the
capacity to conduct such trials.

In conclusion, let me put forward three
recommendations. First, I urge the South Sudanese
parties to the conflict to immediately cease all violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. The parties to the conflict must
abide by and implement their commitments made to end
hostilities, to prevent conflict-related sexual violence,
and to stop violations of child rights violations. The
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict needs
to be implemented in letter and spirit in a timely
manner. Civil and military leaders have a command
responsibility under international humanitarian law to
prevent violations and to punish them, if they occur.
Otherwise, they are responsible themselves.

Secondly, I urge members of the Security Council
and regional leaders to continue engaging the parties
to the conflict in that regard. It cannot be tolerated that
leaders make declarations in Juba, while the hostilities
and attacks on the civilian population continue and
intensify across the country. Not only is South Sudan
on the verge of fragmenting, but the conflict seriously
threatens stability in the entire region.

Thirdly, I call on members of the Security Council
and the entire international community to provide
support, including financial, for the establishment
of the transitional justice mechanisms outlined in
the peace Agreement. The United Nations needs to
extend all necessary support to the African Union and
the Transitional Government of National Unity, once
established, to ensure that the cycle of impunity is
broken and justice is served.

