Ms. Marlin-Romeo (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands would like to express its sincere
thanks to Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations Bintou Keita for her excellent briefing on
the situation in Haiti. We are pleased by the attendance
of Special Representative Helen La Lime. We warmly
welcome her appointment and wish her good luck in
executing her duties.

I am particularly pleased to be here today.
Sint Maarten, a small island developing State and
autonomous country in the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
is the proud home to more than 118 distinct nationalities.
One of the largest of those is the Haitian diaspora,
numbering more than 1,000 persons. With such strong
social ties, the events in Haiti are very much felt at
home. As part of the Caribbean region, we also share
some of Haiti's vulnerabilities to natural disasters and
climate change. Today marks the one-year anniversary
of Hurricane Irma, the strongest Atlantic hurricane
on record. Let me commemorate here the people who
passed away or were injured, those who lost their
homes and livelihoods and those who today continue to
rebuild their lives - not only in Sint Maarten, but also
in neighbouring Caribbean countries. Throughout the
region, work remains under way to improve resilience
and ensure a full recovery from its devastating impact.
Our national recovery and resilience plan will include
institutional reform and capacity-building.

We are discussing the situation in Haiti today
against the background of the benchmarked two-year
exit strategy to a non-peacekeeping United Nations
presence. For that transition to happen successfully, a
further strengthening of the rule of law is paramount.
The rule of law is the bedrock of any just, prosperous
and peaceful society. It is an element oftrust for both the
population and investors, and it helps cushion external
and internal shocks, which Haiti recurrently undergoes.
Sint Maarten, as a Caribbean country in the Kingdom
of the Netherlands, recognizes that challenge. Over the
past few years, Haiti has made significant progress in
difficult circumstances, but, as the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/795) indicates, substantial
work remains to be done.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands therefore
encourages the Government of Haiti to continue
institutional reform, strengthen rule-of-law institutions
and improve respect for human rights. That means
increased engagement by the Government with
MINUJUSTH in all those areas, but it also means
providing the necessary political, legislative and
budgetary support. One important dimension in that
regard is judicial reform. To that end, the Parliament
needs to swiftly adopt both the criminal code and the
code of criminal procedure.

The rule of law also requires effective and
accountable security institutions, in particular police and
correctional facilities. The outbreak of Violence in July
serves as a reminder that the security situation in Haiti
continues to be fragile, and it could be challenged again
in the coming months. It is of paramount importance
that the Haitian National Police improve its ability
to manage such threats and shore up the trust of the
Haitian people in its performance. Particular attention
should be accorded to the reported increase in gang
activities and any perceived vulnerabilities following
the scaling down of the presence of formed police
units in two areas. We commend Haiti on recent steps
taken in cooperation with MINUJUSTH to increase the
capacity of its national police. In that regard, I would
also like to highlight two very positive developments:
the increasing number of women recruited and the
specialized office for sexual violence crime, which has
been embedded Within the judicial police directorate.
With regard to sexual-based violence we welcome the
initiatives undertaken to increase awareness, although
the noted underreporting remains worrisome. It is
essential that perpetrators of those serious crimes
are prosecuted.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
thorough report of the Secretary General, which
transparently measures the level of progress made
with regard to the Mission's mandate against the
previously elaborated benchmarks. We also appreciate
the capacity assessment, security transition plan and
mitigating measures that MINUJUSTH has drafted and
identified. All that should ensure a robust framework
for the transition to a non-peacekeeping United Nations
presence, thereby leading to a responsible withdrawal
based on the situation on the ground. The Government
of Haiti, the Mission and the United Nations country
team should continue to work closely together towards
achieving that. The coming period will be crucial in
that regard. We wholeheartedly support the Secretary-
General's urgent call to redouble efforts to ensure
attaining the benchmarks.

As a close neighbour to Haiti, Sint Maarten and
the Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly support
Haitian aspirations to achieving peace, justice and
development. The necessary foundations for that are
clear - a strengthening of the rule of law, including by
increasing the police,justice and corrections capacity, a
swift implementation of priority actions and increased
respect for human rights. To that end, the Government
of Haiti should take full advantage of the presence of
MINUJUSTH until its exit, and of the United Nations
country team thereafter. The Kingdom of Netherlands
will continue to support the United Nations-committed
work in Haiti.

