Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for scheduling
today's debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I
welcome His Excellency Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Foreign
Minister of Afghanistan, to the Council and thank him
for his statement. We are grateful for the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2011/590) and appreciate
the briefing by Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Staffan de Mistura.

We are deeply concerned that the overall security
environment in Afghanistan continues to deteriorate.
The latest Secretary-General's report notes that the
average monthly number of security incidents is up
39 per cent as compared to the same period in 2010.
While the process of transition of security
responsibilities to the Afghan National Security Forces
has been ongoing since July 2011, it is, indeed,
worrisome that there has been no let-up in terrorist
violence.

The Taliban has opted for attacking high-security
targets, assassinations and launching complex suicide
attacks in urban centres, including Kabul. Important
political figures and Government officials have been

killed in the recent past, including Ahmad Wali Karzai,
Chair of the Kandahar Provincial Council, and Ghulam
Haydar Hamidi, the Mayor of Kandahar. The
Intercontinental Hotel, the British Council and the
United States Embassy in Kabul have also been
targeted.

We unreservedly condemn last week's
assassination of Mr. Burhanuddin Rabbani, Chair of
the High Peace Council and former President of
Afghanistan. Tragically, the forces of terror and hatred
have silenced yet another powerful voice of reason and
peace in Afghanistan.

As we have repeatedly stressed in the Security
Council, such attacks point to a dangerous osmosis of
ideologies, ambitions, training and operations among
the syndicate of terrorism in the region, with suicide
terrorism as its main technique and targets not limited
to Afghanistan. The resilience of insurgents and their
ability to target areas otherwise considered safe and
secure is a grim reminder that the security gains are
still tenuous.

For peace, stability and security in Afghanistan, it
is imperative that the ongoing transition be linked to
the realities on the ground, rather than rigid timetables.
In its hurry to withdraw from a combat role in
Afghanistan, the international community will only
ignore that at its own peril.

The latest report (S/2011/590) of the Secretary-
General underscores that, for the success of the
transition, it is important that the Afghan National
Security Forces continue to demonstrate enhanced
independent capability and professionalism to assume
an increasing level of responsibility and accountability.
We support the further strengthening of the Afghan
National Security Forces, which must go hand in hand
with the enhancement of their capabilities and adequate
enablers. It is important that the transition be Afghan-
owned and planned and implemented in a systematic
manner. It must also ensure the protection and
promotion of the human rights of all Afghans.

For the security and stabilization of Afghanistan,
it is important to isolate and root out the syndicate of
terrorism, which includes elements of the Al-Qaida,
Taliban, Lashkar-e-Taiba and other terrorist and
extremist groups operating within and outside
Afghanistan's borders. These groups are ideologically
and operationally fused, and their bonds have
strengthened over the years. It will not be possible to
consolidate the gains on the security front unless the
international community is able to firmly deal with
safe havens for terrorist groups outside Afghanistan's
borders.

We fully support an Afghan-led, inclusive and
transparent process of reconciliation, adhering to the
red lines enunciated by the Afghan Government in the
Kabul and London communique's. As we have stressed
earlier, that must be accompanied by an inclusive
political process and intra-Afghan dialogue and include
a renunciation of violence, the cutting of ties to
terrorist groups and respect for the Afghan
Constitutions, with its protections for human rights,
including the rights of women.

Afghan ownership and leadership are also vital to
development and reconstruction in Afghanistan. That
also implies greater coherence, coordination and
further streamlining of the international community's
development-related efforts, including aligning
assistance with Afghan national priorities and
increasingly working through Afghan institutions. We
are happy to note efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in that
regard.

With the onset of the drawdown of foreign
security forces and the transition process, it is all the
more important for the international community -
especially the countries of the region - to remain
committed in this crucial phase, when Afghan national
institutions are still being developed and consolidated.

It is also important that Afghanistan's growth
strategy be built upon the country's comparative
advantage of abundant natural resources and its
strategic geographical location. Those will have to be
the building blocks of our vision for Afghanistan as a
hub lining Central and South Asia through pipelines,
trade and transit routes for the common good of the
people of our region and the world. We support the
New Silk Road Initiative, which is an important step in
that direction.

India remains committed to partnering with the
Government and people of Afghanistan in the building
of a peaceful, stable, democratic and pluralistic nation.
India's assistance programme is spread across
Afghanistan, spanning almost the entire gamut of
economic and social development activities. We are
undertaking reconstruction and development activities
in Afghanistan with a total bilateral assistance

commitment of approximately $2 billion. We have
placed special emphasis on capacity building and
human resource development, which, in our opinion,
are the building blocks for a robust and self-reliant
economy.

Indian companies have evinced interest in the
exploitation of Afghanistan's iron ore reserves. India is
also participating in the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-
Pakistan gas pipeline project. Those are projects that
call for large investment. We express our resolve to
cooperate with Afghanistan on plans involving regional
integration for the mutual benefit of all stakeholders.

The South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation, of which Afghanistan is a full member, is
an important vehicle for regional economic cooperation
within the South Asia region. We have always
considered Afghanistan as a South Asian country with
natural complementarities and synergies with other
countries of South Asia, and one that is uniquely
placed to build bridges even beyond it. India's rapidly
growing economy and its large market make it a
natural destination for Afghan exports. Similarly, India
can be a cost-effective and efficient source of Afghan
imports.

As the security transition moves forward,
Afghanistan needs the long-term commitment and
support of the international community. We look
forward to the forthcoming Istanbul and Bonn
Conferences and the comprehensive review of
UNAMA's mandated activities and United Nations
support in Afghanistan by the end of this year. We hope
that this will contribute to efforts towards lasting peace
and the stability, economic sustainability and regional
integration of Afghanistan in the years ahead.

