I would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under Secretary-General and Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for their insightful briefings. We reiterate our full support for the work of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and Mr. Shearer in this challenging time of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I also thank Ms. Rambang Tai for her briefing. Viet Nam welcomes the continued relatively positive developments in South Sudan since the formation of the transitional Government. We commend the efforts of relevant parties in implementing the 2018 peace agreement and upholding the permanent ceasefire. That is greatly encouraging given the fact that the country has been facing various challenges in recent months due to the COVID-19 pandemic, heavy floods and rising food insecurity. We are also pleased to see the active role of South Sudan as mediator of the peace process of its neighbour, the Sudan. At the same time, we note that progress has remained slow on issues such as joint security arrangements and the formation of the transitional national assembly. Inter-tribal and community violence continue to be issues of particular concerns. In the light of recent developments, allow me to highlight several points. First, we reiterate the importance of the full implementation of the 2018 peace agreement. We call on the South Sudanese parties to spare no effort in advancing the joint security arrangements and establishing a transitional national assembly. We are encouraged to see female representation in the Government and the local leadership and look forward to seeing their increased participation. We commend the tireless efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), the African Union (AU), UNMISS and other relevant parties in promoting peace and stability in the country. At the same time, the international community should take into account the current difficulties and challenges in South Sudan. In that regard, we encourage IGAD, the AU, UNMISS and the neighbouring countries to strengthen their support for the South Sudanese parties, including through confidence-building measures and technical assistance. The role of IGAD as mediator will continue to be critical. Secondly, we emphasize the importance of continuing to uphold the permanent ceasefire. Further effective measures are also greatly needed to address inter-tribal and community violence in order to prevent the current peace process and the sustainable development of the country from being adversely affected. Given that UNMISS is beginning to withdraw from various protection-of-civilians sites, the Government must continue to strengthen its primary responsibility - the protection of civilians. Thirdly, it is vital to address the economic and humanitarian challenges in the country. We express our sincere condolences to the families of the victims of the recent floods. We are particularly concerned about the high level of food insecurity, which affects more than half of the population. We call on the Government and other South Sudanese parties to continue to do all they can to promote sustainable livelihoods for the people. We also urge the international community to strengthen humanitarian assistance for South Sudan in this difficult time. Fourthly, we commend the role of UNMISS, especially its women peacekeepers, in this difficult period of the COVID-19 pandemic, and will continue to support the work of the Mission. We would also like to commend the efforts of the United Nations Mine Action Service in addressing the humanitarian challenges in South Sudan. Finally, Viet Nam reiterates that sanctions are a tool to be applied by the Security Council only in a temporary and case-by-case manner in order to facilitate the maintenance of international peace and security. Those measures should not adversely affect the livelihoods of the people, the essential functioning of the Government or the legitimate development of the country concerned, and should be lifted when certain conditions are met. As Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan, Viet Nam will continue to work closely with the relevant Member States, the United Nations, IGAD and the AU in advancing the implementation of the agreements among the South Sudanese parties, thereby facilitating the midterm review of the sanctions regime in December.
