Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by complimenting Mr. Shearer and the entire
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
team for the steps that they have taken to enhance
the Mission's ability to fulfil its mandate, despite the
hostile circumstances in which it operates.

The situation in South Sudan is dire, but I want to
recall what we, the members of the Security Council,
agreed to on 23 March in presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/4. We called for an immediate ceasefire
by all parties. We called for steps to be taken to allow
life-saving assistance to get to those in need. We called
for the immediate removal of obstacles to UNMISS and
the deployment of the Regional Protection Force. We
also gave our support to joint United Nations, African
Union (AU) and Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) efforts to bring the parties back
to the peace agreement. We said that we would to those
benchmarks and reassess; so let us do that.

The lack of progress since that presidential
statement a month ago is deafening. Fighting and
violence in South Sudan have never been so widespread.
Events that unfolded in Wau earlier this month are a
distressing indication of the apathy of the parties to the
conflict towards achieving peace by political means.
United Nations reports detail clashes between the Sudan
People's Liberation Army (SPLA) and the opposition,
which resulted in the SPLA seeking violent retribution
against civilians in a community they believed to be in
support of the opposition.

It is always difficult to deliver aid in a highly
insecure environment like South Sudan. But, let us
be clear, it is not only the presence of conflict that
impedes the ability of humanitarian workers to address
the ever-worsening food situation; it is the way in
which the conflict is conducted, namely, the fact
that it contravenes international humanitarian law.
International humanitarian law was breached with
the murder of three World Food Programme (WFP)
employees in Wau. That was by no means an isolated
incident. As Ambassador Ciss noted in his briefing, the
murder of those WFP employees adds to the toll of 80
humanitarians who have been killed in South Sudan
since December 2013. That must stop. What is also
unacceptable is the news that the Government of South
Sudan has detained without charge a WFP employee.
We call on the Government of South Sudan for his
immediate and unconditional release, and urge others
to join that call.

The violence in Wau is also an example of the
unacceptable and chronic obstructions placed upon
UNMISS by the Government of South Sudan. Despite
repeated attempts, UNMISS has been prevented from
patrolling in Wau and is thus unable to protect civilians.
A continued lack of Government cooperation has also
prevented meaningful progress on the deployment of
the Regional Protection Force.

The Council has heard time and again of the
shocking impact that this conflict is having on the
world's youngest nation. One example is the fact that
at least one in every four South Sudanese has now been
forced from his or her home since the outbreak of the
conflict in December 2013 - what a damning statistic.
Despite multiple statements made in the Council and
the efforts of the United Nations, the African Union and
IGAD to bring the parties together, we have collectively
failed to bring about an end to the conflict. We are
further from the IGAD peace agreement than ever.

Yes, we have all pledged to do more. Yes, the
Government of South Sudan has time and again
promised peace, but the people of South Sudan are fed
up with pledges and promises. They need action. We
therefore strongly encourage the AU, IGAD and the
United Nations to build on their commitment to working
together by developing a clear joint plan of action to
solve the ongoing crisis in South Sudan without delay.

In conclusion, the question we each need to ask
ourselves as we walk out of the Chamber is: How much
further are we prepared to let the situation deteriorate
on our watch? My answer is - no further at all. With
that in mind, I call on regional countries to avert the
suffering in their backyards. I remind fellow Council
colleagues that it is incumbent on us to use every
available tool to pull South Sudan back from the abyss.
Dialogue is needed, but so is pressure. An arms embargo
would prevent further devastation and re-arming when
the rainy season inevitably slows the fighting. Targeted
sanctions would remind those in power that a return
to peace is the right alternative to the rape and killing
of civilians.

We hear month after month the same lack of
commitment to peace on the part of all parties. We owe
it to the people of South Sudan to end the horror and
secure lasting peace.

