Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
We welcome the Secretary-General's report, and I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Egeland
for his excellent briefing this morning. It paints a
disturbing picture that we know all too well.
Safeguarding civilians from the devastating
effects of armed conflict is fundamental to the precepts
of the United Nations Charter. Our fondest wish would
be that the international community could more
effectively protect civilians from dangers arising from
military operations. There is much that we can do to
achieve that goal. The international community is
improving its efforts, and we welcome again the
Secretary-General's report in that regard.

The Secretary-General and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs have provided us
with a useful status report of the current situation and
good direction for the way ahead. Much depends,
however, not on what we say or do here, but on what
Governments do to protect their own people or to allow
others to help.

As the Secretary-General's report notes, the
ongoing crisis in Darfur is profoundly affecting
civilians: 30,000 have already died; 125,000 have
become refugees; and another 1 million have been
internally displaced. The situation in Darfur has rightly
been called the greatest humanitarian disaster today.
The situation there illustrates the importance of several
of the areas the Secretary-General highlighted as
needing continuing focus: humanitarian access,
security of humanitarian personnel, refugees and
internally displaced persons, women's and children's
issues, and small arms and light weapons.

There have been serious problems with
humanitarian aid and workers being allowed into
Darfur, although the Government of Sudan's decision
to waive visa and permit requirements has started to
improve conditions. Unfortunately, the Government
continues to deny release of vehicles needed by
humanitarian relief agencies. It has also, in some cases,
denied release of the radio equipment needed for workers
to securely deploy to remote areas to deliver aid.

In addition, the Government has delayed food
shipments from Port Sudan, potentially to the point of
making the food useless. These bureaucratic
obstructions, in conjunction with the beginning of the
rainy season, make it imperative that the aid
community stockpile food and supplies.

Darfur also highlights issues related to refugees
and internally displaced persons and the special needs
of women and children, which the Secretary-General
raised in his report.

The opportunity for more peacekeeping
operations can increase the likelihood of mitigating the
impact of a conflict on civilians. However, there is a
strain on capacity and on budgets. We need to ensure
that, even with the strains on the system, United
Nations personnel always live up the highest standards.

In regard to the disturbing abuses committed by
United Nations personnel, my country welcomes the
Secretary-General's bulletin on special measures for
protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse,
and looks at that bulletin as a step in the right direction
towards addressing the problem.

The United States believes that solutions to the
problem of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons must be practical and effective. My country
strongly supports arms export and import controls,
including strict regulation of arms brokers, restraint in
trade to regions of conflict, strict observance and
enforcement of Security Council embargoes,
destruction of excess weapons, and measures to ensure
the security of arms stockpiles.

Member States bear the primary responsibility to
ensure that legal exports are not diverted into illicit
arms flows or used to commit human rights abuses.
They are responsible for meeting their obligations
under international law.

In closing, the United States reiterates support for
the efforts made by the United Nations to protect
civilians from the dangers arising from armed conflict.
We encourage the Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-
General Egeland and other key actors in the United
Nations system to continue the dialogue on how United
Nations organs can better work together with States to
promote protection and to present country-specific
recommendations for the Council's consideration.

