Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me first
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming your role
as President of the Council. I will therefore try to say
in the Kazakh language, "Thank you, Mr. President".

This is the first time the Kingdom ofthe Netherlands
takes the floor as a member of the Security Council
for the year 2018. Let me therefore start by thanking
my colleague, Mr. Sebastiano Cardi, and his Deputy
Permanent Representative Mr. Inigo Lambertini and
their team for the excellent work done in 2017 by
Italy, in the context of our split term 2017-2018 on
the Council. Let me also thank Assistant Secretary-
General Zerihoun for his briefing. Given the value we
attach to dialogue, we welcome the presence of Iran in
this session today.

In my intervention, I will address three issues: the
current situation in Iran, human rights and prevention.
Let me start with my first point, the current situation
in Iran.

As the Assistant Secretary-General just mentioned,
the anti-Government protests in Iran, which originated
in Mashhad, spread to dozens of Iranian cities and rural
areas. These were legitimate and peaceful protests by
the Iranian people against the social and economic
conditions they face in their daily lives. We have
witnessed a disturbing level of violence and a death
toll that has risen to more than 20, with many more
wounded and arrested. As the Assistant Secretary-
General just indicated, the situation in Iran seems to be
calming down.

We hope that the situation in Iran will further
stabilize, especially when it comes to the use ofviolence.
We therefore call on all sides to refrain from any
more violence. We furthermore call upon the Iranian
Government to launch a comprehensive accountability
process. This accountability process should address
all cases of serious human rights violations, including
those involving the Iranian judiciary and security
agencies. An end to impunity for such human rights
violations is paramount.

This brings me to my second point, which concerns
respect for human rights. The right to peaceful
demonstration and the right to freedom of expression
and assembly are fundamental rights. They apply to
all persons, in all countries, and Iran is no exception.
This was also stressed by the European Union and its
member States in our recent statement of 2 January.

In this light, we appreciate the public statements
of the Iranian president regarding the legitimacy of
peaceful protest in the country, and we take note
of the increased willingness for engagement by the
Iranian authorities on issues related to human rights.
However, we have seen that the Islamic Republic of
Iran imposed both offline and online restrictions on the
right to freedom of expression, opinion, association and
peaceful assembly. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
urges the Islamic Republic of Iran to end these
restrictions, both offline and online.

My third point is about prevention. Without human
rights and fundamental freedoms, there can be no human
dignity. Without human dignity, there can be no lasting
stability or security. Therefore, from the perspective of
conflict prevention, the Council has a responsibility to
act early and decisively when fundamental freedoms are
under threat. Every person has the right to individual
freedoms, such as the freedom of religion, freedom
of speech and freedom of assembly, and every person
has electoral rights and a right to a fair trial. These are
not just words; they are obligations under international
law. All Governments have a responsibility to honour
those obligations.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
reiterates its concern about the recent developments
in Iran. We hope that today's session can work as
a preventive measure to avoid further escalation
of violence. We call upon the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran to exercise restraint when
reacting to people exercising their human rights, to lift
restrictions on fundamental freedoms and to uphold
the rule of law by holding perpetrators of human rights
violations accountable.

Dialogue is crucial in this context - dialogue
within Iran to address existing grievances, but also
dialogue between Iran and the broader international
community. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is
committed to play its role in such a dialogue, especially
during our year on the Council.

