Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic ofKorea): We would first
like to welcome High Representative Valentin Inzko
back to the Council and express our appreciation for his
briefing. The Republic of Korea continues to support
his valuable efforts to ensure the implementation of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

As the High Representative elaborated, almost
20 years after its civil war, Bosnia and Herzegovina
remains on a difficult road to stability. Chronic political
stagnation and a fragile socioeconomic situation
have been obstacles in its path to becoming a stable,
prosperous and democratic country. While we welcome
the positive developments achieved so far, such as the
progress in functionalizing the Vital Interest Panel of
the Federation Constitutional Court, it is regrettable
that we have been witnessing an ongoing stand-
off among political actors, even during the election
campaign period. Such a protracted power struggle not
only hinders stable governance, it also undermines the
country's progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration.

The slow response to the devastating floods in May
is another reflection of the country's weak governance.
We are particularly disappointed in the authorities'
slow provision of help to the families who lost their
livelihoods in the aftermath ofthe severe floods, mainly
due to the absence of a coherent recovery strategy.
Indeed, the protests that broke out last spring were
clear evidence of citizens' desire for better governance,
increased economic equality and an end to corruption.
Those are all legitimate demands by the people and
they must be heard.

In that regard, the latest elections in October
provided for a chance to break away from the past and
chart a new political course. We welcome the orderly
conduct of the elections and commend the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the High
Representative for their contribution to ensuring a secure
electoral process throughout the country. However, the
reports of irregularities and the high number of spoiled
or invalid ballots are matters of serious concern and
need to be duly addressed. Looking ahead, we hope
that the Government and institutions can be formed in
a timely manner so that new leadership can proceed to
address the key challenges the country is facing. The
new assertiveness of civil society should also remain as
a counterweight to hold political representatives more
accountable.

Another issue that must be considered seriously in
this context is the worrying divisive rhetoric and open
advocacy for the dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In that regard, we call upon the leaders of the Republika
Srpska to refrain from such secessionist rhetoric and
make every effort towards national reconciliation with
a vision of a shared future. We also reiterate our full
support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is an intrinsic principle
built into the Dayton Peace Agreement.

In conclusion, the Republic of Korea welcomes the
extension of the mandate of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Operation Althea and supports its continued role in
maintaining a safe and secure environment in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

