Mr. Al-Hussein: This is the fourth briefing to
the Council by my Office in as many years on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and I regret
that it is impossible for me to point to any significant
improvement in the human rights situation.

The international security crisis regarding the
actions taken by the Government of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea ought not to negate our deep
concerns about the human rights situation of ordinary
people in the country. Security tensions seem to have
deepened the extremely serious human rights violations
endured by the 25 million people in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. Our picture of the situation
is necessarily incomplete, given my staff's lack of
access to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
However, escapees have reported to us extremely
widespread violations of rights in almost every aspect
of people's lives.

I will begin with the horrific conditions in the
country's large network of prisons and labour camps.
Testimonies collected by my Office indicate that torture
is widespread in detention centres overseen by the
Ministry of State Security and the Ministry of People's
Security, where it is used to extract information or
confessions from people suspected of planning to
leave the country, communicating with the outside
world by using foreign telecommunications networks
or engaging in smuggling activities. Detainees work in
mines or infrastructure projects in conditions of severe
deprivation. People held in such camps have told my
staff of being beaten by prison guards or other inmates
and being fed so little they barely survived. Moreover,
while it has been possible to gather some information
on the situation in regular prison facilities and labour
camps, there is absolute secrecy when it comes to
people detained in the five political prison camps that
are also reportedly operational. The interviews of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) with people who have left
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea indicate
that fear of being sent to those camps is a powerful
instrument of control.

In recent months, military tensions have led to
more severe controls over freedom of movement and
civil and political rights. My Office continues to receive
reports of new physical barriers being erected along
the border. Increased surveillance by the authorities
also makes escape more difficult. People who attempt
to leave the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
without authorization do so at great risk to their lives.
It is now almost impossible to cross the border without
engaging a broker or trafficker. Women, who make
up the majority of those who manage to escape the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, are frequently
forced by traffickers into sexual exploitation, forced
marriage or cheap bonded labour.

A number of escapees are sent back to the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, despite the
fact that monitoring by my Office indicates that anyone
who leaves the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
without authorization will face persecution if returned.
Over the past year, OHCHR has received more than 70
reports of women, men and children who escaped to
China only to be sent back to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea after the authorities found them to be
economic migrants, notwithstanding the overwhelming
evidence of human rights violations taking place in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Repatriated
escapees are routinely subjected to multiple forms of
torture and ill-treatment, including beatings, forced
labour, deprivation of food and health care, and sexual
violence, at detention centres located on the border with
China. Women have told my staff that following their
forced return, officials also subjected them to invasive
body searches, using methods that may amount to rape
under international law. My Office continues to receive
reports ofpeople crossing the border carrying poison in
case they are caught. In July, a family of five reportedly
committed collective suicide as they were about to be
taken to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
border for repatriation. Anyone found to have attempted
to escape to the Republic of Korea or to contact people
there also receives particularly harsh treatment.

The case of Otto Warmbier, an American student
who had been sentenced to 15 years in prison in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and who was
returned to the United States earlier this year in a coma
with extensive loss of brain tissue, is suggestive of the
severe violations endured by persons deprived of their
liberty in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
Three other United States nationals and six nationals
of the Republic of Korea are currently detained in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and denied
access to their families or any outside help. No progress
has been made regarding cases of the international
abduction or enforced disappearance of foreign
nationals. Efforts to locate 12 Japanese nationals and
516 nationals of the Republic of Korea have also been
hampered by the deteriorating security situation.

The people of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea also face severe violations of their economic,
social and cultural rights. They continue to endure
chronic food insecurity, due in part to the diversion of
resources to military objectives, as well as to laws and
practices that make access to basic rights conditional
on perceived loyalty to the Government. A failing
public distribution system and pervasive corruption
in the delivery of public services are forcing people
to look for alternative ways to secure access to basic
economic and social rights. Even very poor people must
frequently pay hefty bribes to enable their children to
pursue primary or higher education, engage in private
business, register as overseas workers or access
health care.

The humanitarian assistance provided by United
Nations agencies and others is literally a lifeline
for some 13 million acutely vulnerable individuals.
However, sanctions may be adversely affecting that
essential help. For example, controls over international
banking transfers have caused a slowdown in United
Nations ground operations, affecting the delivery of
food rations, health kits and other humanitarian aid.
I would like to ask Council members to conduct an
assessment of the human rights impact of sanctions
and see that action be taken to minimize their adverse
humanitarian consequences.

Above all, every effort must be made to ensure that
the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea makes urgently needed changes to the country's
laws and policies in order to enable greater freedom and
access to fundamental services and goods. My Office
is implementing Human Rights Council resolution
34/24, following recommendations by the Group of
Independent Experts on Accountability pursuant to
Human Rights Council Resolution 31/18 on the situation
of human rights in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, who urged us to strengthen monitoring efforts
by recruiting criminal law experts and establishing a
repository of cases to be used in future prosecutions.

