Mr. Tanin: Before I begin, I would like to take a
brief moment to pay tribute to those who lost their
lives in the earthquake that took place today in western
China. As reports continue to come in, it is clear that
this tragic event and its consequences will have serious
effects on tens of thousands of lives, in addition to the
hundreds killed and thousands injured. The Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People stands in solidarity with the people
of China as they work to rebuild. I would like to offer
the Chinese delegation our deepest sympathies and our
full support today and in the days and months to come.

In my capacity as Vice-Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the exemplary manner in which you
have been steering the work of the Council during this
month. I would also like to express my appreciation to
Ambassador Emmanuel Issoze-Ngondet of Gabon for
the efficient manner in which he presided over Council
during the month of March.

On behalf of the Committee, I would like to
express my appreciation to the Secretariat for its
monthly briefings on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. Such briefings serve
a useful practical purpose, as they reflect the latest
developments on the ground and the efforts of various
stakeholders in the international community to move
the peace process forward.

Sadly, as we meet here today there appears to be
little hope for a serious turnaround in the all-too-
familiar pattern of events on the ground. Violence
continues to affect the lives of Palestinians and Israelis.
The Committee has condemned the use by Israel of its
military might against the occupied Palestinian people,
be it through the bombing of areas in Gaza, incursions
into Palestinian cities in the West Bank and Gaza, or
dispersing non-violent protestors in front of the
separation wall built illegally on Palestinian land. The
Committee has also been unequivocal in condemning
the indiscriminate firing of rockets by Palestinian
groups from Gaza into Israel. Violence from both sides
has to stop.

The Committee also considers it alarming and
totally unacceptable that the Government of Israel
continues to flagrantly dismiss numerous calls by
members of the international community, including the
Quartet, to halt its illegal settlement activity in the
occupied West Bank, and especially in East Jerusalem.
Prime Minister Netanyahu's latest statements in that
regard send a clear message to the international
community that the Israeli strategy is to continue to
build in Jerusalem in violation of international law. At
the same time, the occupying Power has continued to
displace Palestinian residents in East Jerusalem
through illegal house demolitions, evictions and
revocations of residency rights.

The Committee is also seriously concerned about
the new Israeli military order that went into effect
yesterday, threatening thousands of residents in the
West Bank with deportation. The order is part of the
Israeli policy of consolidating and perpetuating its
occupation of Palestinian land through forced
displacement of the population. Implementing the
order would constitute a breach of the Forth Geneva
Convention, in particular article 49, which prohibits
individual or mass forcible transfers and deportations
of protected persons from occupied territory.

It is absolutely clear that, by creating such facts
on the ground, the occupying Power is undermining
efforts to restart the political process and
predetermining the outcome of sensitive permanent-
status negotiations on the status of Jerusalem. That
approach renders any such negotiations devoid of
purpose. In the same vein, Israel's actions and policy
on the issue of settlements are a serious threat to the
concept of achieving a permanent settlement of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis of the two-State
solution. It is obvious that those illegal and provocative
actions of the Israeli leadership are also directly
undermining current efforts to relaunch the political
process between the parties.

The Committee fully supports the demand of the
Middle East Quartet that Israel freeze all settlement
activity, dismantle outposts and refrain from illegal
house demolitions and evictions in East Jerusalem. I
would like to emphasize here that those are not
preconditions for resuming the negotiating process;
they are Israeli obligations under the Road Map, as
endorsed by the Council. It is hoped that the 10-month
freeze in settlement expansion declared by the Israeli
Government will be comprehensive, extended to East
Jerusalem and retained indefinitely.

I would like to inform the members of the
Council that, at the end of March, the Committee
convened its annual United Nations seminar on
assistance to the Palestinian people. Its goal was to
draw the attention of the international community to
the programme of the Palestinian Authority entitled
"Palestine: Ending the occupation, establishing the
State", which has become known as the Fayyad plan.
The programme might be understood as the Palestinian
answer to Israeli settlement-building, as it aims to
unilaterally create positive facts on the ground. Unlike
Israel's settlement activity, the Palestinian Authority's
programme is consistent with international law,
welcomed and supported by the international
community and promotes rather than impedes
prospects for a peace agreement. The plan reflects the
Palestinians' determination to empower themselves by
taking their destiny into their own hands and
shouldering their share of responsibility by building
State institutions under the Israeli occupation with a
view to ending it.

This forward-looking programme of the
Palestinian Authority deserves the full attention and
tangible support of the international community. The
Palestinian Authority has proven its ability to transform
international support into concrete Government-
administered programmes, as demonstrated by the
reform of the law and order sector and improved
transparency at all levels and in all sectors of its
activity. The Fayyad plan is a logical continuation of
these efforts.

It has to be borne in mind that this programme is
not being implemented in a political vacuum. It is now
and will be in the foreseeable future critically affected
by developments in the political process. In fact, its
success is determined by the measure of progress in the
political area. On the international level, support needs
to be built for the broad recognition of an independent
Palestinian State. At the end of the projected two years
of the plan, this recognition could be enshrined in a
Security Council resolution clearly determining the
borders of the Palestinian State based on the pre-1967
lines.

Our Committee has come out strongly in support
of the Palestinian Authority's State-building
programme. We would like to encourage the members
of the Security Council to support the realization of
this plan, which has already been endorsed by the
Secretary-General, the Quartet and the League of Arab
States. By putting the weight of its authority behind
this plan, the Council will create the necessary political
framework for ending the occupation and
implementing the two-State solution, with Israel and
Palestine living side by side in peace and security.

