Ms. Agladze (Georgia): At the outset, let me
express our gratitude to the Spanish presidency of the
Security Council for convening this open debate and
for its successful chairing of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We welcome the adoption of resolution 2325
(2016) today, which we also co-sponsored.

Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier today by the observer of the European Union.
I wish to convey the following remarks in my
national capacity.

The risk of nuclear terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and related
materials and technologies have become major
challenges to our common security. The chance of
such weapons falling into the hands of unauthorized
actors is indeed alarming. In fact, the acquisition of
those technologies and materials may be a bigger
challenge than an actual WMD. Increasing threats
emanating from terrorist groups make the possibility
of exploitation of security vulnerabilities with criminal
intent highly probable, while some actors have already
demonstrated readiness to acquire and use weapons of
mass destruction, as demonstrated in the reports by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism.

Political commitment is crucial to all of us in
developing the policies, strategies and systems to
strengthen security at all levels. In that regard, full
compliance with the obligations under international
arrangements such as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention,
the Biological Weapons Convention, resolution 1540
(2004) and others must stand out as a priority for the
international community.

Georgia is a non-nuclear State, a status we achieved
after the removal of 1.83 kilograms of highly enriched
uranium from the Breeder-l Neutron Source Facility in
December 2015. Repatriating highly enriched uranium
was a step in response to the communique ofThe Hague
2014 Nuclear Security Summit.

However, the threats posed by the proliferation
of chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear
(CBRN) weapons and materials, as well WMD-related
technologies, remains a subject of serious concern for
Georgia, not the least due to our close proximity to a
region that poses a high risk of proliferation. In that
regard, Georgia has been taking various measures
while implementing CBRN national actions plans.

In recent years, several attempts to smuggle nuclear
and radioactive materials via Georgia's occupied
regions were detected and duly prevented by our law
enforcement agencies. During the 2006-2016 decade,
25 cases of illicit smuggling of radioactive materials
were intercepted, 11 of which were from the occupied
territories of Georgia. However, in the absence of
an international presence inside those regions, it has
become virtually impossible to conduct any type of
verification activities on the ground, thereby increasing
the risk of the proliferation of WMD-related materials.

Georgia actively cooperates with the European
Union and the United Nations Interregional Crime and
Justice Research Institute, within the framework of the
European Union Chemical, Biological, Radiological
and Nuclear Centres of Excellence Initiative, to promote
an integrated CBRN approach across the area covering
South-East Europe, the Caucasus, Moldova and
Ukraine. With the aim of contributing to the success of
the project, the CBRN Regional Secretariat was opened
and successfully functions in Georgia.

To promote CBRN-related topics at the United
Nations, the Governments of Georgia, the Kingdom
of Morocco and the Republic of the Philippines have
established the United Nations Group of Friends on
CBRN Risk Mitigation and Security Governance. The
Group of Friends is a consultation and dialogue forum
aimed at integrating the CBRN component into the
international security architecture, sensitizing States
to the importance of mitigating CBRN risks, and
fostering regional cooperation on CBRN challenges. It
also promotes the activities aimed at building capacity
and developing capabilities between and among partner
States and the implementation of the resolution 1540
(2004).

It is our belief that through promoting such joint
efforts we can succeed in advancing a robust preventive
system against the proliferation of WMD.

