Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the briefings given by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Nicholas Haysom, and by
Ambassador Tanin.

Chile deplores and strongly condemns the attack
committed today against the Parliament of Afghanistan
and the use of force against unarmed civilians. We
would like to recall that it is of the utmost importance
that authorities ensure the protection of civilians and
prevent anti-Government forces from undermining
trust in the new Government and in the democratic
process.

The development of a modern, democratic and
prosperous Afghanistan will depend, to a large extent,
on the success of the process of reconciliation in the
framework of a broad-based strategy for the protection
and promotion of human rights that envisions access
to education, health care and jobs for all Afghans. In
order to achieve that, it is crucial that progress achieved
by Afghanistan in the area of human rights since 2001

continue in an accelerated and consolidated manner. By
the same token, it is imperative to ensure the full and
effective participation of women in decision-making
processes. Accordingly, we urge the Government of
Afghanistan to implement resolution 1325 (2000) and
the law on the elimination of violence against women,
so as to ensure that the perpetrators of this type of
violence are held accountable for their actions. We are
concerned about the security situation in Afghanistan
and, particularly, the increase in the deaths of Afghan
women and children. We hope that the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict quickly reaches a
consensus regarding its conclusions and that those
are used to provide better protection to children in
Afghanistan.

We remain concerned about radical extremism in
Afghanistan and the fact that there are approximately
7,180 foreign terrorist fighters in that country,
according to estimates by the Ministry of the Interior.
We encourage the Government of Afghanistan and
neighbouring countries to implement the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council in order to slow
down the entry of foreign terrorist fighters. Regional
and international cooperation is essential in this area,
particularly in operations aimed at improving border
control. Similarly, it is crucial that the Government
prioritize inclusive development in order to address
the grievances of disaffected communities. It is Vital to
implement preventative measures that counter extremist
rhetoric and recruitment by terrorists. We would like to
reiterate what President Michelle Bachelet said to the
Council last January:

"Social inclusion and inclusive development are
the conditions for peace [...]'Over the longer term,
the biggest threat to terrorists is not the power
of missiles. It is the politics of inclusion [...]. It is
education, jobs and real opportunity." (S/PV. 7361, 
pp. 6-7).

We believe that it is essential to promote dialogue,
inclusion and consensus among Afghans, all of which
are necessary in building a country capable of standing
on its own, with strong democratic institutions and the
rule of law. We would like here to reiterate our support
for UNAMA's important work in strengthening the
country's capabilities. In conclusion, Chile calls once
again on the international community to continue its
support for the people of Afghanistan and strengthen
their capacities, thereby enabling the country to
confront the security and development challenges that
it faces.

