The Chinese delegation supports South Africa in calling for this important meeting. I welcome Foreign Minister Pandor to preside over the meeting and thank Assistant Secretary-General Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General Alexandre Zouev and African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security Smail Chergui for their briefings. Professional, efficient and fully functional security sectors are the centrepieces of countries' governance systems. In many post-conflict countries, security sector reform is an integral part of consolidating and building peace and an important foundation for achieving lasting peace and sustainable development. In recent years, United Nations peace operations and peacebuilding programmes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and Liberia, among other places, have served to support security sector reform in the countries concerned, mobilize more assistance by the international community and maintain close coordination with regional organizations. Good results have been achieved. Meanwhile, the international and regional security environment is undergoing profound changes, with incessant regional conflicts and the coronavirus disease pandemic making post-conflict reconstruction even more difficult. There are still many things to be done to strengthen and improve security sector reform in post- conflict countries. I would like to emphasize the following. First, maintaining national security is countries' sovereign right, and security sector reform should be owned and led by the countries concerned. The United Nations and the international community should fully respect the intentions of the countries concerned and provide assistance according to countries' priorities. Country-specific strategies should be formulated based on differing national conditions and circumstances, and priorities and focus should be identified. Secondly, it is the responsibility of the security sector to maintain national security and protect civilians. Therefore, improving their capacity is a most pressing priority for security sector reform. Post-conflict countries face security threats such as terrorism, violent extremism and intercommunal conflicts, as well as new risks such as cybersecurity and transnational organized crime and severe challenges imposed by the criminal activities of foreign troops. The security sectors of post- conflict countries should conduct reform to raise capacities in early warning, emergency response, counter-terrorism and surveillance of risks and challenges. This includes actively using high and new technologies to holistically improve the security and defence systems and strengthen the rule of law to bring criminals to justice and eliminate extrajudicial behaviour. Thirdly, security sector reform is an aspect of post-conflict reconstruction and should be considered in the context of the post-conflict country' overall development strategy. An overall development strategy should be drawn up to promote coordinated progress in security sector reform and economic and legal system reforms. Post- conflict reconstruction and development resources should be used in a balanced and wise manner to both ensure the necessary spending for the security sector and scale up input to development, as well as vigorously alleviate poverty and promote sustainable development, so as to eradicate the breeding ground for conflicts. A good job should be done with regard to the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former combatants, and conditions should be created for economic growth and social recovery through security sector reform. Fourthly, security sector reform is a systematic project that requires coordination and synergy by multiple players. The Peacebuilding Commission and the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the General Assembly are important platforms for discussions on issues related to security sector reform. United Nations peacekeeping operations, missions and country teams should play active roles in accordance with their mandates to assist the countries concerned in advancing reforms. The African Union and other regional and subregional organizations have made tremendous efforts in helping post-conflict countries conduct security sector reform and have accumulated much experience. The United Nations should strengthen coordination and cooperation with regional and subregional organizations through, among other things, information exchange, experience sharing and training. There exist big gaps in funding for security sector reform in post-conflict countries. It is necessary for bilateral and multilateral partners to provide active assistance and increase transparency and coordination to ensure sufficient and sustained financial resources for security sector reform.
