Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank Presidents Carmel
Agius and Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their comprehensive briefing on the
reports of the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals.

Uruguay reiterates its firm commitment to the work
of the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
and the International Residual Mechanism. Uruguay
recognizes the contribution that those institutions have
made to international criminal justice, national and
regional reconciliation in the countries concerned, and
international peace.

With regard to the International Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia, we note with satisfaction the
progress of its judicial activities and its adherence to
the schedule for completing its judicial work time and
achieving its closure by the end of 2017. Likewise, the
liquidation activities of the Tribunal are well under
way, which is undoubtedly a very good sign.

We share the concern of President Agius over the
continuing attrition of Tribunal personnel looking for
more stable and durable jobs. We hope that the talks
between President Agius and the various authorities
of the United Nations will lead to a solution that will
allow the most critical personnel to be retained for
the proper completion of the Tribunal's work. The
temporary and exceptional nature of any measure to be
adopted for that purpose should be an element of its
favourable consideration.

An issue that deserves our special attention is the
situation created around the arrest warrants of Petar
Jojie, Jovo Ostojie and Vjerica Radeta, who are accused
in connection with the trial against Vojislav Seselj.
President Agius informs us that the arrest warrants
have been pending execution since 19 January 2015. In
his letter of 1 March 2017, he requested the Security
Council to act.

With regard to the International Residual
Mechanism, we note with satisfaction the progress that
it has made in several of its areas of activity. We share
the belief that the Mechanism ought to be devoted to
the search and prosecution of the 8 persons indicted by
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda who
remain fugitives.
The situation surrounding the arrest of Judge
Aydin Sefa Akay and its repercussions in the case of
The Prosecutor v. Augustin Ngirabatware, of which
President Theodor Meron has informed the Council
on several occasions, most recently in his letter of
dated 9 March, is also cause for concern. The State's
cooperation is essential if the International Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia and the Residual Mechanism are
to comply fully with the mandates bestowed upon them
by the Security Council. The mandates refer to no less
than imparting internationaljustice and prosecuting and
punishing those guilty of crimes against humanity, war
crimes and crimes of genocide. It is the responsibility
of the Security Council to not allow those institutions
to be weakened, since they embody the credibility of
the international criminal justice system and are the
custodians of the confidence it inspires. The Security
Council, collectively or through the actions of its
members, must make its best efforts to ensure that the
principles essential to the effectiveness of the work of
those institutions, as well as their working methods,
are respected.

Presidents Carmel Agius and Theodor Meron, as
well as Prosecutor Brammertz, have brought to the
attention of the Security Council two concrete cases
and requested its action. We cannot feign ignorance of
the situations at hand. The weakening of the institutions
responsible for imparting justice and defending the rule
of law, as well as the impunity that may result from
that weakening, lead to the repetition of human rights
violations and the lack of protection of the victims.

To conclude, we would like to express our gratitude
to the Office of Legal Affairs and the Secretariat for
their ongoing support for our work in our capacity as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals. On a personal note, I wish to underscore
the high regard in which we hold the officials of the
international criminal tribunals who are with us
today. I would also like to express our admiration for
the work they are doing to champion international
criminal justice.

