Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Let me begin by saying
that we fully endorse the statement that will be made
later by the presidency of the European Union on
behalf of all its member States.

I would like to thank you and your delegation,
Mr. President, for having convened this very important
meeting.

Germany welcomes the fact that the Council
gives a great deal of attention to the situation in Africa.
That is where most conflicts are taking place, with the
greatest human suffering. It is therefore appropriate to
have two upcoming Security Council missions focus on
the major African issues. We expect fresh impetus for
future Council action.

The work of regional organizations in Africa is
highly commendable, and it shows a growing sense of
responsibility. I would like to pay tribute in particular
to current efforts by the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development in the
prevention and settlement of conflicts. By promoting a
political settlement and contributing to peacekeeping in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, individual
countries such as South Africa show strong leadership
in promoting stability in a conflict situation. The same
is true for those countries providing troops for the
African mission in Burundi and for other regional
initiatives.

We particularly welcome the decision taken by
the Security Council this morning to authorize a
peacekeeping mission to Bunia, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, thereby bringing relief and
security to the suffering population. We commend
France for having taken the lead in this mission.

The primary responsibility for creating the
necessary conditions to prevent crises and to take
measures to solve conflicts lies with the affected
countries themselves. The international community can
help, but its support can be effective only if the parties
themselves decide to bring about a solution to the
conflict that is conducive to durable peace. That brings
into focus the importance of a regional approach to
crisis situations in Africa - in particular in West
Africa and the Great Lakes region, where many
problems are interlinked and instability seems to be
spreading. Let me highlight just three of these
interlinked problems: first, the plundering of natural
resources; secondly, the flow of weapons; and, thirdly,
the refugee problem.

On the first point, the plundering of natural
resources, we feel that this often fuels and prolongs
conflicts. We see the worst example of that in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. An intensive
dialogue with Governments and political leaders is
necessary. Where dialogue fails, international pressure
on Governments, companies and individuals must be
the next step. A good example of the dialogue we
envisage is the Expert Panel on the Illegal Exploitation
of Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Their reports have
had positive results, because Governments have taken
action and companies have been encouraged to review
their policies.

The second point, the continuous flow of
weapons and other military materiel to belligerents, is
another important issue. In our view, neighbouring
States must cooperate in the effort, and muster the
political will, to stop the flow of arms to belligerents.
If failure to do so is due to a lack of capabilities, those
have to be strengthened. In addition, better
implementation of Security Council resolutions is
necessary. For example, effective implementation of
existing sanctions regimes for Liberia and Somalia
could give considerable support to regional mediation
efforts between the parties to those conflicts. In both
cases panels of experts established by the Security
Council are working very effectively to monitor and
improve the implementation of those sanctions
regimes. They are supplying the Council with
important recommendations. It is a matter of political
will among Council members to then use those findings
effectively.

Further measures to control the illicit flow of
small arms have to be taken. I fully agree with
Ambassador Aguilar Zinser, who said this morning that
small arms and small weapons are the real weapons of
mass destruction: they kill more people than any other
weapon. This implies that we must not only see to it
that we curtail the purchase of such weapons on the
demand side, but also that we establish controls on the
supply side. The United Nations weapons register is an
important tool in this regard.

Finally, the third example of the regional
dimension of a prevailing problem is the large numbers
of refugees, displaced persons and other vulnerable
groups. As witnessed in the conflicts in Liberia and
Cote d'Ivoire, refugees are often driven back and forth
between the changing front lines of a conflict. The
fragile stability achieved in Sierra Leone is tested by
the influx of new refugees from neighbouring
countries. We therefore believe the Security Council
should, on the basis of the results of its mission,
seriously consider a comprehensive approach to
stabilize this region.

With regard to strengthening African capabilities
in the fields of the prevention, management and
solution of armed conflict, Germany is fully committed
to the strategic goal expressed in the G-8 Africa Action
Plan to enhance technical and financial assistance. Its
goal is that by 2010 African countries and regional and
subregional organizations will be able to engage even
more effectively to prevent and resolve violent conflict
on the continent and to undertake peace support
operations in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.

The instruments are mostly there, but we must
generate the political will to use them effectively.

