Mr. Cavusoglu (Turkey): Let me begin by
expressing our appreciation to the United States and
to you personally, Secretary Kerry, for organizing this
important meeting on Iraq. I hope that our meeting
today will add value to our previous discussions in
Newport, Jeddah and Paris.
Obviously, Iraq is facing the most severe crisis
in its recent history. The ongoing conflict in Syria,
together with misguided policies and practices of the
former Government in Baghdad, has created a perfect
environment for extremist and terrorist groups to carry
out their despicable objectives. Therefore, our priorities
should be to devise policies and plans of action to change
this environment. We need engagement within Iraq, as
well as international cooperation, to achieve that aim.
That is why we have been convening so frequently.
However, if these meetings fail to make a difference in
the daily lives of the Iraqi nation, we may risk losing
our credibility.

I can see that there is broad agreement on the
need to devise and implement a comprehensive and
integrated strategy that embraces political, security
and humanitarian elements. In the political field, we
have to ensure that every component of the nation is
properly represented and has a meaningful role in the
decision-making process. Iraq has made a promising
start to that end wit the formation of the new Government
under Prime Minister Al-Abadi, but they have a long
and thorny road ahead. The challenges are real and
complex. The new Iraqi Government needs to reverse
the deteriorating security situation, overcome the long-
lasting ethnic and sectarian divisions and embrace all
segments of the Iraqi society. Our engagement and
support to that process should therefore be a long-term
one.

Sustained international support to Iraq in the
security field should be another component of the
strategy. That requires an organized and coordinated
flow of military equipment and an effort to help build
the defence infrastructure of Iraq. We shall guide and
support Iraq towards a future where it will be able
to defend itself. Restructuring the army and other
security organizations on a national basis should be an
indispensable part of those efforts. Neither the army
nor other Sate structures should be an instrument of
ethnic or sectarian groups. Unfortunately, that is
something that extremists and terrorist groups have
greatly exploited.

The third point I should like to highlight is the
need to redouble our humanitarian efforts. We have
been doing our best since the beginning of the crisis,
and we appreciate the help provided by many countries
present here. Turkey's ongoing humanitarian support
has alleviated the suffering of thousands of Iraqis from
various ethnic and religious backgrounds. We are also
setting up three camps in northern Iraq, with a total
capacity of 35,000 people. Furthermore, as of today,
we are hosting 38,000 Yazidis who sought refuge in
Turkey. Yesterday alone, we provided sanctuary to
more than 10,000 - I emphasize that number - Syrian
Kurds who had to run away from the ISIS advance in
Kobane, Syria.

Certainly, more has to be done. We call upon the
relevant United Nations agencies, as well as experienced
non-governmental organizations, to coordinate all
those efforts.

Let me also underline a very important factor in
all those efforts. It is imperative to treat Syria and
Iraq as a single theatre of action for the success of our
strategy. Ignoring Syria in this struggle would not help
bring about a lasting solution to the challenges we face
today. The Syrian regime is the patron of extremism.
Its policies based on sectarianism and ethnic divisions
trigger further instability and threaten the wider region.
As long as the regime remains in Damascus, stability
can neither be achieved in Syria nor in the region. The
only way of achieving stability and security is through
a political solution based on the Geneva declaration. A
genuine political transition in Syria is therefore a must.

Before concluding, I would like to emphasize once
again Turkey's full support for Iraq in efforts to build a
better political environment that is free of extremism,
and thus to fight more effectively against terrorism.
We act in close coordination with our allies and friends
to that end. All of those efforts to create a stable Iraq
can be more effective with increased international
collaboration. We are ready to further deepen our
engagement with our partners with the aim of bringing
peace and stability to the region and in the fight against
extremism and terrorism.

