Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Before delivering my
written statement, I would like to convey, on behalf of
the Palestinian people and the Palestinian leadership,
our deepest condolences to the Gemayel family and to
the Government and the people of Lebanon on the
tragic crime that was committed this morning in
Lebanon. We are confident that the sisterly nation of
Lebanon is strong enough to withstand this crime and
to move ahead towards a bright future for the great
people of Lebanon. I also want to thank Mr. Gambari
for his briefing.

Ten days ago, we met in this Chamber in the hope
that the Council would take a swift and determined
stance to address the grave situation occurring in the
occupied Palestinian territory, in particular the
condemnable massacre that took place in Beit Hanoun
on 8 November 2006. Like many other times prior to
this tragic incident, we had hoped that the Security
Council would shoulder its responsibilities and
undertake the necessary action to remedy the grave
situation to which the entire world was bearing
witness. Yet, once again, not only were we let down,
but the individuals who lost family members and the
Victims themselves have also been let down.

Even for the people of Gaza - a people who
have been forced to endure the insurmountable grief of
death and destruction - the loss in Beit Hanoun was
too great to bear. Loads of ambulances lined up,
carrying the unrecognizable and mutilated bodies of 16
members of the same extended family, the majority of
whom were women and children, all of whom were
civilians. The total number of those killed in the Beit
Hanoun massacre, a civilian-populated neighbourhood,
rose to 19, thus adding to the over 82 others killed
earlier in the same Israeli military aggression, which
centred mainly on Beit Hanoun. Moreover, the overall
count of Palestinians killed since last June in the wider
military aggression carried out in Gaza now numbers
over 450.

It should be highlighted that, after the inaction by
the Security Council, Israel, the occupying Power,
continued its aggression against the captive civilian
population, including through air strikes on the Gaza

Strip. This resulted in the killing of more Palestinians,
including a 15-year-old boy and a 20-year-old.
Furthermore, the Israeli occupying forces also
continued to carry out incursions into the occupied
West Bank, killing and wounding several civilians. In
fact, the latest Israeli crimes occurred today,
21 November 2006, and yesterday, 20 November, in
the West Bank town of Qalqilya when the Israeli
occupying forces carried out yet another extrajudicial
execution, killing two Palestinians they had illegally
targeted, as well as six innocent bystanders.

The inaction of the Security Council, which was
specifically due to a veto by one permanent member,
led us to the resumption of the tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly, in accordance with
the Uniting for Peace formula. We had hoped that
Member States would collectively undertake what the
Security Council had been unable to do. Indeed, the
international community took up the reins of
responsibility and voted nearly unanimously in favour
of a draft resolution which was practically identical to
the one put before the Council.

We thank the entire international community that
voted in that manner. Out of the 169 present for the
voting, 156 voted in favour of the resolution (General Assembly resolution ES-10/16), sending a loud and
clear message to the parties. Those 156 countries
cannot be hijacked. One should respect the integrity of
the entire collective voting of the Non-Aligned
Movement, the entire collective voting of the European
Union, the entire collective voting of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference, the entire collective voting
of all of the countries in South America, the entire
collective voting of the Arab League of nations, and
the votes of other nations in Asia.

As for the Israeli side, the resolution called for an
end to its military aggression, which endangers the
Palestinian civilian population. Of course, in the
resolution there are obligations on both sides, but, as
an occupying Power, Israel is ultimately obliged to
ensure the safety and well-being of the Palestinian
people it holds hostage in its 39-year-old occupation;
this is an obligation it has continued to ignore in the
most violent and brutal manner.

It should be mentioned that this is not the first
time that the Security Council has failed to uphold its
responsibilities, despite the fact that since 1967 the
Council has adopted more than 40 resolutions
specifically on the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. One of the main
problems is that the Council has been unable to take
the actions necessary for implementation of those
resolutions, and thus for bringing about compliance by
Israel, the occupying Power, with its obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law.

In that regard, Israel's policies and practices
against the Palestinian people, who have been under its
occupation since 1967, have included not only
systematic human rights violations, but acts
constituting grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, under its article 147 - that is, war crimes,
which are carried out with complete impunity. That has
not only aggravated the situation by failing to bring
about an end to the violations - including an end to
Israel's belligerent military occupation itself - but has
also prolonged a conflict that has caused so much
suffering, loss and hardship for the Palestinian people,
as well as for the entire region.

To be fair, this is not due to a failure of the
membership in its entirety; rather, it is due mainly to
one permanent member, which has consistently
prevented the Council from taking serious action, has
provided the occupying Power with unjustified
diplomatic protection and has actively tried to
neutralize and contradict international law. The
consequences of that behaviour have been extremely
detrimental, not only in terms of the rights of the
Palestinian people, but also in terms of the
international system and its authority and credibility.
That pattern of behaviour has undermined the rule of
law and deepened doubt regarding the Security Council
and the United Nations itself, sending the wrong
message to Israel, the occupying Power, which has
continued to act as if it were above the law.

The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, continues to deteriorate
dramatically and the toll of death and destruction
continues to rise as a result of the aggression being
carried out by the Israeli occupying forces against the
Palestinian people. We continue to reaffirm that it is
incumbent upon the international community to
address this crisis. We have continued since
September 2000 to reiterate our calls for amelioration
of the suffering caused to the Palestinian people as a
result of the ongoing and escalating flagrant Violation
of their human rights as defined by international
humanitarian law and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.

Unfortunately, those calls have fallen upon deaf
ears. Consequently, since that time, more than
4,300 Palestinians, including many children, have been
killed. In addition, tens of thousands have been injured,
many of whom have been permanently disabled as a
result of the serious injuries sustained. The Israeli
occupying forces have also committed themselves to
continuing with their crimes of extrajudicial killings;
the destruction of homes, buildings, agricultural fields,
roads and other infrastructure; the confiscation of more
land for illegal settlement activities and for Israel's
expansionist wall; and the destruction of Palestinian
institutions. At the same time, the Israeli occupying
forces have tightened their military siege and their
restrictions on the freedom of movement of all
Palestinian persons and goods, virtually dividing the
occupied Palestinian territory into several detention
centres.

Despite the aforementioned, the Palestinian side
remains committed to finding a peaceful solution
through diplomatic means. The Palestinian side - in
particular President Mahmoud Abbas - is actively
engaged in formulating a national unity government,
efforts which will soon come to fruition.

Moreover, others have spoken in the same vein
about the importance of finding a diplomatic solution.
In that regard, three countries of the European Union,
namely France, Italy and Spain, have unveiled a
Middle East peace plan amid the frustration over the
latest developments between the Israeli and Palestinian
sides. We welcome that initiative, which includes,
among other things, an immediate ceasefire in the
region, a Palestinian national unity government and
talks between Israel's Prime Minister and the
Palestinian President, plus an exchange of prisoners
between the two parties, an international mission in
Gaza to monitor a ceasefire and the convening of an
international peace conference on the conflict in the
Middle East. As the Prime Minister of Spain correctly
pointed out,

"We cannot remain impassive in the face of the
horror that continues to unfold before our eyes.
Violence has reached a level of deterioration that
requires determined, urgent action by the
international community."

Even some on the Israeli side are calling for a
diplomatic solution. In that connection, senior Israeli
ministers - including, among others, Foreign Minister
Tzipi Livni, Vice Premier Shimon Peres and Defence
Minister Amir Peretz - have all called on Prime
Minister Olmert to initiate a plan to break the
diplomatic impasse with the Palestinian Authority,
including calls for an immediate ceasefire. After a
telephone call between Mr. Peretz and President Abbas
yesterday, it was clear that they had agreed that an
immediate and mutual ceasefire was needed.

However, it seems that the Israeli Prime Minister
would rather ignore them as he continues to pursue his
illegal policies and practices. According to Israeli news
reports, Mr. Peretz told Mr. Olmert, "I am not a
minister of assassinations", referring to the policy of
targeted killings. He continued, "I am the head of the
peace camp. I need to talk about a ceasefire. I am not
only responsible for the intensity of the fire."

It is high time that Israel, the occupying Power,
and the Security Council heed not only the calls of the
international community, especially the General
Assembly, but the calls among its own, to prevent
further massacres and tragedies from occurring.

It is never too late for mistakes of the past to be
rectified. In that regard, we assert our hope that the
Security Council will soon assume its rightful and
proper role and use its authority to address this issue.
That can be done only by ending the grave breaches
being committed by Israel, the occupying Power, and
by bringing an end to the hostilities and salvaging the
prospects for reaching a peaceful settlement on the
basis of international law, the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Quartet Road Map and the Arab Peace
Initiative adopted in Beirut in March 2002. The
Palestinian people hope that the next time we are
forced to return to the Security Council, it will finally
uphold its duties and responsibilities and thus save us
all from the tragedy of more death, destruction and
misery.

