Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank Mr. Sharma for his statement and
for the excellent work that he has been doing. France
fully associates itself with the statement to be made
later by the representative of Denmark on behalf of the
European Union, but I would like to add a few
comments.

First, I should like to reiterate our satisfaction
with the work done by the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET). Three goals were
set for the Mission, and, to a large extent, they have
been attained.

The first task involves the transfer of policing
responsibility. The process is moving forward on
schedule and should be completed by January 2004, in
keeping with the timetable.

The second task is the establishment of a national
defence force. We welcome the beginning of the
process of the transfer of power and look forward to its
completion by 2004. In that connection, we note that
the question of refugees in West Timor no longer seems
to pose a threat to stability in the region.

The third task relates to the consolidation of the
Administration. Here prospects are less clear, naturally,
because this is a most important and sensitive issue.
Institutions seem to be functioning well, and the
relations between the President, the Government and
the Parliament, elected in August 2000, appear to be
satisfactory. But there are still disturbing shortcomings
in connection with the judiciary, and prison
administration in particular, and solutions must be
found as quickly as possible. In the short term, this will
require further efforts to complete recruitment of
Timorese civil servants. In more general terms, with
respect to institutional matters, political pluralism must
continue to be encouraged.

Above and beyond the work of UNMISET, the
future and long-term prosperity of Timor-Leste seems
to us to depend, inter alia, on three factors.
First, efforts towards rebuilding and economic
development must be redoubled - a point that several
members made earlier. International assistance and
mobilization must therefore continue. In this
connection, we reiterate the appeals made by others.

The second factor relates to the judiciary. It is
important that there be a certain consistency between
the decisions taken with respect to serious crimes,
whether such decisions are taken in Dili or in Jakarta.
We are aware of the concerns expressed by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights with respect to the ad
hoc human rights tribunal in Jakarta. In the wake of the
tragic events that took place in Timor-Leste, the
judiciary system in both countries has a paramount role
to play in ensuring full and lasting reconciliation. In
this connection, I share the concerns that have already
been expressed on this score.

The third factor - the establishment of good
relations between Timor-Leste and its neighbours, in
particular Indonesia - is a positive factor, and we are
pleased at how things are proceeding in this respect.
The Joint Ministerial Commission, together with
Indonesia, began work last month, and initially
promising results have been achieved. I should like to
ask a few questions of Mr. Sharma on this point.

Could he tell us what is happening with respect to
the important issues of compensation and the right to
assets? Has the Joint Commission addressed these
issues? Are people becoming more receptive to the
zero option advocated by Mr. Sharma? And lastly,
could the Special Representative tell us more about the
demarcation of the land and sea borders between the
two countries?

I would now conclude my statement by simply
reiterating our very positive assessment of the work
being done by the United Nations in Timor-Leste.

