Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): During this two-day
debate, there has been a very rich and much-needed
exchange of views on the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait. We welcome the participation in this debate of
such a large number of countries from the general
membership. This was a clear indication of the wish of
the membership to see this issue discussed within this
multilateral setting. We thank the representative of
South Africa, who, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Non-Aligned Movement, requested this meeting.
Mauritius fully supported this request.

We have noted a convergence of views on several
important points, and one on which there is complete
unanimity is the fact that Iraq must dispose of all of its
weapons of mass destruction in compliance with
Security Council resolutions 687 (1991) and 1284
(1999).

Following the adoption of resolution 687 (1991),
Iraq ought to have completely disposed of its weapons
of mass destruction and inspectors ought to have been
allowed to complete their work. However, by choosing
to reject the return of United Nations inspectors and by
using other delaying tactics, Iraq defied the
international community and the authority of the
Security Council. Such defiance has not helped either
the Government of Iraq or the people of Iraq, who
continue to live under the regime of United Nations-
imposed sanctions. Yet the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) made significant progress,
and if resolution 1284 (1999) had been duly complied
with, the situation today could have been altogether
different.

The almost four-year absence of United Nations
inspectors has not only caused a serious break and
delay in resolving the whole issue of the disarmament
of Iraq in the area of weapons of mass destruction, but
has intensified the uncertainties regarding the actual
state of the Iraqi programme of weapons of mass
destruction. With its delaying and evasive tactics, Iraq
has created greater doubts and suspicions about its
possession of weapons of mass destruction.

Admittedly, Iraq is not the only country with
regard to which the issue of the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons of mass
destruction arises, and we certainly support all actions
aimed at eliminating all such weapons throughout the
world. But on the basis of past actions by Iraq, the
Security Council has determined that Iraq's possession
of such weapons constitutes a real threat to
international peace and security. It is therefore
imperative that Iraqi weapons of mass destruction be
completely destroyed.

Notwithstanding the track record of Iraq, we are
pleased that there has been a positive evolution in the
Iraqi position in the last few weeks. Following the
intervention of the Secretary-General and Arab States,
and appeals from the international community, Iraq has
been persuaded to accept the return of United Nations
inspectors. We welcome the decision of the
Government of Iraq to accept the unconditional return
of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC). We also
welcome the outcome of the recent talks in Vienna
between, on the one hand, Mr. Hans Blix, Executive
Chairman of UNMOVIC, and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), and, on the other, the Iraqi authorities.
We also note with satisfaction that agreements have
been reached on a wide range of issues pertaining to
the modalities and practical arrangements for the return
of inspectors.

Iraq must now stand by its engagement. It must
fully respect the commitment it has undertaken. We
appeal to the Iraqi Government to extend its full
cooperation with the inspection teams. Iraq must
understand that if it is to provide all the necessary
cooperation and information required by UNMOVIC, it
will enable the Council to lay this matter to rest and
review the sanctions regime imposed on the country.
The return of the inspectors to Iraq is in the interests of
all, especially the Government and the people of Iraq.

As many delegations have pointed out, on a
purely legal basis no new resolution is necessary for
the return of the inspectors. However, if in its
collective wisdom the Council feels that the inspection
regime needs to be reinforced in order to provide
greater clarity and, inter alia, to give inspectors
immediate and unfettered access to all sites, including
presidential sites, as well as to ensure Iraqi
cooperation, Mauritius will give careful and positive
consideration to such an initiative, which we believe
should take into account the principles and objectives
of the Charter, including respect for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Iraq and for the dignity of
the Iraqi people.

It will also be important for such a resolution to
enjoy the full support of the Council as a whole, since,
as we all know, the Council's action is most effective
when it acts in unison. It is our expectation that Iraq
will fully cooperate with the inspectors and comply
with any such resolution that the Council might adopt.

Mauritius considers it important that UNMOVIC
resume its activities in Iraq as soon as possible. Exactly
one month has elapsed since Iraq expressed its
readiness to allow, without any conditions, a United
Nations inspection team into Iraq. We should not be
perceived as delaying the process. Instead, all efforts
need to be made to expedite the departure of
UNMOVIC and the IAEA with clear and defined
mandates. Here, let me express my delegation's full
support for and confidence in Mr. Hans Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei, who, guided by the principles of
professionalism, independent vigour, impartiality and
transparency, will carry out their task with efficiency
and credibility. We should avoid prejudging the
effectiveness of their work, as well as that of their
respective multinational and independent teams. Nor
should we - as the Permanent Representative of
Singapore said - try to micromanage them and their
teams.

It is equally important that Iraq also address all
the outstanding issues pertaining to Kuwaiti prisoners
of war and the return of Kuwaiti property, as well as
the question of missing third party nationals, so that
there can be a complete normalization of relations
between Iraq and its neighbour.

As much as it is important for Iraq to comply
with Security Council resolutions and to cooperate with
weapons inspectors, it is equally important that in the
event of any non-compliance, the Security Council
retain its centrality and authority in deciding the most
appropriate course of action to obtain compliance.
There is clearly a strong determination on the part of
the international community to enforce compliance.
There is equally a strong desire to exhaust all
diplomatic efforts in that regard, and Mauritius will
continue to support such efforts.

Mauritius has full confidence that in case of
non-compliance and on the basis of an appropriate
report by Mr. Blix, the Security Council would
collectively take the required action in full compliance
with the principles of international law, taking into
account the geopolitical realities. All of that can be
avoided if Iraq takes the right steps.

Mauritius reiterates its View that it is the duty of
all United Nations Members to comply with Security
Council resolutions, in accordance with Article 25 of
the Charter. There should be no exceptions, and the
Security Council should show even-handedness and
impartiality in dealing with all those who defy its
resolutions.

With its immense wealth in agricultural and
petroleum, with the qualities of its men, its women and
children, with its culture, Iraq can and should have a
positive influence on the region and its stability and
future. Unfortunately, that is not the case today. Iraq
today is at the confluence of all crises.

Our debate over the last two days has confirmed
the importance that the United Nations community
attaches to questions concerning international peace
and security.

Cameroon has noted and shares the twin
challenges facing the United Nations of carrying out its
peace and security missions, promptly and effectively,
and its ongoing concern to ensure that in doing so, its
actions are legitimate, credible and transparent.

The problems involved in the question of Iraq
very clearly demonstrate this dual concern of the
international community.

My delegation notes and condemns that in many
ways the Iraqi authorities have not always respected
the letter and the spirit of the numerous resolutions
adopted by the Security Council, neither on the
situation between Iraq and Kuwait nor on the
disarmament of Iraq.

Iraq must demonstrate that it does not possess
weapons of mass destruction. The challenge of our
debate today is precisely the disarmament of Iraq.

Despite some promising actions on Iraq's part,
especially since the recent Arab League Summit of
March 2002, we must note that crucial problems such
as the restitution of Kuwaiti property; Kuwait's
veritable national memory, including the national
archives; and the return of Kuwaiti and third country
nationals, as well as the remains of the deceased, are
issues still pending.

Iraq's blatant non-compliance with Council
resolutions has been noted by all. It is unacceptable
because it undermines the credibility of the United
Nations and could pave the way for an undesirable and
very harmful unilateralism, which could plunge us into
relations governed by the law of the jungle and
displace us from our organized world based on the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.

Today's debate, going beyond the important
question of disarming Iraq through United Nations
inspections, poses questions of principle. I would like
to talk about two such principles. The first and most
important is the obligation of every United Nations
Member State to comply unconditionally and without
delay with the decisions of the Security Council. The
other, which is linked to the first, is the Council's
obligation to act quickly and fairly in deciding the
measures it deems necessary, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter.

Coming back specifically to the need to see Iraq
without the proscribed weapons - biological,
chemical or nuclear - my country is in favour of an
immediate and unconditional resumption of inspections
for the disarmament of Iraq by the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA).

The Iraqi position, as found in a letter addressed
to the Secretary-General dated 16 September 2002,
indicates considerable progress; it is a large step in the
right direction by Iraq, in keeping with what is
demanded of it by the Council.

It is the interest of all that the inspections be
carried out in strict respect of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, especially resolutions 1284 (1999)
and 687 (1991).

We all believe that Iraq question is the one of
greatest interest to the international community. The
international community's expectations contain two
hopes: that Iraq does not possess weapons of mass
destruction and that the world will not wake up
tomorrow to a widespread military conflagration.

Those hopes create an extraordinary
responsibility for the inspection teams led by Mr. Blix,
Executive Chairman of UNMOVIC and Mr. ElBaradei,
Director General of IAEA.

For that reason, Cameroon believes that it would
be highly useful for the Council to reaffirm in a new
resolution its firm and total support for Hans Blix and
his colleagues at UNMOVIC, as well as for the teams
of IAEA, before their departure for Iraq.

This new resolution is therefore more a political
opportunity - just as is our present public meeting -
than a legal necessity.

Beyond reiterating firm support for the
inspectors, the new resolution must define once again
the practical details of the inspections so as to remove
any ambiguities that have arisen on the question. The
effectiveness of the inspections depends on it. Also, the
resolution must clearly indicate that the Council will
take the appropriate measures if it observes once again
that Iraq does not respect its decisions. The resolution
must, in addition, without prejudice to Iraq's conduct,
contain provisions foreseeing the possibility of
suspending or even removing all relevant sanctions, if
Iraq meets all the Council's demands.

Demonstrating the consensus of the large United
Nations family, this resolution must be a message of
support for the inspectors, but also and especially a
message of firmness to Iraq.

On behalf of Cameroon, I would like to invite the
Iraqi authorities, as they have already committed to do,
to cooperate fully with the inspectors who will soon be
deployed to Iraq. It is the only way for Iraq to prove its
sincerity and good faith and to spare the world one
more conflict, which would only exacerbate the
suffering of the Iraqi people, who are the main if not
the sole victims of the procrastinations and posturing
which have been frequent in this episode in the history
of international relations over the last 12 years. Iraq,
then, could reassume the vocation contained in its
name: a country of water, a country of life.

It is clear that one more refusal by Iraq to comply
with the Security Council's requirements would be one
refusal too many, because the Council would then have
to take appropriate measures to ensure compliance with
its decisions, in accordance with the provisions of
Article 42.

I appeal to Council members to remain united,
given the grave circumstances, and to show confidence
in our body to resolve this issue, this crisis, and to do
so in a consensual fashion.

I am pleased to note that during the consultations,
all Council members, bar none, clearly assured me that
they would undertake nothing against Iraq without the
Council's explicit approval. Therefore, I have good
reason to remain particularly optimistic.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The Permanent Observer of Palestine has asked to
make another statement. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

