Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Let me at the outset salute
the format of today's meeting of the Council, which
provides for an expanded exchange of views, not only
between members of the Council and the Secretariat, but
also with Member States that are directly affected or have
a special interest in this important issue. This format will
certainly enhance the process of consultations between

 

Council members and the larger membership of the
Organization, and thus clearly enrich the decision-making
process of this Council.

We wish to thank the Secretary-General for his latest
report on the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and Assistant Secretary-General
Annabi for introducing it and for his update on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also appreciate the report
that has been submitted by the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in relation to the implementation of the New
York Declaration, which the Presidency adopted last
November.

We commend UNMIBH and Special Representative
Jacques Klein for their continued efforts in connection with
the restructuring and reform of the local police forces and
the judiciary in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We note that
some of the measures that UNMIBH has implemented
through the targeted and more inclusive concept of
operations have begun to bear fruit, and that the Mission
has made additional progress in many core mandate areas.

We are, however, concerned by the continued
obstruction and delay in the efforts aimed at full integration
of multi-ethnic police in certain cantons, in particular
canton 7 - Mostar. We are also concerned to see the
speedy establishment of the State Border Service, an issue
that was highlighted by Mr. Annabi and is discussed in
paragraphs 10 and 11 of the Secretary-General's report.
Both Mr. Annabi and the report underscore the importance
of the Border Service to Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well
as of the establishment and integration of the multi-ethnic
police force, which must continue to be seriously pursued
in both entities, in particular in the Republika Srpska. In
this context, we note in particular the Secretary-General's
observation that the Republika Srpska has missed key
benchmarks for minority recruitment. Any impediments to
further progress in these areas are certainly not acceptable.

We continue to express our strong objection to
political obstructionism and interference in the
implementation of the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Obstructionists and extremist political groups
should not be allowed to impede progress. In this regard,
we are gratified to note that the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been most forthcoming in supporting the
implementation of the various measures outlined in the New
York Declaration.

Needless to say, the cooperation and constructive role
of local leaders is of paramount importance. Without this
contribution, the international community's efforts will
not be successful. We therefore urge other political
leaders, at every level, to demonstrate commitment and
determination similar to those already shown by the
Bosnian Presidency in order to carry the process forward
towards the establishment of a democratic, multi-ethnic
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is the ultimate goal of the
international community's active involvement in the
country.

On the return of refugees and displaced persons, we
note that, despite the concerted efforts by the international
community, the progress has been very slow and that the
implementation of annex 7 of the Dayton Peace Accords
is far behind schedule. The High Representative informed
the Council last November that if the current slow tempo
of return continued, the return process would take about
22 years in the Federation and 40 years in the Republika
Srpska. At the present rate, therefore, the return process
will in practical terms never be completed, which of
course would be a triumph for the evil of ethnic
cleansing. This should be prevented at all costs.

The refugee problem is of course at the heart of the
existing insecure situation, which is due to the absence of
law and order, as well as to the existence of political and
administrative obstructions. This underscores the need for
more robust efforts that would help create a safe and
secure environment through, inter alia, the establishment
and implementation of projects designed to increase
economic opportunities. In this regard, making conditional
all forms of assistance from international donors and
agencies could encourage the necessary compliance and
cooperation on the part of those concerned and would
facilitate the return process.

Continued emphasis on reconciliation should remain
one of the most important priorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The consequences of ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity in the country must be reversed,
and justice must be done and done quickly. In this regard,
the work in Bosnia and Herzegovina of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia is of
particular importance, and the international community
must continue to strongly support this work. Clearly the
continued freedom enjoyed by the leading war criminals,
such as Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, sends the
wrong signals and contributes to the climate of insecurity
that limits further progress in the peace implementation
process. The early arrest and prosecution of all indicted
war criminals would not only serve to mete out justice,
but also contribute to the accomplishment of the long-

 

term goal of national reconciliation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Finally, my delegation commends UNMIBH for all its
accomplishments thus far, including its successful project
of establishing a Bosnia and Herzegovina police contingent
for a United Nations peacekeeping operation. It is also
encouraging to note that preparations are already under way
for the establishment of a Bosnia and Herzegovina military
contingent for a similar purpose.

