Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency for the month
of November. I would also like to thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her important briefing this morning.

To be honest, I do not have much to add to what I
said at the Council's 744lst meeting of 12 May. I would,
however, like to reaffirm that Libya is wedded to the
principle of complementarity among issues addressed
at the national level and by the ICC, despite the fact that
we are not a party to the Rome Statute. That is because
we wish to see justice prevail and confront impunity,
especially regarding crimes covered under the Rome
Statute.

I can confirm that Libya's judicial institutions
are committed to fulfilling their obligations under
national and international law, despite the dangers
and pressure they find themselves in, particularly the
Office of Libya's Prosecutor General, which is based
in an area that is controlled not by the State but by
militias. In that regard, it is necessary to point out
that the Ministry of Justice of the provisional Libyan
Government announced its rejection of the sentence,
issued on 28 July, by the Court of Assize with regard
to the former officials of the Al-Qadhafi regime. The
Government does not believe that one can talk about
independent justice or a fair trial when trials are held in
regions controlled by outlaw militias.

The Libyan authorities want to guarantee
accountability, fight against impunity and strengthen
the rule of law. They have repeatedly reaffirmed their
commitment to investigate all crimes committed and
to punish those responsible. The Libyan Government
condemns all human rights violations, regardless of
who the perpetrators are. However, the Government
would like to emphasize that no Libyan Government
will be in a position to control the security situation and
ensure respect for human rights and justice as long as
the capital, Tripoli, is occupied by outlaw militias. The
Government will remain unable to successfully carry
out its mission as long as its institutions cannot work
in a climate of security. The prisons will not submit
themselves to the authority of the State as long as
resolution 2214 (2015) is not implemented and as long
as Libyan army units and security elements are not in a
position to obtain weapons.

In spite of the foregoing, the Government of Libya
welcomes the continued cooperation between the Office
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
and the Office of the Prosecutor-General of Libya.
Before I conclude, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to the following. In various statements
delivered by a number of Council members we heard
that there was racial discrimination in Libya. There
was a reference to the detention of our sub-Saharan
brothers as a result of the colour of their skin. That is
wrong and does not exist in Libya. Differences in skin
colour mean nothing in Libya, especially since a large
number of Libyan citizens are black. They have always
held high positions and it is enough for me to point out
that the Head of the Libyan Government is black. The
same is true for the Head of the Libyan Air Force. To
claim anything else is simply wrong. Unfortunately,
those rumours started in 2011, at the beginning of the
revolution, when Al-Qadhafi enlisted a number of sub-
Saharan workers to face down the revolution. That was
later used to undermine Libya and its relations with other
African States. Those who entered the country legally
were protected from human traffickers and violence.
There are tens of thousands of African brothers who
live and work in Libya under the protection of Libyan
families.

The meeting rose at11.05 a.m.
