Mr. Skoog: Congratulations to you, Madam
President. It is really a thrill to see you and Lithuania
acceding to the presidency of the Council this month.

I have a few points to make on behalf of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Liberia
configuration.

First, as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Karin Landgren just pointed to us with regard
to the very significant Ebola situation, if no new cases
are reported, Liberia will officially be declared Ebola-
free this Saturday, 9 May. But this is not the time to
lower our guard. Focused efforts will still be needed to
ensure that Liberia stays at zero, including by improving
basic health-care services in rural communities. High-
level international attention must also be maintained
to ensure that the broader recovery process can bring
tangible improvements to the people of Liberia as
quickly as possible.

Having been elected Chair in early March, I
travelled to Liberia from 5 to 7 April to get a first-hand
impression of the situation on the ground. The purpose
of that visit was to draw lessons from the crisis and
to see how the Peacebuilding Commission could best
support peacebuilding priorities in the Ebola recovery
and in the transition processes of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). I have shared my report
with the Council in advance, but let me take this
opportunity to highlight three points.

First, there is an urgent need to improve the
socioeconomic situation in Liberia. This includes
increasing access to primary education, deploying social
safety nets and creating employment opportunities
for youth. The conditions were already dire before
the crisis, with 64 per cent of the population living
below the poverty line and only 34 per cent of children
attending primary school. The situation has now further
deteriorated as a result of the Ebola situation. The crisis
has increased the burden on households and destroyed
the livelihoods of many, in particular women and young
people engaged petty trade. Providing opportunities,
especially for young people and women, is a critical
priority for ensuring future peace and stability. The
swift recovery of the economy, including through
the resumption of cross-border trade, the return of
international flights and economic stimulus, will be
key to these efforts.

Secondly, there is a need to address State-society
relations and trust in State institutions. A major part of
this is to focus more on strengthening accountability,
legitimacy and institutional capacity, including through
empowering the various independent commissions.
This also includes enhancing State presence and
capacity to deliver basic services in the communities as
part of the decentralization process. As UNMIL draws
down and turns over security responsibility, targeted
efforts must be made to strengthen the justice and
security sectors, including the software of security, and
to improve civilian-security relations.

But State capacity is not enough to build trust;
continuing to deal with some of the outstanding
grievances from the civil war, including by accelerating
the implementation of the National Reconciliation
Roadmap in an inclusive manner, will also be critical.
This will be important not least in the context of
starting to prepare for peaceful and credible elections
in 2017. It is important in this regard to continue to
empower women and to guarantee their full and equal
participation in the electoral process, noting that the
percentage of women in the Legislature decreased in
the latest senatorial elections.

Thirdly, there is a need for a stronger regional
perspective and approach. The Ebola crisis has clearly
demonstrated that what happens in one country in the
region has a direct impact on the others. The crisis
has given new impetus to regional cooperation. The
decision of the Mano River Union leaders to join
efforts in a regional Ebola recovery plan should be
welcomed and supported. Such regional cooperation,
including at the highest level, will also be important for
the future maintenance of regional peace and security.
Relevant regional initiatives and organizations deserve
greater attention and support, and we should more
systematically consult and coordinate with these
organizations as we frame our own engagement.

The priority for the Peacebuilding Commission is
to safeguard that peacebuilding gains can be sustained
and strengthened. Close coordination with the Security
Council will be important in the coming months to
help ensure a responsible and seamless transition of
UNMIL, including by coordinating with relevant Ebola
recovery efforts and helping to mobilize support and
resources for the Government transition plan.

The Ebola crisis exposed how volatile the situation
in Liberia still is. But it also demonstrated the
determination and resilience of the people of Liberia.
The success that we hope to celebrate on 9 May is much
thanks to Liberian political, religious and traditional
leaders uniting in collective action. We should build on
this experience and seize the opportunity for change
as we take the next steps in support of a peaceful and
prosperous Liberia.

