Mr. Musambachime (Zambia): At the outset,
allow me, on behalf of the current Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), President
Mwanawasa of Zambia, to congratulate the delegation
of Singapore on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May. My delegation
also wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for initiating
this meeting, which will undoubtedly go a long way in
helping to resolve conflicts in Africa. In the same vein,
let me commend your predecessor, Ambassador Lavrov
ofthe Russian Federation, for the able manner in which
he guided the affairs of the Council during the month
of April.

We also wish to pay a special tribute to
Ambassador Koonjul of Mauritius for his tireless work.
We are confident that, under his chairmanship, the ad
hoc Working Group will enhance and supplement
efforts to bring about lasting peace on the African
continent. We also thank him for the statement that he
made this morning on the mandate of the ad hoc
Working Group.

My delegation further wishes to thank the
Chairman of the Economic and Social Council and the
Permanent Observer of the OAU for their important
statements this morning. Special thanks go also to
Assistant Secretary-General Ibrahima Fall for his
contribution to the establishment ofthe ad hoc Working
Group and for the support he has given to it. We also
thank him for the thought-provoking statement that he
made this morning. I should like to mention here that
we welcome his appointment as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for West Africa. As he leaves
to take up his new post in Dakar, we wish him well.

The decision to convene this meeting to discuss
the ad hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa is to be highly commended. The
meeting is a timely and welcome development in that it
allows members and non-members of the Council to
review the situation in Africa and to propose a new
course of action. My delegation would like to express
its appreciation to the Security Council for devoting so
much time to issues concerning Africa. This debate,
and the visits made by Council members to our
continent to get a first-hand impression of the situation
and to have the opportunity to discuss issues with our
leaders and with other parties to conflicts, have
highlighted the extent of the Council's interest in
resolving issues and in finding solutions to conflicts in
Africa.

In view of the complex nature of the conflicts in
Africa, the ad hoc Working Group has a huge
responsibility to find innovative ways of addressing
their underlying causes in order to foster sustainable
peace and security on our continent. The holding of
this meeting is a step towards realizing the objectives
ofthe ad hoc Working Group.

The Secretary-General's report on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa (S/1998/318) was
published in 1998 and was considered by the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council as highlighting the causes of conflict,
which include poverty; local, national and regional
instability; and widespread and easy access to small
arms and light weapons. The report also contains a
series of both specific and broad recommendations on
the issues of conflict resolution, post-conflict peace-
building and the mobilization of resources for
development. My delegation has total confidence in the
report's recommendations.

The holding ofthis meeting comes at a time when
a number of positive developments are taking place in
Africa. We want to congratulate the people of Sierra
Leone on the steps that they have taken towards peace
in their country. The successful holding of elections
there, in an atmosphere of peace and tranquillity during
the entire exercise, demonstrated that the people of
Sierra Leone were tired of war and desired peace.

We salute the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo for the significant progress of the inter-
Congolese dialogue in Sun City, South Africa, under
the wise counsel ofthe facilitator, Sir Ketumile Masire,
former President of Botswana, and President Mbeki of
South Africa. The Congolese people deserve praise for
their serious approach to their responsibilities and for
securing agreement on 87 points, which constituted
approximately 85 per cent of what was to be discussed.
We hope that the remaining issues will not prove to be
obstacles to moving the peace process forward. We also
hope that, under the aegis of the Lusaka Agreement,
which is accepted by all parties to the conflict, the
agreement between the Government and the Movement
for the Liberation of the Congo will be used as a
framework to broaden and incorporate all other groups
as they work towards a final agreement. It is important
that the final agreement be owned by all groups in the
Congo.

We also congratulate the people of Angola for the
giant strides they have taken towards the cessation of
conflict since February this year. We note with
satisfaction the rapid progress of the peace process, the
demobilization of former rebel soldiers and the gradual
resettlement of displaced persons. It is our hope that
those developments will be permanent and that the
people of Angola will not return to war. The Angolan
people need peace; we hope that it is now within their
grasp. The international community should continue to
give them support as they strive towards the attainment
of peace in their country.

My delegation would also like to congratulate
Eritrea and Ethiopia on accepting the report of the
Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission without
reservation. That development is a demonstration of
two neighbouring countries resolving the conflict
between them in a peaceful and friendly manner.

We wish to note that some progress has also been
registered in Burundi. A transitional Government is in
place, and we hope that the international community
will continue to give support to the peace process in
that country.

At this juncture, we would like to commend the
leaders of Africa for producing an economic initiative,
the New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD). It is a blueprint for the development of
Africa, and it stresses such aspects as the importance of
the prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts; peace enforcement, peacekeeping and
peacemaking; and post-conflict reconciliation,
rehabilitation and reconstruction. More important, it
focuses on the utilization of Africa's own resources for
development with the support of partners.

The developments taking place in Madagascar,
the Republic of the Congo, Somalia and Liberia are,
however, less comforting. The situations in those
countries demand concerted action by all concerned -
including the international community - to restore
peace and to avoid further loss of life and suffering
among the people. We commend the efforts of the
Security Council, the OAU, the regional groups and the
various African leaders to bring peace to these sister
countries. We pray and hope that they will bear fruit
soon.

In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity to
pledge the full support and commitment of my
delegation to the activities of the ad hoc Working
Group. Its objectives to find solutions to the problems
of Africa have our support. It is my hope that, together,
we can make a difference and find workable solutions
for Africa.

