Mr. Bildt: It is indeed an honour to be able to
address the Council on the search for self-sustaining
stability, as well as human rights and democracy, in the
Balkans.

Kosovo is once again the centre of public attention.
But it is not my task to go into the details of all of the
challenges we are facing there. Indeed, Mr. Kouchner will
be briefing the Council on these on 6 March, I
understand. It is enough for me to repeat what I remarked
in informal consultations last year: that the operation in
Kosovo is the most complex and the most challenging
operation of this sort that the United Nations has ever
been asked to undertake.

But Kosovo is only one small part of a region that
is in search of stability, and my task as Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General is to see what can be done to
prevent new conflicts from occurring, as well as to see
what can be done to pave the way for self-sustaining
stability in the region as a whole.

Instability and conflict are not recent phenomena in
this region. We often tend to forget that conflicts and
instabilities in the Balkans dominated the first decade of
the twentieth century as much as they dominated the last.
To find a stable political order for this region, with its
rich mosaic of peoples, cultures and traditions - the
result of millennia of rule by multinational empires - has
been a most difficult task.

It was a decade ago that we were confronted with
these issues again. Old regimes and old structures of
repression were thrown away, and the international
community was faced with the task of helping the region
transit to a new order of stability, now also built on
respect for human rights and democracy. This has proved
to be a most challenging task. Some would describe it as
a succession of failures: the failure to prevent the war in
Croatia, the failure to prevent the war in Bosnia and the
failure to prevent the war in Kosovo. Those wars of
course devastated the lives of people and devastated the
region. The United Nations system, from the very
beginning, has been at the forefront of the efforts to
alleviate suffering and help ordinary people. It has often,
as the Council knows, been a thankless task.

As we look at the situation now, a decade later, I do
not think it is possible to say that we have managed to
achieve a situation of self-sustaining stability in the

 

region. Indeed, our combined political, humanitarian,
economic and military involvement in the different parts of
the region is larger and more demanding than ever before.
Were it to be withdrawn today, we would be facing new
wars tomorrow.

The larger issue that we are confronted with in the
region is the conflict between what I refer to as the forces
of integration and the forces of disintegration. The conflict
is between those who favour, or at least accept, integration
within their societies as well as between them, and those
who favour - often in the name of extreme nationalism -
disintegration within their societies and between nations.
We know, of course, from rather bitter experience that
virtually every step of disintegration in the region has been
associated with violent conflict of one sort or another, more
often than not resulting in massive violations of human
rights, massive ethnic cleansing and massive destruction of
economic and social infrastructure. This has not been a
region of velvet divorces; this has been a region of violent
divorces.

As we look at the region today, we have to conclude
that the forces of disintegration are still stronger than the
forces of integration. As long as this is the case, a self-
sustaining stability that also conforms to our other values
will be most difficult to achieve. This makes it even more
important to press on with our search for such stability.

In 1995, after massive failures and massive efforts, we
managed to achieve a political settlement in Bosnia. The
Dayton Peace Agreement remains one of the most
ambitious agreements of its kind in modern history. In
1999, efforts to seek a political settlement to the conflict in
Kosovo failed, and the war that resulted ended with
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), as well as with a
military-technical agreement. But there was and there is no
proper peace agreement.

This is a key factor that makes the task of the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo so demanding and so difficult.
And since the core issues of the conflict concerning the
long-term position of Kosovo are not seen as settled, it has
also made it much more difficult to move towards stability
for the region as a whole. There are simply too many
expectations and too many fears generated by the
apparently unresolved core issues of the conflict.

It is thus imperative, if we are not going to give up
our search for self-sustaining stability, that we be ready to
resume the search for a peaceful settlement to the conflict.
The time might not yet be ripe for more concrete moves,
but the time is certainly ripe for discussion of the core
issues. Let me indicate four starting points for such a
search for a settlement. They, in turn, come on top of the
most obvious point, namely, taking into account the
wishes of all those living or having their roots in Kosovo.
First, I believe the search for a regional settlement
must have the solid support of the Council. This is not
just an abstract principle or political statement. It is based
on concrete experience in the region during the past 10
years. For only when there has been a solid consensus
among the key international actors - often the United
States, the countries of the European Union and the
Russian Federation - has it been possible to achieve
political agreements between the different warring parties
in the different conflicts in the area. Any lesser
combination has, as a rule, been doomed to failure. It is
thus important for there to be a dialogue within the
Council on the shape of the regional settlement that must
come.

Secondly, I believe that the States of the region must
be active participants in the search for this settlement. In
Rambouillet a year ago, the search for a settlement was
primarily between Belgrade and the political
representatives of the Kosovo Albanians. Although this
certainly remains the core conflict yet to be settled, its
settlement is no longer enough. The future of Kosovo
affects the region as a whole in a very profound way. We
must thus be clear in seeking the voice and the
involvement of the leaders in Skopje and Tirana, as well
as other regional capitals. We must take into account the
views expressed in Podgorica and in Sarajevo. We must
treat it as a truly regional issue.

Thirdly, I believe it is fundamental that we be ready
to make it clear that a true deal will be one that meets the
minimum demands of everyone, but the maximum
demands of no one. This was the essence of the political
deal that resulted in the Peace Agreement for Bosnia. It
answered to the minimum demands of everyone, while it
met the maximum demands of no one. Only thus could
that deal be achieved, and only thus can that deal be
carried forward.

Fourthly, and what is perhaps most difficult, we
must be able to set an agreement firmly within the
context of a wider arrangement for the region as a whole,
and preferably for the region within the wider European
context. There are obvious interrelationships between the
different conflicts in the region, and there is an obvious
need to create a wider framework that will not only

 

guarantee the stability of the different deals in the region
but will also promote the common policies of reform,
reconciliation and reintegration, which will be absolutely
crucial to future development.

There have been, and there are, important regional
initiatives. In the early 1990s there was the United Nations
and European Union-sponsored International Conference on
the Former Yugoslavia, and since the summer of last year
there has been the Stability Pact initiative, sponsored by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and initiated by the European Union. The European
Union has also offered to conclude stabilization and
association agreements with each of the countries of the
region.

These important efforts notwithstanding, it is my belief
that there will be a need for a structure that in its scope,
firmness and perspective goes well beyond what has so far
been contemplated.

All this being said, we all know that there are virtually
no possibilities at the moment of proceeding along this path
of a possible peace. We are, mildly speaking, handicapped
by the regime in Belgrade. The fact that the key political
and military leaders of what is left of Yugoslavia have been
indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for
Yugoslavia for crimes against humanity means that they are
de facto excommunicated from any sort of dialogue or
diplomatic contact.

This is natural, but it is undoubtedly also a dilemma.
We can neither make peace without Belgrade, nor talk
about the different issues of the region as a whole without
taking in Serbia, but there is also no way in which we can
deal with those personalities who are indicted by the
International Tribunal or their close associates. We are thus,
in a certain sense, in a situation in which many of our
efforts in the region can be seen as little more than a big
holding operation until change in Serbia opens up the
prospect of moving forward with a proper peace process as
well as with the wider regional agenda of reform,
reconciliation and reintegration.

But simply to sit and wait is not enough. If we do
that, we might well be faced with further conflicts. We
must actively seek change; we must meet the provocations
that are there and will come later; and we must actively try
to prevent existing tensions from boiling over into open
conflict.

Let me, in this context, mention in particular the
situation between Serbia and Montenegro. As long as
there is no change of regime in Belgrade, these two
republics of Yugoslavia are set on a somewhat slow but
very steady collision course. President Milosevic has
grossly misused the federal institutions and grossly
violated the rights of Montenegro within that federation.
That the leadership of Montenegro has not reacted to
these violations by seceding outright, but proposed instead
a reformed relationship between Serbia and Montenegro
is an indication of responsibility and statesmanship that
should not go unrewarded.

The position of Montenegro is difficult in a number
of respects. In a way, we can say that it suffers from
double sanctions. From one side, Montenegrans suffer
from the sanctions against all of Yugoslavia, which block
their access to the international financial institutions.
From the other side, they face the de facto sanctions
against them from Serbia, forcing them - to take just
one example - to rely on expensive food imports from
abroad.

I believe that, in the interests of stability, we must
all accelerate our efforts to give them help in this
particularly difficult situation. The confrontation between
Montenegro and Serbia is a confrontation over the future
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. As such, it has
obvious implications for the way in which Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) can one day be fully
implemented. A regional settlement is hardly possible
until key questions of the future shape of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia have been settled. Such a regional
settlement will have to balance the wider interests of the
Serbs or other Slavs with those of the Albanians in the
region. We certainly want to build democracy and civil
society in the entire region and in all of these countries,
but this will not be enough to make all of these other
issues go away. Nationalism and democracy are not
necessarily incompatible.

We must be aware of the tensions that are there
along the fault lines between these wider interests. We
see them on an almost daily basis in Mitrovica in
northern Kosovo. And we must not pretend that we
cannot recognize those extremists groups or individuals
on both sides who are determined to exploit these
tensions to the full along all of the fault lines, be they in
northern Kosovo, be they in southern Serbia, as we are
also seeing, or be they perhaps even in Macedonia.
Again, we are dealing with the clash between the forces
of integration and the forces of disintegration in the

 

region. If the latter are allowed to have the upper hand for
long enough, we will see tensions building up even more,
bringing further conflicts, and perhaps even paving the way
for conflicts every bit as brutal as those we have already
witnessed.

We are thus faced with a complex situation in the
region. There are positive developments. The political
changes in Croatia certainly count very prominently among
those and, in spite of all of the difficulties that we are
facing and the Council is familiar with, we are also making
progress in Bosnia. But overall, we are still far from
achieving the self-sustaining stability which we have been
seeking for the past decade and about which all the
individuals of the different countries of the region,
irrespective of belief, origin or creed, are dreaming. So the
search will have to go on under conditions that are far from
easy.

