Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Nigeria's initiative to convene today's open
debate on regional organizations and contemporary
challenges of global security. I thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his presence at this meeting,
and listened carefully to his briefing.

The United Nations is at the heart of the
international collective security mechanism. The
Security Council has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Peace
and development are the watchwords of our times, but
our world is not yet at peace. Regional turbulence,
terrorism, major epidemics, natural disasters and other
non-traditional security issues continue to arise. All
countries are becoming increasingly interdependent
and share a common destiny.
China supports the efforts of the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations to deepen
cooperation in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations in consolidating and
strengthening the international collective security
mechanism as we strive to jointly maintain international
peace and security. I should like to emphasize three
points in that regard.

First, we must be guided by and base our actions
on the United Nations Charter. The United Nations
should encourage and support regional organizations
in resolving conflicts through dialogue, consultations,
good offices and mediation, in defusing differences
through peaceful means, and in contributing to the
promotion of regional peace and security. The actions
of relevant regional organizations should adhere to the
principles and purposes of the Charter, in particular the
principle of respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of States.

Secondly, we must deploy our respective strengths
in order to enhance complementarity and coordination.
China supports regional organizations in fully utilizing
their own experiences and advantages in regional,
historical and cultural expertise in playing their
unique role in resolving regional conflicts. When
cooperating with each other, the United Nations and
regional organizations should use their respective
strengths to complement and promote each other's
efforts. Regional organizations should strengthen
contacts and cooperation among themselves, draw on
one another's experiences and learn from each other.
China appreciates the efforts of regional organizations,
such as the African Union (AU), to resolve regional
hotbed issues through good offices and peaceful means.
We hope that the United Nations will provide more
assistance to the relevant regional organizations and
support their important role in maintaining regional
peace and security.

Thirdly, we should continue to cooperate in seeking
win-win situations and towards common development.
All countries should adopt a new approach for win-win
solutions, and in pursuit of self-interest we must also
take the interests of others into account and promote
common development, while seeking our own. They
should maintain a concept of security that is joint,
integrated, cooperative and sustainable; take full
account of the history and reality of relevant regional
problem; and develop comprehensive policies that seek
security through cooperation, place equal emphasis
on development and security, and promote sustainable
security through sustainable development.
The AU, the largest and most representative regional
organization in Africa, is playing an increasingly
important role in regional peace and security affairs.
China has always been an active and constructive
participant in African peace and security affairs. In July
2012, at the fifth ministerial conference of the Forum
on China-Africa Cooperation, China put forward the
Initiative on China-Africa Cooperative Partnership
for Peace and Security, aimed at enhancing the AU's
capacit-building in peace and security, improving its
capacities in peacekeeping operations and combatting
terrorism and piracy. The Initiative covers Chinese
financial support to the AU for conducting peacekeeping
operations and building the African Standby Force. It
also covers strengthened training for African Union
peace and security officers and peacekeepers.

With the efforts of both sides over the past three
years, there has been positive progress in implementing
the initiative. China has provided positive support
to the African Union Mission in Somalia, as well as
for other activities, and has trained a large number of
peacekeepers for African countries. The Forum will
hold its sixth meeting later this year, on the theme
"Peace and security".

Together with Africa, China is ready to seize
the opportunity to step up the implementation of the
Initiative on China-Africa Cooperative Partnership
for Peace and Security so as to facilitate the political
settlement of hot-spot issues and jointly promote peace,
stability and development on the African continent.
China attaches great importance to the important
role played by regional and subregional organizations
in preventing and resolving conflicts and facilitating
post-conflict reconstruction, as well as responding to
non-traditional security threats. China is ready to join
hands with the international community to strengthen
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations to promote international
peace and security and to create a more secure and
brighter future for all.

