Mr. Klein (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Llorentty Soliz for his report and his
leadership of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). We have a lot to guide us
in our work this year. In addition to the report of the
second comprehensive review, we also have resolution
2325 (2016), which the Security Council unanimously
adopted last December.

Today, I am going to touch briefly on the challenges
that we continue to face, the importance of international
cooperation and our particular emphasis in the United
States on outreach and transparency. We are pleased
with the momentum that was built last year, and the
United States still sees the 1540 Committee as a crucial
foundation for combating the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction.

Resolution 2325 (2016) was positive. It provided
the Committee with new tools for accomplishing our
non-proliferation goals. Nonetheless, we still have a long
way to go before we can say that the obligations of the
Committee are being fully met. In that context, there are
a number of recent, alarming developments, including
the use of chemical weapons in Iraq, the alleged use
of VX nerve agent in Malaysia and the confirmed use
of chemical weapons by State and non-State actors in
Syria. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
arsenal of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) and
its series of ballistic missile tests, all in violation of
Council resolutions, along with its defiant threats to use
weapons of mass destruction, make clear the great risk
that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea poses
to international peace and security.

Moreover, we have real concerns about the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea as a proliferation
risk, as they could try to sell material or technology
to bad actors in order to try to finance their own
programmes. Against that backdrop, we believe that it
is ever more urgent for the Committee to redouble its
efforts to assist Member States in preventing the transfer
of WMD-related material, expertise and technology to
terrorists. For example, assistance among States is an
essential part of resolution 1540 (2004), but States need
to improve their communication and coordination with
the Committee so as to ensure that the limited resources
are being used effectively.

Last year's comprehensive review found that
regional assistance efforts have been particularly
effective. To that end, the United States contribution
to the 1540 United Nations Trust Fund for Global and
Regional Disarmament Activities is funding a 1540
Regional Coordinator position in the Organization of
American States. We expect that official to be hired
and working soon.

The 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts
will also continue to play a crucial role in monitoring
and promoting the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). Six of the nine experts are, however, scheduled
to depart this year. We hope that the incoming experts
will bring expertise and backgrounds in fields such
as outreach, monitoring and evaluation, which are
essential skills that the Committee needs.

That leads me to my final point, which is on
outreach and transparency. My delegation places a
particular emphasis on outreach and transparency as
vital tools for strengthening the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). In fact, as Chair of Working
Group IV, on transparency and media outreach, the
United States helped to sponsor a student essay contest
with the Stimson Centre, which is a non-profit research
institution that focuses on international peace and
security. There were over 150 essay submissions from
undergraduate and graduate students in 44 countries
around the world. Later this month, we expect to be
ready to launch a fully updated version of the 1540
Committee's website, which will make it easier to
navigate and allow visitors to the site to quickly learn
about the Committee and its many available resources.

In conclusion, the United States looks forward to
hearing Council members' ideas on how we can work
together to achieve full implementation of resolution of
2325 (2016), and we look forward to cooperating with
all Council members to that end.

