President Farmajo: Before I start my statement,
I would like to express my deepest sympathy and
condolences to the British people and the British
Government following the barbaric terrorist attack in
London. We in Somalia are at the forefront of that war.
We fully condemn terrorism and will continue to fight
it in all its forms.

It is a great honour to address the Security Council
on the important matter of Somali's progress and the
remaining challenges we face. The Security Council,
along with many partner nations of the United
Nations, has played and will continue to play a vital
role in our national progress alongside our people and
Government, both bilaterally and multilaterally. At the
outset, I would like to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General and his delegation, including
Mr. Stephen O'Brien, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for visiting Somalia to witness and assess
the current acute humanitarian challenges we face. I
heartily welcome the statement by Mr. Michael Keating,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, and agree that while there are immediate and
long-term challenges to overcome, there is also much to
be hopeful about as we make tangible and sustainable
political progress.

Despite the progress Somalia is making, it is difficult
to meet the challenges of drought and the humanitarian
crises both in our country and in the region, but we must
not simply give way to doom and gloom. We in Somalia
strongly believe that socioeconomic and political gain

must go hand in hand with good governance to achieve
sustainable development for all our people.

As the Council knows, despite the enormous
challenges and scepticism, the long and protracted
elections have just been concluded peacefully and
democratically. On 22 February, I appointed Hassan
Ali Khayre as my Prime Minister, and the Federal
Parliament endorsed him unanimously. Just two days
ago, he in turn formed a competent Cabinet. I am
optimistic that Parliament will once again support the
new Cabinet so that we can get to work, starting with
tackling the drought currently wreaking havoc in our
nation. Somalia was one the first democratic countries
in Africa, and on 8 March we completed our first
successful national election in decades. That election
saw the preceding President, Hassan Sheikh Mohamud,
graciously accept the electoral outcome that led to my
becoming President, and his speech to all delegates
strongly encouraged all Somalis and other stakeholders
to work with and support the new Administration under
the new President.

For the first time in history, we have an almost
30 per cent representation of women in our Parliament,
a substantial improvement from 14 per cent in 2012.
Furthermore, the number of young lawmakers has
increased, and there is a healthy number of diaspora
parliamentarians, which is an excellent indicator that
our people living all over the world will have an even
greater impact than they have already had through
remittances in shaping the direction that Somalia takes
going forward. The new Cabinet also reflects a greater
proportion of women and youth, who are the bedrock
of our society.

Among the many pressing priorities for my
Administration, responding effectively to the current
humanitarian crisis tops the agenda. Almost half of
my people are facing acute food shortages, and about
15 per cent are facing famine. I am truly saddened by
that situation, as the Somali people are proud, generous,
hard-working and truly resilient. They would be the last
people to ask for assistance if they could somehow find
a way to survive and transcend their reality. Instead,
however, men, women and children walk for miles
and hours in search of food and water, and many have
fled to urban centres looking for the support that our
Government is desperately trying to provide with
the assistance of the international community. Many
people's livelihoods, especially those in the area of
animal husbandry, have perished. We are therefore
left collectively to plan a better future together in the
aftermath of this humanitarian crisis.

The Somali Government has already sounded the
alarm internationally and nationally and is leading a
drive to generate funds from the Somali diaspora, the
business community and others sources that might
provide the urgent lifesaving assistance that the
millions of our people affected by drought need. A few
weeks ago, I declared the current drought a national
disaster, so as to unleash our institutions and enable
them to act urgently. The Prime Minister chairs the
national drought committee, which has successfully
mobilized and organized Somalis in the country and in
the diaspora to collect funds in support oftheir brothers
and sisters affected by the devastating drought.

The response from the Somali people and the
international community has been tremendous, and
we are working with the humanitarian community and
valuable partners to address the issue. We kindly ask
all those who can to give further support to this effort.
Their support and generosity will be noted not just by
the Somali people but by history.

Given the regional nature of the drought, it is
important that sustainable, region-wide and resilient
early-warning and intervention strategies be created
and, where they already exist, enhanced. We must
ensure that we increase the resilience of communities
and make a priority of developing sustainable solutions
for environmentally induced disasters such as this
drought. In that regard, we have now created a new
Government Ministry that focuses exclusively on
humanitarian response and disaster management.
In our national development plan, we have an entire
chapter dedicated to resilience and a long-term strategy
to mitigate cyclical droughts. In the desperate fight
to avert this and other droughts, it is crucial that
neighbours share ideas and experience bilaterally and
multilaterally through the United Nations and regional
institutions such as the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development. This is the only way that can we hope to
mitigate the devastating damage caused by droughts in
East Africa.

The humanitarian response to the drought is
somewhat challenging in certain places because of the
insecurity caused by the terrorist group Al-Shabaab.
However, we are determined to defeat it. I can
confidently say that Al-Shabaab, thanks to the courage
and sacrifice of the troops of the Somali National
Army and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), has been substantially weakened. In the
fight against Al-Shabaab and international terrorism,
we are grateful for the continuous support of AMISOM
troop-contributing countries, our valued international
partners, including many members of the Security
Council, and the Somali Security Service, which is
growing in strengthen and ability every day.

While we are grateful for all the support from
and sacrifices by AMISOM, we understand that the
only way to protect our democracy and development
against evil spoilers is to rebuild our national army,
police and other security services. I can assure the
Security Council today that that is our goal, and we will
achieve it with the Council's continued support. We are
working with our partners to develop a clear road map
for the reduction of AMISOM. forces, while we are also
expanding both the quality and quantity of our security
services. In that regard, I would like to ask the Security
Council to work with us on a road map towards the
full lifting of the arms embargo. The road map will be
presented at the upcoming London conference in May.

Achieving sustainable peace requires more than
physical security. We must invest in education, jobs and
skills in order to overcome the many challenges Somalia
faces. That critical component of development must
accompany the physical security we seek, or it will be
difficult to overcome the challenges of radicalization,
illegal migration and other tragedies that waste talents
and lives. Furthermore, we need to train and educate
the future water, engineering, livestock, agriculture
and technological champions who will design, produce
and maintain the drought-resilience systems that are
necessary for ensuring that today's misery is never
again repeated. I am sure that all Council members will
agree that that is a better investment of our money than
repeatedly responding to cyclical humanitarian crises.

Our strategy for a sustainable economic recovery
is detailed in the national development plan. We will
present our top priorities at the London conference,
but I can point to a few key ones today. First, we need
to invest seriously in our vital infrastructure, starting
with energy, water and major roads. Secondly, we
need to revive key economic engines such agriculture,
livestock and fisheries. Thirdly, we need to invest in
new sectors, such as telecommunications and finance.
Finally, none of the foregoing will be possible if we do
not first undo our errors and normalize our relations
with international financial institutions. Tangible
progress has already been made in that regard, but
we hope for an accelerated process of debt relief and,
subsequently, access to capital loans. A detailed plan
covering those issues will be presented in London.

On the political front, we have major work ahead
of us. A primary objective for us will be to deepen
the federal architecture by strengthening the federal
member states and finalizing the status of the capital,
Mogadishu. Furthermore, we will finalize the review
of our Constitution, which is the document that will
bind the Somali people together. We have a large
number of negotiations ahead, in such key areas as
resource-sharing, the relationship between the Federal
Government and the federal member states, security
architecture and policy, and many other issues. We will
approach them with an eye to reconciliation and social
healing. Most importantly, we will work towards the
implementation of a one-person, one-vote arrangement
in 2020, anchored in a political party system. That is the
only way to make our political system more transparent
and truly democratic.

Despitethemanychallenges,noneisinsurmountable.
The Somalis are resilient, patient and ready to do the
heavy lifting for their own progress. However, we have
a saying in Somalia that one finger cannot be the boss
of your whole face. We therefore want to reiterate to the
Security Council how much we value the effort of all
our partners, and to emphasize that in this time of both
our greatest need and greatest opportunity, we must
cooperate in order to achieve our common goals and
ensure that Somalia, the region and the rest of the world
are safe, progressive and prosperous.

