Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): I would first like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the able manner
in which you are leading the work of the Council.
I would also like to thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
comprehensive briefing.

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People welcomes the tireless
diplomatic efforts of the international community, in
particular those led by the United States Administration
over the past several months. The negotiations were the
best opportunity in recent years to find a negotiated
solution.

As the deadline established nine months ago
is now upon us, the Committee notes with concern
the apparent lack of progress and the revising of
expectations downwards. Once again, the talks have
been compromised by the illegal settlement activities,
which increased by 130 per cent, and non-compliance
with the commitment to release prisoners who, under
the Oslo agreements, should have been released a long
time ago.

Support for the peace process was the main theme
of the United Nations international meeting that the
Committee held in Quito on 25 and 26 March. We
continue to support the search for a comprehensive
settlement on the basis ofthe agreed terms of reference,
in particular the 1967 borders. The Committee calls
upon the parties to honour their commitments, to show
good will and cease all illegal activities and refrain
from making new demands, which will only arouse
distrust.

Last week, the Committee also held a round table
with leading international law experts to discuss the
implementation of various measures, in particular
regarding the legal status of Palestinian prisoners, and
solutions available to Palestine given its accession to the
Geneva Conventions of 1949, The Hague conventions
and other international treaties. The discussions we had
on those issues will inform the work of the Committee
and, hopefully, that of the Council. The Council
will agree that settlement activity is a violation of
international law and a violation of its decisions. The
Committee therefore asks the Council, as the guarantor
of international peace and security, to ensure respect
for international law and its own resolutions. We ask
the Council to urge the occupying Power to end its
arbitrary detention and mistreatment of prisoners,
release prisoners and provide medical care to detainees.

While continuing to support the peace process,
the Committee appreciates the legitimate Palestinian
initiatives aimed at promoting human rights and
accountability, which are initiatives that unfortunately
met with immediate threats of economic retaliation
from the occupying Power and the most extensive
confiscation of Palestinian lands in recent years.

However, the international community seems
ambivalent with respect to the continuing illegal
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory. The resolution on the settlements just adopted
by the Human Rights Council (A/HRC/25/L.37/Rev.l)
is, from that point ofview, a first step towards rectifying
that imbalance. The international community should
increasingly apply the relevant international standards
in a uniform manner.

We are particularly concerned by the proliferation
of provocative acts by extremists and certain Israeli
political leaders in the vicinity of the holy sites in
Jerusalem. Such measures restrict freedom of worship
and further exacerbate tensions. The Israeli actions
aimed at changing the legal status and the physical,
demographic and cultural characteristics of occupied
East Jerusalem, the future capital of the Palestinian
State, are prohibited by international law. To shed light
on the situation, the Committee, in cooperation with
Turkey and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
will hold, in Ankara, on 12 and 13 May, an international
meeting on the question of Jerusalem.

The Committee once again condemns attacks
against civilians from either side and under any pretext
whatsoever. We welcome the recent agreement on
intra-Palestinian reconciliation and look forward to
seeing it implemented in good faith by both parties.

Finally, I would like to say that, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 68/12, the Committee
is continuing its programme of activities for the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People. It is in that context that ajoint meeting was held
on 9 and 10 March in the Egyptian capital between the
League of Arab States and the Committee. It resulted in
the reiteration, in the Cairo declaration, of the region's
strong solidarity with the Palestinian cause.

