I thank France for convening this open debate, as well as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and the Director of the United Nations Children's Fund for their presentations. Colombia has experienced the phenomenon of forced recruitment by illegal armed groups. However, the children concerned are identified and cared for by the Colombian State as victims and, consequently, are not deprived of their liberty, which is in line with the Special Representative's recommendations and helps to avoid further stigmatization. Pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005), Colombia continues to make progress on effective mechanisms to prevent recruitment, such as the Intersectoral Commission for the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Children and Adolescents by Illegal Organized Groups, which has helped to identify risk factors and coordinate State action. In addition, in November 2019, the Government adopted a public policy on the prevention of recruitment and use of children and adolescents and of sexual violence against them by organized armed groups and organized criminal groups. The policy's main purposes are to create protective environments, progressively reduce all forms of violence and exploitation, guarantee rights and establish mechanisms to facilitate intersectoral coordination. Colombia has made an unequivocal commitment to respect that population group and has directed all the necessary efforts to prevent the recruitment, use and utilization of children, and sexual violence against them, by armed groups and organized crime. It is important to reiterate that law enforcement entities have been respectful of children's rights. They have complied strictly with the prohibition on involving them in service activities, in accordance with the Code on Children and Adolescents and the Intelligence and Counter-Intelligence Act. Inresponse to acts of sexual violence, the Government is developing a technical assistance strategy to include the comprehensive care and prevention programme in the development plans of the target territories. Colombia rejects and condemns the use of schools and educational centres by organized armed groups to conduct their criminal activities. Likewise, it reiterates its respect for the rules of international humanitarian law. My country encourages the Secretary-General to indicate in his annual reports the sources of the recorded figures, in order to improve the data analysis process of international organizations and States and to contribute to strengthening evaluation mechanisms. The reports are a guide and a starting point in the formulation and improvement of public policies. Education and vocational training are the most effective means of creating safe environments for comprehensive development and of preventing the six grave violations committed in times of armed conflict. It is imperative that we continue working towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, which include, inter alia, rights to an adequate standard of living, food, equality, health, education and personal integrity. Today we reaffirm once again Colombia's commitment to building an increasingly prosperous and secure future for children and adolescents. They are the future and the seed of peace in our country.
