Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Augustine Mahiga,
for his briefing.

The peace process has achieved historic progress
in Somalia. The tasks specified by the road map have
been basically accomplished. A new President has been
elected, a new Prime Minister has been appointed,
and there have been military gains in combating
Al-Shabaab. We welcome and offer congratulations
on the success and thank the Special Representative,
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and other regional organizations
for their efforts. We highly appreciate the important
contributions by the late Prime Minister of Ethiopia,
Mr. Meles Zenawi.

China has noted that there is still a long way to
go to reach lasting peace, and challenges remain. The
capabilities of the Somali Government still need to be
strengthened. Terrorism and extremist forces still exist.
The terrorist situation remains precarious. We hope
that Somalia's different parties will make efforts in the
following four aspects.

First, they should continue to advance the political
process and national reconciliation. We hope the Somali
parties will seize this historic opportunity for the greater
good of national stability and development, strengthen
unity and cooperation, and bridge their differences
through dialogue and consultations. We support the
new Government of Somalia in implementing an
interim Constitution, exercising Government functions
and extending effective authority over all its national
territory. We urge different factions in Somalia to
renounce violence and to join the peace process as soon
as possible.

Secondly, the security situation must be further
consolidated. We support Somalia's efforts to expedite
the building of the security sector and to assume full
responsibility for protecting sovereignty and national
civility. We appreciate AMISOM's effective work, and
we support its continuing to play an important role in
stability in Somalia. In the light of the real need, the
international community, especially the United Nations,
should strengthen logistical support for AMISOM. and
the Somalia security forces.

Thirdly, they most start economic and social
reconstruction. Poverty and underdevelopment are the
root causes of the 20 years of turbulence in Somalia. We
hope that Somali parties will soon prepare economic and
social reconstruction plans so as to let the Somali people
see the prospect of national peace and development.
We call on the United Nations and the entire donor
community to deliver what has been committed and to
raise more funds, in cash or in kind, to help Somalia
achieve economic and social development.

Fourthly, a new strategy in which the international
community can help Somalia must be prepared. We
support the Secretary-General's strategic review of the
continued United Nations presence in Somalia beyond
2012 to 2016. We hope the United Nations will play an
active coordinating role and take fully into account the
views of the African Union and IGAD, on the basis of
respecting Somalia's sovereignty. We hope that it will
prepare a comprehensive and viable strategic plan to
help Somalia achieve stability and development and put
that plan into effect as soon as possible.

