Mrs. Laohaphan (Thailand): I am pleased to see
you, Sir, presiding over this meeting, and I
congratulate you and your country on your presidency
of the Security Council. At the outset, my delegation
wishes to thank Ambassador Heraldo Munoz,
Chairman of the Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions
Committee, for his informative and comprehensive
briefing on the overall work of the Committee.

Thailand attaches great importance to the work of
all the committees established by the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. It supports the new
approach of the Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions
Committee in shifting the focus from States'
comprehensive implementation reporting to active
dialogue with Member States. Dialogue provides the
Committee not only with valuable insight on States'
implementation efforts, but also a better understanding
of the problems that Member States are encountering.

In this regard, Thailand was pleased to have
received a visit from the Chairman of the Al Qaeda and
Taliban sanctions Committee and his party this past
October. The visit proved to be successful in providing
the Committee with on-the-ground information and in
enhancing the level of understanding and cooperation
between Thailand and the Committee in the efforts to
combat international terrorism. We welcome the
suggestion by the Chairman of the Committee during
his visit that Thailand provide technical assistance to
countries in the region, as that corresponds with
Thailand's ability and willingness to do so.

Thailand's Anti-Money-Laundering Office has
played an active role in tracking suspicious
transactions and fund transfers, in cooperation with
financial institutions, particularly commercial banks.
Still, in certain cases, commercial banks face
difficulties in accurately identifying whether the
transactions are related to terrorist activities, especially
those from legitimate sources with no history of
irregularities. Therefore, we must enhance commercial
banks' expertise in that respect, including expertise
provided by the head offices of foreign banks located
in Thailand.

Thailand wishes to thank the Governments and
international organizations that have provided training
and assistance in combating terrorist financing
methods and techniques to its Anti-Money-Laundering
Office, including the Egmont Group of financial
intelligence units, the Asia/Pacific Group on Money
Laundering, the Asia-Europe Meeting Anti-Money-
Laundering Project, and the Governments of the United
Kingdom and the United States.

In February 2004, Thailand set up a National
Coordinating Centre for Combating Terrorism and
Transnational Crimes as its national focal point for
coordination among relevant international and
domestic agencies. The purpose of this Centre is to
refine all intelligence concerning the internal and
external environment and national security in such
areas as terrorism, illicit drug trafficking, money-
laundering and international economic crimes.
Moreover, Thailand ratified in September the 1999
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism.

Regarding international cooperation, the Thailand
Anti-Money-Laundering Office has signed a
memorandum of understanding concerning cooperation
in the exchange of financial intelligence related to
money-laundering. This is based upon the model of the
Egmont Group of financial intelligence units and
comprises 15 countries with different levels of
susceptibility to terrorist threats, developed or
developing, from different geographical regions of the
world: Andorra, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Finland,
Estonia, Indonesia, Lebanon, Mauritius, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, the Republic
of Korea and the United Kingdom.

Thailand has reinforced immigration measures in
various respects, including the installation of the
Advanced Passenger Information/Processing system at
the airport. In March 2004, Thailand signed a
memorandum of intent with the United States to put
into motion the Personal Identification Secure
Comparison and Evaluation System, which will
enhance immigration measures and can serve as the
nucleus of a nation-wide terrorist interdiction
programme border-control system.

In closing, Thailand would like to reiterate its
support for and cooperation with the Al Qaeda and
Taliban sanctions Committee, as well as its readiness to
provide technical assistance to countries in the region.

