I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security Council today on this critically important issue. Five months ago, I warned the Council the world stood on the brink of a hunger pandemic (see S/2020/340). A toxic combination of conflict, climate change and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) threatened to push 270 million people to the brink of starvation. Famine was a real and terrifying possibility in up to three dozen countries. I am grateful the world listened, responded and acted. Countries large and small took extraordinary measures to save the lives of their citizens and support their economies, spending $17 trillion on fiscal stimulus and central bank support. The International Monetary Fund and the Group of 20 nations threw a lifeline to the poorest nations by suspending debt repayments. Donors stepped up with advanced funding and additional life-saving dollars. And, with our donors' help, the global humanitarian community launched a huge and unprecedented global fightback against COVID-19. Along with our partners, the World Food Programme (WFP) is going all- out to reach as many as 138 million people this year - the biggest scale-up in our history. Already, in the first six months of 2020, we reached 85 million people. The WFP is doing what we do best - adapting and innovating to meet the unique demands of the pandemic: launching new food and cash programmes to support the hungry in urban areas; supporting over 50 Governments to scale up their safety nets and social protection programmes for the most vulnerable; and getting nutritious food to millions of school children shut out of the classroom during lockdown. Every day, we are succeeding in keeping people alive and avoiding a humanitarian catastrophe. But this fight is far from over - the 270 million people marching towards the brink of starvation still need our help. We are doing just about all we can do to stop the dam from bursting. But, without the resources we need, a wave of hunger and famine still threatens to sweep across the globe. And if it does, it will overwhelm nations and communities already weakened by years of conflict and instability. The Security Council made a historic decision when it adopted resolution 2417 (2018) and condemned the human cost of conflict paid in suffering and hunger. The resolution called for effective early-warning systems and, once more, I am here to sound the alarm. The global hunger crisis caused by conflict, and now compounded by COVID-19, is moving into a new and dangerous phase - especially in nations already scarred by violence. The threat of famine is looming again; And so we have to step up, not step back: 2021 will be a make-or-break year. Financially, 2020 was a record year for the WFP. We hit $8 billion for the first time ever, but our budget was set before the pandemic hit. Economies were strong. Reserve and emergency funds were available. But now I am truly worried about what will happen next year. I know members' Governments are spending billions on domestic stimulus packages. National budgets are tight; reserves are running low, if not out; and economies are shrinking. But I urge members not to walk away from their commitment to humanitarian assistance, and not to turn their backs on the world's hungry people. As COVID-19 pushed countries everywhere to lock down, the equivalent of 400 million full-time jobs have been destroyed and remittances have collapsed. The impact has been felt hardest by the 2 billion people who work in the informal economy, mainly in middle- and low-income countries. Already only one day's work away from going hungry, living hand to mouth, they now have no money to buy their daily bread. This inevitably creates a risk of rising social tensions and instability. It is critically important that we balance sensible measures to contain the spread of the virus with the need to keep borders open and supply chains and trade flows moving. We also have to be vigilant and guard against unintended consequences, which could hit the poorest people the hardest. The virus itself thus far has not been as deadly as many people had feared in sub-Saharan Africa; this is the good news. But its toll has been devastating in other ways. The London School of Health and Tropical Medicine has analysed the closure of vaccination clinics in Africa during lockdown. It calculated that for every COVID-19 death prevented, as many as 80 children may die due to a lack of routine immunizations. There is a grave danger that many more people will die from the broader economic and social consequences of COVID-19 than from the virus itself, especially in Africa. The Council's continued support for humanitarian programmes is therefore a matter of life and death - literally - for millions of people in the countries being discussed today, and for many millions more in the other countries edging closer to the brink of starvation. We know that already there are 30 million people who rely solely on the WFP for their survival. Let me turn to the countries on today's agenda. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, conflict and instability had already forced 15.5 million people into crisis levels of food insecurity. The latest assessment indicates that the upsurge in violence and COVID-19 have sent that total skyrocketing to nearly 22 million people, an increase of 6.5 million people. I should warn the Council that these numbers assume that the WFP is able to maintain current levels of food assistance. If we are forced to scale back operations, the outlook is even worse. In Yemen, meanwhile, the countdown to catastrophe continues following years of conflict-induced hunger, and now the COVID-19 pandemic. Twenty million people are already in crisis due to war, a collapsed economy and currency, crippling food prices and the destruction of public infrastructure. We believe that a further 3 million may now face starvation due to the virus. Already because of lack of funding, 8.5 million of our beneficiaries in Yemen receive assistance only every other month. We will be forced to cut rations for the remaining 4.5 million by December if funds do not increase. The decision by the Ansar Allah authorities to close Sana'a international airport last week has made an already impossible situation worse. As the only airport in northern Yemen, it is a critical access point for humanitarian staff. The inability to move people in and out will hamper our efforts to stave off famine. The alarm bells in Yemen are ringing loud and clear, and the world needs to open its eyes to the Yemeni people's desperate plight before famine takes hold. In Nigeria, too, COVID-19 is forcing more people into food insecurity. Analysis shows that the measures imposed to contain the virus reduced incomes in 80 per cent of households. In the north-east of the country, 4.3 million people are food-insecure, up by 600,000, largely due to COVID-19, while in the large urban area of Kano, the number of food-insecure people skyrocketed from 568,000 in March to 1.5 million in June - an increase of | million people. The outlook in South Sudan is similarly worrisome, where even before the pandemic 6.5 million people were expected to face severe hunger at the height of the lean season, made worse by the violence in Jonglei state in recent months. That has resulted in the displacement of tens of thousands of civilians, a large number of abducted women and children and widespread loss of livestock and livelihoods. In addition, virus outbreaks in urban areas such as Juba could put as many as another 1.6 million people at real risk of starvation. Finally, even though it is not on today's agenda, I also want to highlight the disaster unfolding in Burkina Faso, driven by the upsurge in violence. The number of people facing crisis levels of hunger has tripled to 3.3 million people, as COVID-19 compounds displacement, security and access problems. For 11,000 of these people living in the northern provinces, famine is knocking on the door as we speak. We know what we need to do. We have made huge strides forward in spotting the early warning signs of famine and in understanding its causes and consequences. But, tragically, we have seen this story play out too many times before. The world stands by until it is too late, while hunger kills, stokes community tensions, fuels conflict and instability and forces families from their homes. I recently learned that in Latin America hungry families have started hanging white flags outside their houses to show they need help. There are a lot of them: 17.1 million severely hungry people today, as compared with 4.5 million in December last year. A white flag is the sign of surrender - of giving up. We cannot, and we must not, surrender, or tell ourselves that there is nothing we can do, because millions of people around the world desperately need our help. The truth is that we are all out of excuses for failing to act - swiftly and decisively - while children, women and men starve to death. Today, as humanitarians, we are here to warn the Council that the pressures caused by conflict and COVID-19 are rapidly building, and I am terrified the dam protecting us from famine may be about to burst. But there is hope amid the turmoil. The peace agreements signed in the Sudan and in the Middle East in the last couple of weeks show that, if there is a real commitment to peace, miracles can happen. Now the world needs political leadership to build peace and avert this hunger crisis, and I urge Security Council members to lead the way. Resolution 2417 (2018) was a landmark moment. It is time to live up to our pledge and mobilize immediately to save countless lives, in an effort to promote peace and stability around the world. We need everyone on board. I understand that Governments everywhere are facing unprecedented financial pressure due to the pandemic. I believe, therefore, that it is time for the private sector to step up and help fund the relief effort. Some may be wondering why I am bringing this up at the Security Council, but I will take every opportunity I get to raise the alarm before it is too late. We need $4.9 billion to feed 30 million people for one year - people who will all die without the WFP's assistance. Worldwide, there are over 2,000 billionaires, with a net worth of $8 trillion. In my home country, the United States of America, there are 12 individuals alone worth $1 trillion. In fact, reports state that three of them made billions upon billions during the COVID-19 pandemic. I am not opposed to anyone making money, but humankind is facing the greatest crisis of our lifetimes. It is time for those who have the most to step up in order to help those who have the least. It is time for them to show that they truly love their neighbours. The world needs them right now. It is time to do the right thing.
