Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian): As
this is the last open meeting of the Council this month,
I should like first to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the successful completion of your presidency of the
Security Council. I would like to point out that you
have been very skilful in steering our deliberations.
I wish the Russian national team success in the FIFA
World Cup, which has been so excellently organized in
your country.
(spoke in English)

We thank the Russian presidency for bringing the
issue of mines and explosives to the attention of the
Security Council. We also express our appreciation to
Assistant Secretary-General Zouev for his interesting,
informative and comprehensive update.

(Spoke in Russian)

We wish Mr. Zouev every future success in pursuit
of the laudable purposes of the United Nations.

(spoke in English)

The contamination of mines and explosives,
remnants of war and conflicts affects civilian
populations, United Nations operations and global
peace and security. The alarming rate of conflicts
utilizing explosive devices necessitates a more robust
response in order to provide urgent humanitarian mine
action assistance. We are also witness to the growing
use of improvised explosive devices by terrorist groups
against civilians, our peacekeepers and humanitarian
personnel, who must be protected from such tragedies.

Resolution 2365 (2017), ably introduced by Bolivia
in June 2017, is of vital importance and is the first of
its kind as a stand-alone resolution on mine action. It
is a sine qua non for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Secretary-General's new agenda
for peace. Therefore, we welcome the Secretary-
General's report (S/2018/623) and encourage periodic
updates on the status of efforts to address the hazards
of mines and explosives, inter alia, in the form of
annual briefings. Kazakhstan highly values the work
of the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS)
and would like to make the following observations
and recommendations.

Itisimportantforallrelevantstakeholders-Member
States, United Nations regional and subregional
organizations, and international partners - to
streamline efforts to protect civilians and include mine
action in their mandates and programmes. It is just as
important to build national capacities through training
and ensuring the availability of equipment by promoting
effective partnerships at all levels. We urge the
international community to support the multifaceted
activities of UNMAS, an invaluable and efficient United
Nations entity for mitigating the devastation caused in
conflict and post-conflict zones through mine action,
mine clearance, rehabilitation and risk education. As
a preventive measure, education about the risk, safety
and identification of mines and improvised explosive
devices is most essential at all levels and segments
of society.

We welcome the work of UNMAS with female risk-
education volunteers to spread lifesaving education
to women, who play a critical role in instilling safe
behaviour among their children and peers. Women
and young people have proven to be great catalysts for
change and action.

The high death toll among our peacekeepers due to
landmines and improvised explosive devices dictates that
ensuring their safety and security must be our priority.
Consequently, it is essential to equip our peacekeepers
and provide them with in-depth, comprehensive and
appropriate training, both predeployment and during
missions. We therefore welcome the fact that UNMAS
has developed and is implementing a comprehensive
framework to mitigate the threat of improvised
explosive devices that has contributed to reducing the
casualty rate. Member States should also support the
mine action response of the United Nations through
predictable, un-earmarked funding for the purposes of
long-term planning and programming.

No discussion of mines would be complete without
considering victims who must be given immediate
medical attention, in addition to prostheses, long-
term rehabilitation and reintegration into society.
Reintegration should include vocational training and
job opportunities to lead normal, productive lives.

Kazakhstan has considerable experience in mine
clearance, having neutralized more than 4.5 million
explosive devices in Iraq. My country has also developed
and provided intensive specialized training to Iraqi
security forces, thereby enhancing their capacity to
counter the threat of mines and explosives. That, in
turn, has also become an area of special expertise. In
that connection, Kazakhstan has established and is
constantly upgrading its national demining centre and
its K9 centre.

Kazakhstan is engaged in improving existing
legislation, enacting new laws and providing practical
and technical support for the safe and proper storage
of ammunition and mines, in strict adherence to
established international regulations. We are also
strengthening such initiatives regionally among our
Central Asian neighbours in the region.

Lastly, we are committed to joining the multilateral
effort, not only for the safety and security of civilians,
but also to reinforce stability, to promote peace and to
support the process of sustainable development.

