The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

I welcome the presence of Mr. Jose Luis
Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, and
once again convey to him the support of France. I also
thank Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, for her briefing.

The representative of the European Union will be
making a statement at this meeting, and we subscribe
to it.

Over the past year, the overall situation in East
Timor has continued to improve. It has been
characterized by political stability, the development of
a constructive dialogue between the Government and
the opposition, institution-building and strong
economic growth. But it will take time to consolidate
this progress. The reassuring presence of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
and the international security forces - whose activities
we welcome - will be a key element of stability into
2012. France supports the renewal of the mission's
mandate for a further 12 months, as part of a medium-
term consolidation strategy with a view to progressive
Timorese ownership of responsibilities now borne by
UNMIT.

We share the concern of the Government that
responsibility for law and order should rapidly be
transferred to the Timorese police, in line with criteria
jointly formulated by the United Nations and the
authorities. As indicated in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2010/85), this should make possible a
gradual reduction in UNMIT personnel. In his report,
the Secretary-General also stresses the importance of
fighting impunity for past crimes, which is a
prerequisite for sustainable reconciliation. We share the
concerns expressed by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and encourage her to remain
actively engaged in this area, in conformity with the
mandate that the Security Council has given her.

We reaffirm in particular our support for
UNMIT's action in support of the Prosecutor-General
of East Timor, including through the mission's Serious
Crimes Investigation Team.

10-2486]
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Australia.

