I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing, which was very informative, as usual. The overall humanitarian situation in Syria remains a great source of concern. The plight of millions of people continues both in the north-west, with about 840,000 still unsettled recently displaced persons, and in the north-east, where there is an acute shortage of medical supplies. Some other areas remain unreachable for humanitarian aid delivery, such as Rukban camp, as mentioned by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2020/401) and by the Under-Secretary-General in his briefing. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic requires special attention now, as it continues to raise the already-high level of complexity of the humanitarian situation in the country. On the one hand, we welcome the renewed efforts by the World Health Organization, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other humanitarian partners to provide humanitarian support for Syria during this extraordinary time. We also take note of the efforts made by the Government of Syria to cope with the pandemic. On the other hand, we feel genuinely worried about the weak response capacity, in certain regions of Syria, of the health system, which is now being seriously challenged. We therefore urge all relevant parties in Syria to fully cooperate in creating the most favourable conditions possible to ensure sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access to all parts of Syria in order to assist people in need. The support of the international community in ensuring an effective humanitarian response in Syria is undoubtedly of crucial importance - especially during this time - to address the needs of Syrian people, including the food security and health concerns. The COVID-19 pandemic is the fight of the entire international community, and no one should lag or be left behind in this joint fight. In that connection, we call for renewed and unconditional support to increase Syria's capacity and resources. However, if that is to happen, we must address the daunting challenge of ensuring security. While we welcome the calm in the north-west over the past two months, we also reiterate our full support for the call of the Secretary-General and the Special Envoy for a ceasefire in Syria, and call on all parties to heed their call. We thank the Secretary-General for the recently released report on the review of United Nations humanitarian cross-line and cross-border operations, pursuant to resolution 2504 (2020), and take note of his assessments therein. We will continue to look into it and will engage in the discussion on the cross-border humanitarian delivery mechanism with a view to best assisting the Syrian people. In conclusion, we continue to call for peace. We need people to build peace and to enjoy it. Let us put an end to what kills and maims the Syrian people - conflict and COVID-19.
