Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I welcome the presence here
today of the Palestinian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Riad Malki. Palestine recently attained non-member
observer State status in the United Nations. This was
far too late, coming some 65 years after the adoption
of resolution 181 (II). It was the first step on the path
towards the realization of the Palestinian people's
inalienable right to establish an independent State, with
Jerusalem as its capital, within the borders of 4 June
1967.

To that end, we call on the Security Council
to respond to the call of the Palestinian State to be
granted full Member State status in the United Nations,
while guaranteeing the restoration of all the legitimate
rights of all of the Palestinian people, including the
return of Palestinian refugees to their motherland and
the provision of compensation in a fair and equitable
manner pursuant to resolution 194 (III) of 1948 for the
losses incurred.

I can affirm that the Palestinian people, following
the panoply of United Nations meetings that have
been held since the Israeli occupation began, view
us with skepticism. How could it be otherwise, given
the fact that these people have been held hostage for
more than 65 years under the most abject forms of
racist and expansionist occupation? How could it be
otherwise, given the continued systematic campaign
of settlement activity, which has stamped out any hope
for the emergence of a viable Palestinian State, halting
not even for a single day? How, indeed, could it be
otherwise, given that Israel, the occupying Power, has
practiced and continues to perpetrate the worst forms of
racial discrimination and flagrant violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law? How could
they not look with skepticism on the informal periodic
meetings at which the Council has proven incapable of
putting an end to the tragic suffering of these people
and restoring their legitimate rights, ceding instead
the large part of its prerogatives to the Quartet, which
itself has failed to tackle the situation, seeking instead
to sideline the General Assembly?

In the light of the unflinching support that several
members of the Quartet have given to Israel, how could
it be otherwise?

If we wish to preserve what is left of the credibility
of the United Nations, uphold the prospects for peace in
the region and prevent war, then the United Nations and

its Member States must refrain from the ceremonial and
business-as-usual approach to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. That approach lacks any serious content and
cannot lead to tangible results on the ground. It is time
to start taking concrete measures to bring to an end
once and for all the inability of the United Nations to
fulfil its obligations to stop the Israeli occupation of
Arab territories - an inability that, as we all know,
is the result of the intransigence of successive Israeli
Governments, which have themselves been blindly
supported and unfairly justified by a number of
influential Powers present and active in the Council.

We were deeply alarmed by the fact that, in his
briefing two days ago onpriorities for201 3, the Secretary-
General failed to include a reference to the resolution of
the Arab-Israeli conflict. It was not included among the
priorities. We are all the more alarmed as the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process also
failed in his briefing to refer to an essential component
of his mandate and obligations - addressing the Israeli
occupation of the Syrian Golan - even when it was
brought to his attention and other representatives of the
Secretariat warned him ofthe consequences of ignoring
this essential component of the international stance on
the Middle East.

This is an essential point; the occupied Syrian
Golan is an integral part of the item before the Council.
The representatives of the Secretary-General must
therefore refer to the occupied Syrian Golan in their
briefings and statements. In his briefing to the Security
Council, the Special Coordinator avoided making any
allusion whatsoever to the Golan, even though it is part
of his mandate. Instead, he referred at length to the
prevailing internal situation in Syria, even though that
is not part of his mandate.

More than 45 years have passed since Israel occupied
the Golan. However, apparently these long decades have
not been enough to compel Israel, the occupying Power,
to implement the relevant United Nations resolutions,
in particular resolutions 497 (1981), 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), to bring its occupation of the Syrian Golan, its
grave and systematic violations of human rights, its
terrorist policy of racial discrimination and reprisals,
and its unbridled expansionist activities to an end.

We call on Israel to provide international
supervisors and organizations with maps of the
areas that have been mined in the Syrian Golan. The
explosion of cluster munitions and mines placed by the
occupying Power in the Syrian Golan have led to over
726 casualties, including 227 children. We have brought
this information to the attention of the Secretary-
General.

The most recent such acts of violence saw an
increase in the number of abductions of Syrian citizens
from the disengagement zone by the occupying Israeli
Power. The Israeli authorities have even gone so far as
to provide support to armed terrorist groups operating
in the disengagement zone so as to exploit them to
justify the construction of a wall of separation and
racial discrimination that stretches 42 kilometres along
the ceasefire line in the occupied Golan.

The intention of Israel and the occupying authorities
is to pursue their unbridled attempts to tear the Golan
from Syria and to include it as part of its occupation.

We underscore the need for the Golan to be returned
in its entirety to my country. We call for the Golan to
be restored to Syria, whether or not this is acceptable to
the Israeli representative. In spite of the perpetration of
all Israel's crimes; in spite of all the resolutions adopted
by the United Nations; and in spite of all the reports that
have been drawn up by the United Nations commissions
of inquiry, condemning and describing these crimes
unequivocally, it is truly regrettable that the Israeli
leaders and perpetrators of these war crimes and crimes
against humanity continue to shirk any responsibility
or accountability at the international level because of
the illegal immunity that has been granted to them by
certain influential States.

We all witnessed this morning the insolence of
the representative of Israel who, in his statement,
unequivocally demonstrated that he is completely
divorced from reality and operating in a state of political
delirium and immoral hallucination, completely
denigrating the rights of the Palestinian people. The
Israeli representative is misled ifhe believes that he can
alter or distort in any way the historic reality through
a statement that is full of lies and political trickery. We
call upon himto read this book The General's Son.

(spoke in English)

The General's Son is a kind of biography written
by Miko Peled, son of the famous Israeli General
Matti Peled. He is considered to be one of the most
prominent Israeli generals who participated in Israel's
wars against its neighbours in 1948, 1956 and 1967. The
General, who passed away in 1995, converted to peace
and became a peace activist in Israel. The author speaks
about the wrongdoings of Israel's policies towards the
Palestinian people as well as towards the Arabs in the
occupied territories. By the way, this man lives in Israel
and is an Israeli citizen, but the book was published in
Ramallah. The Palestinians authorized the publication
of this book. The Israeli Government prevented it from
being published.

(spoke in Arabic)

Once again, I am obliged to warn of the unbridled
attempts of a number of delegations to water down the
agreed traditional terms of reference concerning the
situation in the Middle East by addressing other subjects
at this debate and seeking to distance us from the matter
at hand for the sake of pursuing their own objectives.
The issue is putting an end to Israel's occupation of the
occupied Arab territories and the establishment of a
Palestinian State.

Accordingly, I shall not respond to the fraudulent
allegations that have been made by a number of
delegationsagainst my country, Syria, during this
debate, as this is a matter ofprinciple. We must not find
ourselves discussing an agenda item that we have often
drawn warning attention to. Naturally, there is a great
deal we could say to refute the allegations that have been
put forward by some member States that have spared
no effort in seeking to further exacerbate the crisis in
Syria by supplying, sheltering and arming extremists
and terrorists operating in Syria in order to stymie any
possibility of finding a peaceful solution to the crisis.
In this regard, I should like to point specifically to
Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Turkey.

I shall be brief on this matter and will simply
underline the fact that the Syrian Government recently
submitted a comprehensive political programme for a
resolution of the current crisis in Syria. This document
is a national solution, based on dialogue between and
among the Syrians themselves under Syrian leadership.
We call upon all those who claim to be committed to
resolving the situation in Syria to respond positively
to this programme by putting forward constructive
ideas to enable its implementation instead of rejecting
political solutions or national dialogue. The crisis in
Syria will find a peaceful solution on the Syrian scale.

Finally, our preference would have been for the
first statement that was made to the Security Council
by our colleague from the United States at the start
of President Obama's second mandate, as well as the
statements made by our colleagues the representatives
of France and the United Kingdom, to have been
balanced in nature and to have been based on the
reality on the ground in Syria, in keeping with their
obligations pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations, the Geneva Conventions, international law,
and Mr. Brahimi's mandate. Their statements outght
to have been open to the priority of supporting the
national dialogue mechanism to resolve the crisis in
Syria in both a political and peaceful manner, on the
basis of the aspirations of the Syrian people and led by
Syrians themselves, as is recalled in the two resolutions
addressing the Syrian crisis. Instead, they expressed
support for one entity of the Syrian opposition, inciting
it to operate against the motherland and the interests
of the Syrian people, and thereby pushing them into a
cycle of destruction and violence in my country.

