Mr. Storaci: Ihave the honour ofspeaking on behalf
of the European Union (EU). The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Albania, Ukraine and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union warmly welcomes the
announcement by United States Secretary of State
John Kerry on 19 July that an agreement had been
reached establishing a basis for resuming direct final
status negotiations between the Palestinians and the
Israelis. This is a crucial step towards achieving a
lasting resolution to the conflict. The European Union
commends Secretary Kerry's dedication and the
personal commitment demonstrated by Prime Minister
Netanyahu and President Abbas.

The European Union also praises the significant
efforts made by the League of Arab States to confirm
the strategic importance of the Arab Peace Initiative
for all parties.

Given the challenging negotiations ahead and
the difficult decisions to be taken, the continued bold
leadership of President Abbas and Prime Minister
Netanyahu and their sustained willingness to engage in
good faith will be crucial to success. Once negotiations
resume, they should lead to tangible and timely progress.
The European Union urges all parties to refrain from
actions that could undermine the negotiation process
and the prospects for peace.

The European Union recalls its previous Council
conclusions laying down its vision for the two-State
solution, resulting in an agreement on all final status
issues, ending all claims, and fulfilling the legitimate
aspiration of both parties, with the State of Israel and
an independent, democratic, contiguous, sovereign and
viable State of Palestine living side by side in peace and
security and mutual recognition, both States enjoying
normal relations with all the countries of the region. It
also recalls previous conclusions and will continue to
address all issues that put the viability of the two-State
solution at risk.

The European Union will remain fully engaged with
both parties and will also continue to contribute, together
with other regional and international partners, including
within the Quartet, to a negotiated solution on all final
status issues, including Jerusalem, borders, security,
water and refugees. The European Union will give
active and concrete support to help ensure negotiations
between the parties are successful, including through
support to any international arrangements aimed at
underpinning a peace agreement. If an agreement to
finally end this conflict were reached, the door would
open to deepened and enhanced cooperation between
the European Union and all the countries of the region,
contributing to the prospects for a new era of peace,
security and prosperity.

I will continue with a shortened statement. I would
ask participants to refer to the distributed text for the
whole statement.

With regard to the situation in Syria, the EU is
appalled by the disastrous humanitarian situation and
the continuing military crackdown of the regime, in
particular the relentless shelling of Homs, as well as the
denial of humanitarian access for the United Nations
and other humanitarian actors, which we deplore. We
are also alarmed by reports of the increasing brutality
of certain armed opposition groups. The European
Union demands that all parties ensure immediate,
regular, safe, unfettered and unimpeded access for aid
organizations to those in need in all areas of Syria, and
through all possible routes and channels, including
across borders and across conflict lines. In that regard,
the EU strongly supports the appeal made by Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Valerie
Amos on the Council on 16 July, and in that connection
calls on the Security Council to fully shoulder its
responsibilities.

The EU welcomes and strongly supports the joint
initiative of the United States and Russia to bring about
a political settlement in Syria by convening a Geneva
conference. The EU welcomes the Syrian National
Coalition's enlargement, which will allow for an
effective, representative and cohesive participation of
the opposition at this conference.

The EU is deeply concerned over the involvement of
extremist and foreign non-State actors in the fighting in

Syria on all warring sides, and with the rising sectarian
tension in Lebanon and Iraq.

The EU reiterates the importance of the role of the
independent international commission of inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic, and expresses grave concern
about the findings reflected in its latest report. The
EU reaffirms that there will be no impunity for any
violation and abuse of human rights or international
humanitarian law, and recalls that the Council can refer
the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court at any time, as requested in the letter from the
Charge' d'Affaires of Switzerland to the Council of
14 January 2013 (S/2013/19).

The European Union is gravely concerned by the
recent assessment on the use of chemical weapons and
agents within Syria. The EU therefore once again urges
the Syrian authorities to grant the United Nations fact-
finding mission full and unfettered access to all sites of
alleged use of chemical weapons without delay.

Please allow me to turn to Lebanon. The European
Union fully subscribes to the content of the presidential
statement on Lebanon of 10 July 2013 (S/PRST/2013/9).
The European Union commends Lebanon's decision to
keep its borders open to all refugees. In its generous
efforts of hosting and assisting these refugees, the
Lebanese authorities, however, face serious challenges
that have wide-ranging humanitarian, political, security
and socioeconomic implications.

The European Union has provided over €113 million
in support for Lebanon since the beginning of the crisis
and is committed to continuing its assistance.

The European Union reaffirms its support to the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, to which EU
member States actively contribute, and underlines the
importance of Lebanon's continued commitment to the
full implementation of the relevant Council resolutions
and other international obligations, including those of
the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.

The EU notes with deep concern the involvement
of Lebanese parties in the fighting in Syria, including
Hizbullah's openly acknowledged participation. It
also underscores its growing concern at cross-border
shelling and rocket fire from Syria into Lebanon, and
reiterates that violations of Lebanon's sovereignty are
unacceptable. We urge all Lebanese actors to heed
the call of President Sleiman to abide in practice by
Lebanon's policy of dissociation from the Syrian
conflict, and to continue to genuinely commit to this and
other principles enshrined in the Baabda Declaration.

The European Union urges a prompt formation of
a new Lebanese Government, and further encourages
Lebanese political leaders to resume their deliberations
over the electoral framework and the arrangements for
parliamentary elections.

Let me conclude with a few words on the situation
in Egypt, which we follow with great concern. The EU
greatly values its relationship with Egypt and continues
to stand with the Egyptian people in their struggle for
dignity, democracy, social justice and a decent life.
Yesterday, the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the EU
agreed to the Council's conclusions on Egypt, which
outline the EU's positions and concerns and to which
we refer. Let me reaffirm three key messages.

It is of utmost importance that Egypt embark on a
transition, allowing a transfer of power to a civilian-
led and democratically elected Government. Inclusivity
remains central to this process. All parties must refrain
from violence, and security and public order must be
maintained, while showing restraint and full respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms. The EU
stands ready to assist the Egyptian people in their
desire for a democratic and prosperous future.

I wish to add one point with regard to the European
Commission guidelines published last Friday, to which
the Permanent Representative of Israel and others
referred. Let me quote a statement made by the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy in that regard. That
document

"reiterates the long-held position that bilateral
agreements with Israel do not cover the territory
that came under Israel's administration in June
1967".

This is meant to clarify the European Union's position
in advance of negotiations of agreements with Israel
during the forthcoming EU Financial Perspective
commencing in 2014. In no way will this pre-judge the
outcome of peace negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians. The EU's long-held position is that it will
recognize changes made to the borders once they are
agreed to by both parties. In that way, the EU hopes to
create an atmosphere for meaningful and sustainable
negotiations leading to a peace agreement between the
parties.

However, the specific provisions of the guidelines
will not be implemented before 1 January 2014. In
the meanwhile, the EU looks forward to working and
consulting with Israel on a broad range of bilateral
issues, and has invited Israel to hold discussions on
the territorial scope of agreements with the European
Union that are currently under preparation.

