Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Daeie,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Citaku, Ambassador
of Kosovo to the United States of America, for their
briefings. I would like to very respectfully recall
that, in accordance with the working methods of the
Security Council, such statements should not exceed 15
minutes, as recalled in paragraph 56 ofnote S/2017/507.
In the light of the situation described by the Special
Representative and the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/981), I will briefly underline three points.

The first concerns the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). Notable efforts have been made to promote
security, stability and respect for human rights in
Kosovo and the region. That work deserves to be
commended. France particularly welcomes UNMIK's
activities in bringing together communities and in
promoting the women, peace and security agenda in
cooperation with UN-Women. However, as has been
underlined by several members at previous meetings
and again today, we must continue to be attentive to the
issue of refocusing UNMIK's actions nearly 20 years
after the adoption of resolution 1244 (1999), taking into
account the situation on the ground, the performance of
that peacekeeping operation and the initiatives led by
other regional and international actors. I am thinking in
particular of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX).

Secondly, the normalization of relations between
Pristina and Belgrade also depends on the dialogue
between the two leaders conducted under the auspices
of the European Union. In that regard, we welcome
the commitment of Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, and the most recent
meeting held in Brussels on Thursday, 8 November.

France calls on both sides to show a spirit of
compromise and political will. We encourage the
policymakers ofboth States to be up to the Circumstances
and to create the conditions for an agreement, which
would be an essential step in the long-term stabilization
of the Western Balkans and in moving towards the
European perspective.

Finally, my third point concerns the European
future of Kosovo and Serbia, which was clarified
last March in the European Union's strategy for the
Western Balkans. In view of the merits at the heart of
the European project, we emphasize the importance of
the reforms needed to consolidate and to strengthen
the rule of law. In Kosovo, EULEX contributes to that
objective by focusing on the effectiveness, ethics and
the multi-ethnic character of Kosovo's justice system.
However, the primary responsibility lies, of course,
with the policymakers.

As we commemorate the centenary of the end of the
Great War, a spirit of reconciliation must prevail. We
hope that Belgrade and Pristina will be able to move in
that direction and reach an agreement on normalizing
their relations.

