Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): I should like first of all to join
my colleagues in thanking Ambassador Fowler for his
comprehensive briefing and report on his Visit to Europe
and Algeria regarding the implementation of the sanctions
against UNITA.

Ambassador Fowler has invested great effort in trying
to find ways to improve the implementation of the
measures imposed against UNITA. His personal
contribution to the work of the sanctions Committee
represents a significant innovation and, I think, is Vital to
peace and development in Angola.

His recommendations are serious. They represent a
perfect understanding of the goals of the sanctions
Committee and create a solid basis for peace in Angola. I
even think that the quality, creativity and
comprehensiveness of his report are such that they
somehow constrain the Council to make the sanctions more
effective.

Last June the Security Council adopted resolution
1173 (1998), condemning the leadership of UNITA and
holding it responsible for the present crisis in Angola due
to its failure to implement its obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol. By the same resolution, the Council imposed
financial sanctions upon UNITA and adopted measures
intended to curb official contacts and trade that benefit its
leadership in the hope that these would have an impact on
UNITA's attitude.

Despite this strong action by the Security Council,
the situation in Angola deteriorated. UNITA regained
control of several localities and revealed its military
strength. Brazil deeply regrets that after years of efforts
to rebuild peace, Angola is once again suffering from the
consequences of a civil war. The Government of Angola
deserves strong international support at this critical
moment. The people of Angola need peace.

I think that an essential step in the direction of peace
is following the report presented by Ambassador Fowler,
first of all because it would send a clear message to
Savimbi that his only alternative is to lay down his arms
and accept the obligations imposed by the Security
Council.

That is why my delegation supports all of the
recommendations contained in the present report. We are
sure that the panels, as conceived, would be a useful
instrument to implement those recommendations and
strengthen the sanctions regime against UNITA. We are
also particularly encouraged by the information regarding
the readiness of Governments, international organizations
and representatives of the diamond industry to support
United Nations efforts to end the conflict in Angola.

Finally, I hope that the adoption at this meeting,
with the full support of the Security Council, of the
recommendations of Ambassador Fowler's report would
be a step in the direction of peace in Angola.

