The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Angola.

I would like to thank Permanent Representatives
Jones Parry and Negroponte, of the United Kingdom
and the United States, respectively, for the wealth of
information they have provided to the Council on the
situation in Iraq and with regard to meeting the
challenges faced in reaching the objectives set by the

SANA-869

 

Coalition Provisional Authority to make Iraq a nation
that is fully integrated into the international
community.

I would like to highlight three points in my
intervention. I would first like to refer to the concern
that has been consistently expressed by the Security
Council and by its members over the situation and
about the future of Iraq.

In resolution 1483 (2003) the Security Council
stressed the right of the Iraqi people to freely
determine their own political future and to control their
own natural resources, encouraged efforts by the
people of Iraq to form a representative Government
based on the rule of law, and reiterated its resolve that
the day when Iraqis govern themselves must come
quickly. Those were unequivocal principles set out in
resolutions adopted unanimously by the Council,
translating the commitment of the international
community for a rapid restoration of Iraq's sovereignty.

Secondly, the security situation in Iraq has been a
permanent concern of the Security Council and its
members. That was clearly spelled out in resolution
1511 (2003), which determined that the provision of
security and stability is essential to the successful
completion of the political process, and authorized a
multinational force to take every necessary measure to
contribute to the maintenance of security and stability
in Iraq. The Security Council once again expressed its
concern about the future of Iraq, as well as its
willingness to contribute to the rapid stabilization of
the situation, unanimously placing its weight and
authority behind the Governing Council and the
Coalition Provisional Authority for the attainment of a
rapid stabilization of the security situation in Iraq.

Thirdly, we are encouraged by the steps taken by
the Governing Council of Iraq and the Coalition
Provisional Authority. We are also heartened by the
agreement reached on the political process, in response
to a Security Council invitation addressed to the
Governing Council in resolution 1511 (2003) to
provide a timetable and a programme for the drafting
of a new Constitution for Iraq and for the holding of
democratic elections under that Constitution. In our
view, the political sequence set out in the agreement on
fully restoring sovereignty to Iraq is a good sign
providing a good framework to move Iraq's political
process forward. It is our expectation that the
benchmarks established in the 15 November agreement

will be fulfilled and that, by the end of 2005, a new
Government will take over that will have been elected
under the new Constitution. Hard work lies ahead for
the two entities - the Governing Council and the
Coalition Provisional Authority - especially in a
country where daily life has been deeply disrupted and
the security situation is shaky.

In conclusion, we encourage the Governing
Council and the Coalition Provisional Authority to
relentlessly pursue the blueprint established in the
agreement. The road ahead may prove to be rocky, hard
and treacherous. But it is our expectation that, under
the agreement, a framework will emerge enabling the
Governing Council and the Coalition Provisional
Authority to make progress in the stabilization of the
security situation in the country, and that a democratic
State based on justice and the rule of law will finally
emerge in Iraq.

This is a challenge that we must also face in the
Council, as the United Nations, in spite of all the risks
involved, is called upon to play a leading role - a role
which I think is made more visible by the new political
agenda which has been provided by the Council's
agreement on resolution 1511 (2003).

I now resume my position as President of the
Council. I invite Ambassador Negroponte to respond
and comment on the interventions by the various
members of the Council.

