Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the
President for her initiative in holding this important
open debate. I welcome the briefings from Special
Envoy Ould Cheikh Ahmed, from High Commissioner
Al Hussein and from Assistant-Secretary-General
Kang.

As all the briefers have made painfully clear, the
situation facing the people of Yemen is alarming.
Yemenis are in the midst of one of the very worst
humanitarian crisis in the world. We have heard the
statistics just now. But to bring it home to this Chamber,
if the members of this Security Council were an average
group of 15 Yemenis, 12 ofus would need humanitarian
assistance and four would need emergency food
assistance just to survive.
Against that appalling backdrop, however, there are
some signs of hope. We welcome the positive progress
made at the United Nations talks last week and the at-
times constructive approach taken by the delegations.
I am sure all of us here will join me in praising the
Special Envoy for his efforts to bring the parties to the
negotiating table. Ismail says he needs our backing. On
behalf of the United Kingdom, I can say that he has
it. I hope that the whole Council will support him and
encourage further progress at the talks.

The onus must now be on all parties to build on the
progress made by taking forward the agreements and
implementing further confidence-building measures.
This will lay the foundations for a sustainable peace.
The United Nations-facilitated talks remain the best
way to resolve the current crisis in an inclusive manner.
I welcome the agreement by the delegations to ensure
a greater involvement of women in the next round of
talks. Women are greatly impacted by the conflict, so
we must heed their voices.

I believe that there are three steps that now need
to be taken: a ceasefire, alleviating the humanitarian
situation and implementing resolution 2216 (2015).
The first step has to be a meaningful and sustainable
ceasefire that is respected by all sides. We welcome
the agreement reached in Switzerland to extend the
ceasefire until 28 December and give our full support
to the work of the Coordination and De-escalation
Committee. But there have been too many breaches
over the past week, and it does need to be extended
further beyond 28 December. Without a ceasefire,
all other efforts to improve the situation in Yemen,
whether human rights or humanitarian or political in
nature, are all put in jeopardy. I therefore call on all
sides to respect the ceasefire and fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian law.

Secondly, we need to be doing all we can to alleviate
the dire humanitarian situation and help the 21 million
Yemenis in need of assistance. The agreement reached
to allow humanitarian access to Taiz was a crucial
step in this regard. Over 100 World Food Programme
trucks reached the city last week, and medical supplies
are also arriving. All parties must do what they can
to facilitate rapid and safe access to humanitarian aid
and remove bureaucratic impediments. Increasing
commercial imports, improving port capacity and
granting greater access to finance for traders would all
be vital if markets are to reopen.

We all have a role to play, and I am proud that the
United Kingdom has doubled its assistance over the past
year to around $110 million, but overall the international
humanitarian response remains underfunded. In
addition, we should all be worried by the continuing
arbitrary detentions and enforced disappearances of
non-governmental organization workers, activists,
protesters and journalists. These repressive measures
by the Houthis are not only closing down the democratic
space, but are also denying Yemenis the fundamental
rights to which we are all entitled. The United Kingdom
called for the release of all those unlawfully detained,
including the Yemeni Defence Minister, Mahmoud
Al-Subaihi, and for the human rights of all Yemenis to
be respected.

The third step needs to be building on the
discussions in Switzerland last week for a framework
for implementing resolution 2216 (2015). This means
the Houthis relinquishing weaponry, withdrawing from
towns and cities, and recognizing the legitimacy of the
Government of Yemen. It also means former President
Ali Abdullah Saleh stopping his destabilizing actions,
which continue to undermine the peace, security and
stability of Yemen.

There are other areas that are crucial to further
progress. Reviving the social welfare fund, protecting
State institutions, stopping the recruitment and
use of children, and taking action against the use of
landmines - these are all vital to finding a sustainable
peace in Yemen. In addition, the Special Envoy has
reminded us of the risk that Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula (AQAP) and Daesh Yemen will exploit
the current situation to consolidate their position.
The seizure of towns in southern Yemen by AQAP
earlier this month and the multiple and coordinated
attacks conducted by Daesh Yemen across the country
should alarm us all. Countering such terrorist threats
must remain a top priority for the Council and the
international community as a whole.

In conclusion, I would reiterate that a long-
term solution must be found through dialogue and
negotiations. We should encourage all sides to take
forward the agreements made in Switzerland and build
on this solid foundation when talks resume in January
2016. There will be much to discuss in 2016 to ensure
that resolution 2216 (2015) is implemented in full and
that ordinary Yemenis can eventually return to a life of
normality and safety.

