Mr. Backovic' (Serbia): Due to time constraints, I
will address two important points for Serbia.

First, I ask Security Council members to take a
look at our written statement, in which they will find
data and details supporting the fact that Serbia's efforts
and cooperation in the prosecution of war crimes are
second to none.

Secondly, let me draw the attention of the Council
to the issue of serving sentences. In its statement
to the Council, my country argued that the decades-
long practice regarding the conditions of serving the
sentences pronounced by the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT)
should be somewhat changed. In the reports of the
Mechanism, however, including in the most recent
one, for the period of 16 May to 15 November (see S/2019/888, annex II), requests are bandied about to
amend rule 151 of the Rules of Procedure and Evidence
relative to pardon, commutation of sentences and
early release. Resolution 2422 (2018), in paragraph 10,
"encourages the Mechanism to consider an appropriate
solution, including by considering putting in place
conditions on early release in appropriate cases".

The IRMCT President, Judge Carmel Agius, it is
reported, has already taken the encouragement into
consideration, while the IRMCT Prosecutor, Mr. Serge
Brammertz, is "seriously concerned" over the fact that
the vast majority of the sentenced persons have been
unconditionally released after serving only two-thirds
of their sentences. The consideration and the concern
indicate that, in all likelihood, unjustifiable changes
will be made in the work of the IRMCT on this issue.

That worries me, for it is hard to believe that the
consideration of this question comes at a time when the
conditions have been met this year for several Serbian
nationals to be released early, after having served two-
thirds of their respective sentences, is only accidental.
Most of them have filed early release applications to
the IRMCT President. None of them have yet received
a reply and no explanation has been provided. Let me
point out that the sentenced persons are of an advanced
age and in poor health so that, for reasons of humanity,
a fair solution for these cases should be acted upon.

Serbia has faced the silence of the administration
on a number of occasions, including regarding two
letters that the Minister of Justice of Serbia sent to the
Mechanism in the case of General Pavkovic'. No reply
to either of them has been received. The Minister had
written with regard to the event of 2 July, when the
war crimes Prosecutor of so-called Kosovo, Ms. Drita
Hajdari, made an attempt to interrogate General
Pavkovie in the Kylmakoski prison in Finland under
cover of "international" legal assistance following a
letter rogatory in connection with an order to conduct
an investigation.

Only the Mechanism has jurisdiction over this
case. Under article 25, item 2, of its Statute, it has
the power to supervise the enforcement of sentences,
including the implementation of sentence enforcement
agreements entered into by the United Nations with
Member States, as well as other agreements with
international and regional organizations and other
appropriate organizations and bodies. It is not clear who
allowed the attempt to conduct the interrogation just
as a clarification is due as to whether the Mechanism
gave a nod of approval to the representative of so-called
Kosovo, a territory, a United Nations protectorate under
resolution 1244 (1999) and neither a State nor a Member
of the United Nations. How did it come about?

The indications that the early release provisions will
be amended touch on Serbia's initiative, launched 10
years ago, calling for serving, in Serbia, the sentences
pronounced to its nationals by the ICTY. The initiative
is motivated by the resolve of my country to take up
the responsibility for the enforcement of the sentences.
The purpose of punishment includes, inter alia, the
resocialization of the punished persons. It is hard to
expect that this purpose will ever be achieved if these
persons serve their sentences in faraway countries
whose language they do not understand and in which
visits by friends and relatives are all but precluded.

I take this opportunity to draw the Council's
attention to the difficult situation of Milan Martic' and
Dragomir Milosevic, two Serbian nationals sentenced
by the ICTY and serving their sentences in Estonia.
The respective former and current ICTY Presidents,
Judge Meron and Judge Agius, have been advised
of their situation by the Ministry of Justice and the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
the International Committee of the Red Cross and the
sentenced persons themselves on a number ofoccasions.

Let me emphasize the fact that Serbia is ready to
accept international supervision of the enforcement of
the sentences of these persons that is precisely defined
and provides positive guarantees that these persons
will not be released early except through appropriate
decisions of the Mechanism or any other United Nations
agency to be mandated with dealing with these issues
in the future.

Once again, we call on the representatives of
the IRMCT, and those of relevant institutions to be
mandated by the Secretary-General, to visit Serbia, tour
its prison facilities and see for themselves the situation
in the prisons that would be used for this purpose.

At the time when the completion of the work of the
Mechanism is in sight, it is of paramount importance
for the Security Council to remain actively seized of
all outstanding issues. Its decision-making should
be transparent. My country expects answers soon,
all the more so since Serbians' cooperation with
the IRMCT has once again been second to none and
widely commended.

