The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its previous
statements and resolutions on Guinea-Bissau and
further recalls the events of 1 April 2010. The
Council notes the efforts of the Government of
Guinea-Bissau towards achieving stability in the
country, but expresses concern at the current
security situation and threats to constitutional
order. The Council stresses the critical
importance of the President, Government,
political leaders, armed forces and people of
Guinea-Bissau meeting their responsibilities to
work towards national reconciliation, maintaining
stability and constitutional order, fighting
impunity, and respecting the rule of law.

"The Security Council calls upon the
Government of Guinea-Bissau to release
immediately all those detained in the events of
1 April 2010 or prosecute them with full respect
for due process.

"The Security Council stresses that genuine
security sector reform requires the creation of
effective professional and accountable security
forces and respect for the rule of law. The
Council therefore calls upon the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to create the conditions for reform
of the security services; calls upon the security
forces, in particular the military, to fulfil their
commitment to abide by civilian control; and
calls upon both to implement current programmes
for security sector reform on schedule.

"The Security Council expresses serious
concern about the continued growth in drug
trafficking, as well as organized crime, which
threatens peace and security in Guinea-Bissau
and in the subregion. The Council calls upon the
authorities of Guinea-Bissau to create the
necessary environment to ensure that actions to
tackle drug trafficking and organized crime,
including actions supported by the international
community, are effective.

"The Security Council also recognizes the
shared responsibility of States where drugs are
produced and consumed, as well as transit States,
to take measures to hold accountable those who
engage in, or otherwise facilitate, drug trafficking
through Guinea-Bissau. In this regard, the
Council welcomes the commitment of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) with the European Union (EU), the
United Nations and other partners for the
immediate implementation of the ECOWAS
regional action plan on drug trafficking and
organized crime, including options for targeted
sanctions against those individuals identified as
members or supporters of the drug trafficking
network. The Council agrees to keep the situation
under active review, and to consider appropriate
action.

"The Security Council welcomes the Final
Communique' of the 38th Ordinary Session of the
Authority of Heads of State and Government of
ECOWAS, expressing the need to promptly
establish a mechanism for ensuring the safety of
State civilian institutions in Guinea-Bissau. The
Council invites the Government of Guinea-Bissau
and the international community to cooperate
fully with ECOWAS to that effect.

"The Security Council welcomes the
continued engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission and also calls for the swift
implementation of the United Nations framework
for peace and development in Guinea-Bissau. The
Council further welcomes the role of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau's efforts to coordinate actions by
partners, in particular the African Union,
ECOWAS, the EU and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, for their
assistance in the area of security sector reform.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
National Assembly's plans to convene a national
conference on 'Conflicts in Guinea-Bissau:
10-46053
Causes, Prevention, Resolution and
Consequences', scheduled for January 2011, and
underscores the need to conduct a genuine and
inclusive political dialogue aimed at ensuring
effective functioning of State institutions and
national reconciliation. The Council welcomes, in
that regard, efforts made by regional leaders, in
particular President Pedro Fires of Cape Verde, to
engage in a constructive dialogue with the
leadership of Guinea-Bissau.

"The Council requests the Secretary-
General to brief the Security Council, as
10-46053
appropriate, on progress made in addressing these
issues as well as what further action may be
required to support their continued
implementation."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2010/15.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.
