Mr. Pleuger (Germany): We greatly appreciate
this opportunity to discuss Somalia with
representatives of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the African Union (AU), and
we are grateful for the very useful briefings that they
gave us.

This is also an excellent opportunity to thank
IGAD for its outstanding and successful efforts in
moving the Somali national reconciliation conference
forward, as well as the AU for its willingness to
undertake planning for an observer mission in Somalia.

Somali leaders have of course also contributed to
the reconciliation process by their willingness to
cooperate and work towards the goal of rebuilding
Somalia. The formation of a transitional federal
parliament and the election of the transitional President
are a real breakthrough and a milestone on the road to
peace. That gives rise to the hope that with this new
momentum the reconciliation process can now be
implemented by the Transitional Government in
Somalia itself. We therefore very much welcome and
appreciate the presence of President Abdullahi Yusuf
Ahmed and Prime Minister Ali Mohamed Ghedi. It
gives us an opportunity to discuss the road from here to
peace in Somalia.

As our Ethiopian colleague has said, there are
still daunting problems to overcome. Security
throughout the country is a major concern, as is the
humanitarian situation. The Transitional Government
will be able to address those problems only if all
Somali leaders agree to lay down their arms and
cooperate with the Government in rebuilding the
country, its totally destroyed infrastructure, its
institutions and its economy. We therefore call upon
the Transitional Government and Somali leaders to
create an environment that will allow international aid
to commence. President Yusuf has already
acknowledged that the future political process will
have to be broad and inclusive. We also hope that
women will participate actively, and with adequate
representation, in that process.

Rebuilding trust in the political processes and
institutions will be necessary in order to deal
constructively with issues such as the future status of
Somaliland. The question of impunity and giving the
victims of war and humanitarian crimes a chance to
find redress are other problems that I am sure the
people of Somalia will want to address. The continuing
engagement of donors in the coming years, including
the United Nations and the European Union, will be
necessary to preserve and help along the progress that
has been made thus far. China has introduced a draft
presidential statement underlining the willingness of
the international community to prepare for that
engagement. We would like to thank the Chinese
delegation for introducing that text, which we fully
support.

Restoring the country will require the
commitment of the international community. Let me
therefore conclude by reiterating Germany's
commitment to assist the peace process in Somalia as
well as regional and subregional efforts in that regard.
As a member of the Group of Friends of Somalia in the
Security Council, Germany will continue to support the
peace process through the European Union, which is by
far the largest provider of resources in Somalia, as well
as bilaterally by making available considerable
financial, human and humanitarian resources and, in
particular, by supporting the planned observer mission
in Somalia.

