Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Portuguese presidency for
having organized the Council's open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict today. I also
want to warmly welcome President Cavaco Silva to the
Security Council and to thank him for his statement. I
would also like to thank the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and the representative of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their
briefings.

The right to life is one of the fundamental rights
enshrined in the constitutions of a vast number of
United Nations Member States, including my own. It
is, in fact, the foundation of any social order.
Unfortunately, there are instances when that foundation
is disturbed, leading to the killing of civilians on a
large scale. Such instances leave a deep scar on our
collective consciousness. Living in a globalized world
today, the international community cannot but deal
with such cases.

At the same time, most cases where civilians are
at the greatest risk today do not involve nation States,
but belligerents who are not necessarily combatants
under international humanitarian law. That makes the
task of the international community, the Council in
particular, so much more difficult as it needs to act
within the established principles of international law. I
would therefore like to thank the Portuguese
presidency for having organized this meeting, and hope
that today's debate will contribute meaningfully
towards the United Nations response for the protection
of civilians. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his incisive statement.

Civilians have always suffered the most in war.
Notwithstanding the development of international
humanitarian law and Security Council mandates,
civilians continue to suffer today. Even more
unfortunate is the fact that civilians, or
non-belligerents, suffer a disproportionate share of
casualties compared to belligerents. It is they who bear
the brunt of violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations.

United Nations peacekeeping is one of the key
instruments available to the international community to
protect people from the scourge of war and
lawlessness. India has contributed, through ideas and
resources, to global efforts towards protecting
civilians. Our men on the ground are the ones who
translate the Council's mandates into actions in
challenging circumstances.

India is proud to have been associated with
United Nations peacekeeping from its very inception.
As a country that has contributed more than 100,000
peacekeepers and to virtually every United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the past six decades, India is
steadfast in its commitment to protect civilians at the
international level. India brings to the table a quantum
of experience in actually protecting civilians in
peacekeeping missions that is unique in its relevance,
variety and depth.

It has been India's consistent view that protection
of the population is first and foremost the
responsibility of each State. We recognize the
responsibility of all States to respect the fundamental
rights of their people, address their legitimate
aspirations and respond to their grievances through
administrative, political, economic and other measures.
At the same time, States also have the obligation to
protect their citizens from armed groups and militants.
While the right of people to protest peacefully is to be
respected, States cannot but take appropriate action
when heavily armed militant groups resort to violence
against State authority and infrastructure.

The Security Council has placed protection issues
squarely at the centre of the conflict resolution and
peacekeeping agenda by adopting a number of
resolutions and statements on protection of civilians
and on related issues of violence against women and
children in situations of armed conflict.

Protection of civilians, when applied as a basis
for Security Council action, needs to respect the
fundamental aspects of the United Nations Charter,
including the sovereignty and integrity of the Member
States. Any decision to intervene that is associated with
political motives distracts from the noble principles
and must be avoided. Also, the response of the Council
and the international community must be proportional
to the threat involved, use the appropriate methods and
make available adequate resources to any peacekeeping
mission involved.

In this context, it is pertinent to mention that we
find several Member States all too willing to expend
considerable resources for regime change in the name
of protection of civilians. However, they are unwilling
to provide minimal resources, like military helicopters,
to the United Nations peacekeeping missions, which
are mandated to protect civilians and designed to
strengthen capacity of State institutions as well.

We must also be clear that the United Nations has
a mandate to intervene only in situations where there is
a threat to international peace and security. Any
Council decision to intervene must, therefore, be based
on credible and verifiable information. This requires a
much greater information flow when the Council is
seized ofa situation.

The Security Council must make up its mind on
what it means by protection of civilians. It must have
clarity about who is to be protected and what
constitutes a threat. It must also clarify what kind of
response it expects and who is to respond. For
example, it must be able to differentiate between
threats that require a military response and a rule-of-
law response. It should not ask force commanders or
their soldiers to assume policing responsibilities.
In this regard, I would like to draw attention to
the need for accountability. We believe that there
should be accountability of those who mandate. Their
responsibility does not end with the generation of
mandates. They should be held accountable if
unachievable mandates are generated for political
expediency or if adequate resources are not made
available.

Further, it is important that the principle of
protecting civilians must be applied in a uniform
manner by all parties to a conflict. The Council's
recent actions have brought to the fore a considerable
sense of unease about the manner in which the
humanitarian imperative of protecting civilians has
been interpreted for actual action on the ground.
Monitoring of the manner in which the Council's
mandates are interpreted has, therefore, assumed
importance. There are also instances when the Council
is expected to quickly criticize national Governments
for failing in their responsibility to protect civilians,
while little or no accountability is enforced on armed
groups indulging in violence.

As stated earlier, the protection of civilians is a
national responsibility and requires institutions, and
conditions in which the institutions can function. To
enable States to fulfil their responsibility to protect
their populations, national capacities need to be
strengthened, where needed. Peacekeepers, in spite of
their best efforts, cannot possibly protect everyone
from everything. Peacekeepers are primarily there to
assist and aid in the development of national
capacities.

In concluding, I would like to stress that force is
not the only way to protect civilians. It should only be
the measure of last resort and be used only when all
diplomatic and political efforts fail. The Security
Council must also be clear that its responsibility for
protecting civilians does not end with a military or
police response. Civilians require humanitarian
wherewithal for survival. The Council requires a more
integrated view. Multiple stakeholders are involved in
this process, not just the military.

The actions of the Council and international
community should facilitate engagement among
warring factions in a conflict situation in a nationally
owned and inclusive political process and not
complicate the situation by threats of sanctions, regime
change, et cetera. This inclusive approach to national
reconciliation, anchored in State sovereignty, is the
only way to move forward and ensure the protection of
civilians in an effective, pragmatic and enduring
manner.

