Mrs. Abdul Hamid (Malaysia): Malaysia takes
the floor to reply to the comments made by the
representative of Israel.

I would first categorically reject the allegations
raised by the representative of Israel against my
country. These allegations are baseless and serve no
other objective than to divert the Security Council's
attention from the real matter at hand - the situation in
occupied Palestine. Let me remind the representative of
Israel that Malaysia holds the highest respect for human
rights and international law. This is in contrast with
Israel, which continues to violate countless resolutions
and decisions of the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the Human Rights Council and even the
International Criminal Court.

Israel also continues to disrespect human rights
by not cooperating with numerous United Nations
human rights mechanisms. The resignation of the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on human rights in
the occupied Palestinian territories earlier this month,
which he attributed to frustration at Israel's denial of
access to Palestinian territories, provides yet another
example of the policy of the so-called only democracy
in the Middle East.

I should also reiterate that Malaysia is not an
occupying Power, unlike Israel, which is roundly
condemned for its illegal practices related to its ongoing
occupation of Palestinian and other Arab territories.
Malaysia is a member of the Special Committee to
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the
Occupied Territories. This places us in a unique position
to see with our own eyes the true nature of the countless
extreme violations of human rights committed by the
occupying Power.

My delegation's positions on the matter under
consideration were made Clear in our statement delivered
earlier. We therefore urge the Israeli delegation to focus
its energy on addressing the various concerns raised
by Malaysia and other Member States today instead of
attempting to divert our attention with false allegations.

The meeting rose at 5pm.
