Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

I would first like to thank all of today's briefers
for their presentations, and in particular to recognize
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and to reaffirm our strong support
for her mandate.
The report presented to the Council today
(S/2014/339) underlines yet again the direct impact
that ongoing armed conflicts around the world have
on children. We urge all parties to immediately stop
the violations described in the report and to take
action to prevent them in the future. We also call on
every State to become party to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, which has
been ratified by all member States of the European
Union.

Both the protection and promotion of children's
rights and the issue of children and armed conflict
are central to the European Union's human rights
policy and funding instruments. That includes the
right to education and well-being of children affected
by conflict, which is addressed through, among other
actions, the EU's Children of Peace initiative. That
initiative is especially designed to provide education
to children in emergencies. Between 2012 and 2014,
108,000 children have benefited from that programme.

The EU is determined to continue its support for
activities aimed at preventing child recruitment and at
demobilizing and reintegrating former child soldiers into
their communities. We emphasize the inclusion of child
protection in the training of peacekeepers, the mandates
of crisis-management operations, standard operating
procedures and the rules of engagement. In 2013, the
European Union mainstreamed the promotion of human
rights, child protection and international humanitarian
law into the mandate of the EU training mission in
Mali. The European Union has also incorporated child
protection into the planning documents of its operation
in the Central African Republic.

We are proud to support the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign, aimed at ending and preventing
the recruitment and use of children in conflict by
Government armed forces by 2016. Fighting impunity
for such serious crimes of international concern should
be part of our actions, and we continue to see the role
of the International Criminal Court as essential in that
regard.

The European Union has invested in strengthening
its capacity in the area of child protection, both at its
headquarters and in its operations. In cooperation with
UNICEF and several non-governmental organizations,
we have organized our first regular training course
for our staff on children and armed conflict. We
are currently finalizing our pre-deployment child-
protection training module for civilian and military
personnel.

We underline the importance of further cooperation
between regional and subregional organizations in view
of their important role in the promotion and protection
of the rights of the child. Last year in Addis Ababa,
together with the African Union, the World Bank
and the United Nations, we organized a workshop on
children and armed conflict, and we hope to further
develop such partnerships with other organizations.

We are concerned about the surge during 2013 in the
recruitment and use of children in the Central African
Republic, which is described in the Secretary-General's
report. With help from UNICEF, the European Union is
currently implementing an educational programme in
the Central African Republic with a component for the
temporary care and training of 1,000 children who were
connected to armed groups.

We share the Secretary-General's concern about the
targeting of schools and the abduction and recruitment
of children by Boko Haram, as was most prominently
shown by the kidnapping events in April. In the context
of its cooperation with Nigeria, the European Union
provides assistance in the field of counter-terrorism
and protection services for children in the northern
Nigerian state of Borno.

We also share the Secretary-General's concern
that attacks on schools and hospitals have become a
common feature in the majority of armed conflicts and
situations covered in his report. We urge all parties to
stop attacks on schools and hospitals and to deter the
military use of schools in accordance with international
law.

Let me also underline that the European Union
deplores the grave violations and abuses against children
committed by all parties to the conflict in Iraq, as
highlighted by Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zerrougui at the recent special session of the
Human Rights Council on Iraq. We are particularly
concerned by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant's
brutal killing of civilians, including children, not only
in Iraq, but also in Syria. Children continue to be the
most affected by the armed conflict in Syria. Well over
10,000 children have been killed thus far, and many

more injured. We express our profound indignation at
the scale, scope and gravity ofthe violations and abuses
committed against children.

In conclusion, we wish to reaffirm our strong belief
that the issue of children and armed conflict must
remain in the focus of the Council and of our efforts at
the national and regional levels.

