Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation abstained in the
voting on resolution 2418 (2018), on extending sanctions
against South Sudan.
We are concerned by the security situation in the
country and by the fact that, despite the December
2017 agreement, there has been continuing fighting in
the country. We call on the South Sudanese parties to
quickly find a compromise solution in the interests of
the entire South Sudanese population.

Nonetheless, we believe that it is wrong-headed
to threaten the introduction of sanctions against
those high-ranking individuals who were involved
in the negotiation process at an important moment
for the completion of the latest round of the High-
Level Revitalization Forum on the peace agreement,
sponsored by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). We are of the view that the Forum
currently represents a unique arena in the attempt to
find a political solution to the conflict in South Sudan.
We therefore believe that it is important to provide
genuine support to IGAD's mediation efforts. We
think the imposition of artificial timelines or deadlines
for the negotiation process, or measures adopted that
conflict with positions expressed by regional players,
is unacceptable.

On the Whole, we continue to doubt that the
introduction of sanctions against members of the
Government and an arms embargo on South Sudan could
play a positive role in reaching a political settlement
and normalizing the situation from a security point of
View. During the course of work on a new sanctions
draft resolution in July, we will also proceed from the
position that it is unacceptable to have any preordained
stance on broadening sanctions.

Finally, we categorically reject what we believe to
be the penholders' damaging and disrespectful position
towards their colleagues in the Security Council, once
again imposing a too-strict time frame on the Council,
which is simply unacceptable when taking such far-
reaching decisions on sanctions under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations.

