Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to thank you, Madame President, for
having convened this meeting. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his important briefing,
as well as Mr. Toure and Mrs. Ukonga for their
statements.

We are seriously concerned about the increasing
number of acts of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and
about drug trafficking, hostage-taking and armed
robbery along the coast of that region. We also
condemn those crimes, which destabilize the region
and undermine security. They also threaten commercial
shipping and have a negative impact on economic
development. The losses from such acts are huge,
especially when it comes to the oil, fishing and
shipping industries.

Lebanon believes that piracy is evolving, thereby
requiring an effective and swift response at the
national, regional and international levels. At the
national level, we emphasize the need to support
countries in the region to build their own capacities
and modernize their equipment, so as to enable them to

eliminate piracy. We also call for harmonization
between domestic and international law in combating
piracy so that countries of the region can capture
pirates and armed bandits, bring them to justice and
imprison the guilty.

At the regional level, we welcome the joint sea
patrols by States of the region in the Gulf of Guinea to
combat piracy, as well as the information exchange
among those countries. We urge them to increase that
cooperation and coordination. We also stress the
importance of regional organizations, such as the
Economic Community of West African States, the
African Union and the Economic Community of
Central African States, establishing a regional plan to
combat piracy in the Gulf of Guinea by instituting a
joint protection force. That would entail protecting the
countries' territorial waters and cooperation with the
United Nations Regional Offices for Central and West
Africa.

At the international level, we should be guided by
international law, which provides the necessary legal
framework to deal with piracy. We would like to thank
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for
placing its expertise at the disposal of the countries of
the region. We call on the international community and
the Security Council to support plans by those
countries to establish joint protection forces to patrol
their coastlines.

We welcome the Secretary-General's decision to
deploy an assessment mission to the Gulf of Guinea to
explore the various options available to the United
Nations to combat piracy.

Finally, would like to reiterate what we have said
in the past on the subject of piracy in Somalia. We
believe that dealing with the underlying causes of
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea in the longer term will
require that we address the economic and social
problems that countries face, set up sustainable
development programmes and combat poverty and
unemployment. We also need to engage in capacity-
building for Government institutions, including coast
guards, so that countries of the region can control their
territorial waters and ensure a better future for their
people.

