Mr. Eide: I will start with some developments
that are not frequently reported and do not receive the
public attention that they deserve. Nonetheless, they
are important if we are to form a more complete picture
of developments in Afghanistan.

First, after all the changes that have taken place
over the past few months, the Afghan Government
today is better and more competent than ever before
and the quality of provincial governance is better.

Secondly, cooperation among key elements inside
the Government has improved; that applies most
prominently to the security ministries and institutions.
And the results are clear. We see an enhanced ability to
uncover terrorist networks and to prevent attacks from
taking place. Yes, there have been some spectacular
terrorist attacks in Kabul, but the overall number of
attacks in the capital has gone down, not least because
of this improved coordination. In addition, the
economic ministries are working in a more coherent
manner following changes in the leadership of the
ministries of Finance, Agriculture and Commerce. That
should enable the Government to develop more unified
economic policies.

Thirdly, these changes have enabled the
Government to better address some of our long-
standing concerns. Let me just mention a few of them.

With regard to the police, a comprehensive
reform effort is under way to strengthen and clean up
the police force. That should lead to a more efficient
fight against the insurgency, greater respect for the rule
of law and an enhanced ability to fight corruption. A
significant number of police officers have been
removed and are being prosecuted.

A national agricultural strategy will be launched
in April. It will include all the major sectors of
agriculture and establish pool funding for donors. The
main objectives are, of course, to increase agricultural
production, to develop marketing capabilities and to
enhance rural employment.

The new team in the Ministry of Commerce is
addressing the challenges of private-sector development:
the establishment of a legal framework, the setting of
09-27354
investment promotion priorities, licensing reform and
trade and transit agreements with neighbouring countries.
And let me remind members that police, agriculture and
private-sector development have all suffered from neglect
for years. They are now being addressed as priority areas.

Fourthly, the improved internal cohesion that we
now see emerging in the Government will help us to
overcome the fragmentation that has so far hampered
coordination with the international community. A
stronger Afghan counterpart will allow us to make
better use of the main coordination body, the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board.

Fifthly, the prognosis for poppy cultivation in
2009 indicates that there is the potential for a very
significant decline in production across the country. We
could see a further increase in the number of poppy-
free provinces, as well as serious reductions in poppy
production in the South. That could be a turning point
in our counter-narcotics efforts.

Those developments represent potential success
stories. However, I underline the word "potential"
because our ability to turn them into reality will, to a
large extent, depend on the ability of the international
community to respond quickly with support. There is a
need to provide trainers, mentors and equipment to the
police. There is a need to adjust and strengthen
agricultural assistance with a view to responding
flexibly to new priorities and new programmes. There
is a need to provide support for governors who are
determined to make their provinces poppy-free and to
farmers who are ready to switch from poppy to licit
crops.

If we could succeed in those areas, then we would
truly live up to the commitments that we all undertook
in Paris in June last year. And, for the first time, we
would be able to seriously address some of our most
serious, most long-standing and deepest concerns:
fighting corruption and crime, reducing the flow of
financial resources to the insurgency and improving
food security.

There are no quick fixes; it will take time. But,
for the first time in many years, there have been
promising developments. If we do not respond quickly,
then we may well face new stagnation and even
backlash in several of these sectors. That we cannot
afford. Progress in each of them will contribute to
political stability and economic growth and be a
critical component of any international exit strategy.
09-27354
Of course, the main credit for this progress goes
to prominent Afghan politicians and officials.
However, it would not have been possible without the
presence and commitment of the international
community, civilian as well as military. So this is not a
time to waver; it is a time to remain committed.

These positive trends are so often overshadowed
by dramatic events and political developments - at
this point, mainly the security situation and the intense
debate about the presidential and provincial elections.
Yes, the security situation has deteriorated over the
past few months. A mild winter provided a suitable
environment for maintaining high levels of violence,
and an early Ramadan allowed for a prolonged fighting
season. As a result, the overall number of security
incidents in December 2008 rose by 42 per cent
compared with that in the previous December; in
January 2009, it was 75 per cent higher than in January
2008. As I mentioned, the number of incidents in
Kabul has gone down, owing partly to the improved
performance of Afghan security forces, but we have to
expect an intense fighting season, starting only a few
weeks from now.

The election process has, of course, taken centre
stage in our efforts and has also been at the centre of
attention in the media. We now have an agreement on
the election date, 20 August, which means that we can
plan, from a financial, procurement, organization,
training and security point of view, on the basis of a
firm deadline. The main challenge now is, of course,
how to resolve the dispute regarding what will happen
between 22 May, when the current presidential term
ends according to the Constitution, and the beginning
of the next presidential term.

Our message to Afghan politicians and to the
opposition is clear. They must reach a political
consensus that ensures the legitimacy and strength of
Afghan institutions until the next presidential
inauguration. Reaching such a consensus is a matter of
vital political interest. Such consensus has been
reached in the past when national interests were
considered to be at stake. But when leaders have failed
to reach a national consensus, we know that the costs
for the country have been very high.

The international community has 70,000 troops in
Afghanistan operating alongside Afghan forces today.
Billions of dollars are invested. The summer months
represent the peak of the fighting season. We cannot
3
afford to see these months become a period of political
and constitutional instability. We need a Government
and we need institutions that can continue their work
with full strength and broad legitimacy.

We also have a message for the Government. The
opposition has concerns that are real and well-founded.
They relate to the transparency and fairness of the
election process. The Afghan Government must
demonstrate that it is ready to do its utmost to reassure
the opposition that elections will be fair and
transparent and that the resources of incumbency will
not be misused.

Finally, there is a message for the international
community. We must also do our outmost to establish
mechanisms with the very same objectives -
transparency and fairness - in cooperation with the
Afghan authorities and civil society. I urge those who
have been invited to send international observers -
the European Union and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe - to play their parts fully
alongside domestic observation efforts. The United
Nations and the Independent Electoral Commission
will establish an election complaints commission,
which will be as robust as possible under current
circumstances. A media complaint commission will be
established and the United Nations and the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission will monitor
respect for political rights.

All involved - the Government, the opposition
and the international community - must understand the
costs of a flawed and unfair election process. The result
would be prolonged political instability when stability is
required more than ever. The result would create doubt
in the minds of many Afghans about the value of
democratic processes when confidence is needed.

Civil-military cooperation is an important part of
our mandate. The relationship between the
International Security Assistance Force and the United
Nations Mission has continued to improve. Together
with the Afghan Government, we have come a long
way now in formulating the integrated approach that
we have been talking about for years. The aim is
simple: to allocate our overall resources - civilian and
military - in a way that would allow us to make the
best possible use of them; to strengthen development
efforts where they can proceed unhindered; and to
provide a better basis of governance in swing districts,
gradually attracting more civilian development where
such efforts have so far been difficult. We must learn to
work together in a different way than in the past.

The United Nations has taken a lead in addressing
civilian casualties and military behaviour that does not
adequately respect Afghan cultural sensitivities. This
follows from our obligation to protect and promote
human rights, but our engagement is also motivated by
the need to ensure strong Afghan support for a
continued international engagement. We have seen how
serious incidents have not only affected support for the
international military forces, but have also made the
humanitarian and development community more
vulnerable. The number of civilian casualties rose by
40 per cent last year, with the insurgency clearly
accounting for the majority of such casualties.

I am pleased to see that the commander of
international forces, General McKiernan - to Whom I
pay tribute - is addressing this problem so strongly
and convincingly in his instructions to the troops: to
minimize the use of air power; to improve coordination
with Afghan security forces, giving them the lead
where possible; and to respect, as I said, the cultural
sensitivities of the Afghan population.

President Karzai has expressed his views strongly
and repeatedly. These are views shared by many
Afghans, and they are being listened to and addressed.
Unfortunately, I must add, insurgency groups continue
their indiscriminate and deliberate attacks on civilians.

I understand those who say that an increased
troop level may reduce the requirements to use
airpower and lead to a lower number of civilian
casualties, but we should also admit the danger of the
opposite happening. Additional troops will mean more
fighting, and that is the purpose. With more troops and
frequent troop rotations, the international military
forces must ensure that they operate in a way that
solidifies both the support of the Afghan public and of
public opinion in troop-contributing countries.

Inadequate donor coordination is a major concern
to all of us and a priority element of our mandate. We
have made progress in some areas. I believe political
coordination is better than before. With regard to donor
coordination, the picture is more complex and perhaps
less encouraging. There have, in recent months, been a
number of discussions of policy-shaping, which I hope
will eventually turn into policymaking. Furthermore,
some countries are channelling more resources through
national programmes and the Afghan budget. But I
continue to have serious worries, as Council members
are aware, about a number of our practices.

First, we must, as much as possible, move away
from the use of contractors, who are often overpaid and
underqualified, whose aim is to finish projects quickly
before they move on to the next. The short-term costs
of such development policies are high and the long-
term impact is low. We must be better at measuring our
achievements in terms of impact, cost-effectiveness
and effect on capacity-building.

Secondly, I know that some Council members are
tired of this, but I come back to what I have called the
donor-generated fragmentation of Afghanistan. I
understand the need to build where you fight, but the
balance is wrong and getting worse, despite constant
warnings, agreed commitments and urging by Afghan
authorities. An increasing number of donors are taking
an increasingly province-based perspective of
Afghanistan. A shared nationwide perspective is
required. If the current trends are not corrected, then I
fear turbulence where there is today stability, as well as
an increasing inability to implement national
programmes.

Thirdly, where possible, the international military
should channel development resources through civilian
authorities and institutions - preferably Afghan -
rather than do the development work themselves. I
would recommend that all Provincial Reconstruction
Teams channel, wherever possible, development
resources through often underfunded but successful
mechanisms, such as the National Solidarity
Programme. That would make projects less expensive
and more sustainable, and it would enhance the position
of the Afghan Government in the eyes of its public.

Fourthly, I now believe that the use of an amount
of between $500 million and $1 billion is never
reported to the Afghan Government. Consequently, the
Afghan Government does not know - and we do not
know - how much is being spent across the country
and for what purposes. As a result of the lack of
coordination and transparency, large portions of the
National Development Strategy will go unfunded. The
majority by far of all aid is spent outside the control of
the Government, and any attempt to influence how it is
spent is hampered by an extraordinarily complex
international donor system.
With the assistance of the World Bank, we will
soon set up a new, comprehensive and easily accessible

database at the Ministries of the Economy and Finance.
I urge all donors to make full use of it. So many donors
I meet underline the importance of better coordination,
but so few, I must say, show a readiness to modify their
practices. Those practices have brought us into the
state of fragmentation and confusion in which we still
find ourselves.

The United Nations will also set up a new peer
review mechanism, the purpose of which will be to
bring together donors in certain priority areas so as to
ensure that they are not duplicating, but
complementing, each other, and that they have a
strategic perspective in accordance with the plans of
the Afghan Government. This initiative is supported by
the Afghan Government itself and by main donors.

I have mentioned the need to focus more on
capacity- and institution-building, which is one of our
priorities. It is the most important element in building
Afghanistan, and it is the most important element of an
international exit strategy. It has worked well in
building the Afghan army and it is starting to work
well in building the police. Why is that so? It is so
primarily because there are national programmes. It is
not enough to send people. So often we have seen how
a supply-based as opposed to a need-based approach
has failed. Often, I must admit, I have wondered whose
capacity is being built - the capacity of foreign
experts or of the Afghan institutions.

I firmly believe that a massive - I repeat,
massive - capacity- and institution-building programme
is required. It must be at the top of our priorities. This
includes ensuring that, wherever possible, capacity-
building is an integrated part of every development
project. It includes a more strategic approach to education
and the building of institutions at a national and at a
subnational level. I am talking about the security
institutions, the judicial institutions, ministries and
provincial and district administrations.

But success will depend on the following aspects.
We must formulate a national vision and national
programmes: a fragmented and piecemeal approach
will not work. Programmes should include qualified
people, the technical assets required and financial
resources. Afghan ownership must be ensured. And
capacity-building should, where possible, include both
training and mentorship. Capacity- and institution-
building is not the kind of activity that lends itself to
ribbon-cutting events or to photo opportunities. But it
is the most critical element in enabling the Afghans to
run their own affairs.

Let me illustrate why I insist on more strategic
and long-term thinking. Recently I had a meeting with
the Minister of Education, the Minister of Higher
Education and the Minister of Labour and Social
Affairs. They are all responsible for education of all
sorts, including vocational training. They told me that
very, very soon millions of young girls and boys will
complete their secondary education - millions. That is
good news. But there is very limited capacity to absorb
them into higher education. Only 4 per cent of them
will be able to move on to vocational training. If this is
not soon corrected, Afghanistan will not be able to
make use of its intellectual resources, and the potential
for economic growth will be significantly limited. The
private sector will not have the qualified and educated
people it needs.

The readiness of donors to provide primary
education is very encouraging. One country is building
200 schools in its own province - I say "its own"
because it has a Provincial Reconstruction Team there.
But the neighbouring province lacks anything
resembling this type of generosity. And resources for
higher education and vocational training in the same
provinces are very scarce. So now is a time for strategy
and policy reviews. I therefore welcome those reviews
that are under way and believe that they can
re-energize our common effort in a meaningful way at
a critical moment.

However, I would also emphasize that we have
set priorities - we have agreed on them, in Paris and
elsewhere. The main problem is our limited readiness
to implement our priorities - to implement what we
have agreed on - and to be flexible enough to respond
to changes and to have a strategic, nationwide
perspective in our work.

I have touched upon our human rights mandate in
terms of civilian casualties, as well as the election
process. Allow me only to mention two other areas that
I believe are important and need our full attention: the
rights of women in Afghan society and freedom of
expression.

I have been disturbed by recent reports of
violence against women and brutal rape cases. The
Mission and I are speaking out consistently against
such phenomena, against the marginalization of women
in Afghan society, against the prevailing atmosphere of

impunity, and against the lack of access to the court
system and to adequate health facilities. Afghanistan is
today the only country in the world where the average
life expectancy for women is much lower than that for
men.

And we are speaking out to promote the
education of women and their ability to take part in
Afghan society. It is a matter of human rights, but it is
also a matter of making full use of the entire Afghan
population in building the country. Afghanistan cannot
afford to keep 50 per cent of its population
marginalized. There are women in prominent positions
today, but they are few. Many more are needed to serve
as role models for the young female population and to
use their resources for the benefit of their country.

We have also constantly raised the question of
freedom of expression, which is always important, but
even more so when an election campaign is
approaching.

When I last addressed the Security Council, I was
deeply concerned about the humanitarian situation and
the prospects of starvation occurring in large parts of
the country. That danger has not passed. But so far the
winter has not brought the humanitarian crisis that
many of us feared. The prospects for the next harvest
seem to be better than last year. In the middle of April
we will be better able to assess the situation and the
prospects than we are today.

Over the next few months, there will be several
conferences on the regional dimension of our work. I
very much welcome this wider focus. I hope that these
various conferences can be prepared in a way that turns
them into a process rather than a series of separate
events.

The improved relationship between Afghanistan and
Pakistan is encouraging. None of us underestimates the
challenges and the need to support this new relationship,
as illustrated by the appointment of so many special
envoys for Afghanistan and Pakistan.

The potential for regional cooperation is indeed
impressive. It ranges from huge infrastructure projects
that bring the wider region together to small-scale
cooperation in agriculture. The meeting in Paris in
December served to mobilize the attention and interest
of donors. As a follow-up to the Paris meeting, experts
met in Brussels two days ago to identify priority
projects in preparation for the regional economic
cooperation conference in Islamabad. We are, I believe,
moving from a declaratory phase to an operational
phase. Already, the new electricity supply from
Uzbekistan to Kabul through other cities in
Afghanistan is a visible sign of the value of regional
cooperation.

I am convinced that in economic cooperation as
well as in capacity-building, all neighbouring countries
could and should play a significant role. For instance,
agricultural experts from neighbouring countries know
Afghanistan, know the climate, know the language and
in addition to that are less expensive than experts from
Western countries or elsewhere. They represent a
significant untapped resource that should be mobilized.

I have always insisted that military means alone
cannot bring an end to the conflict. A political process
will ultimately be needed. However, we should not
believe that such a process of reconciliation can be a
shortcut to peace or a replacement for other efforts to
build Afghanistan. Reconciliation is not a substitute,
but an indispensable final component.

Furthermore, a peace process will never succeed
if the Government and the international community do
not have confidence in themselves. We must address
reconciliation in a way that projects strength and
conviction and not weakness and doubt. If we do not
have confidence in ourselves then the Afghan people
will not have confidence in us and in their own future.
That would damage any reconciliation process.

I am coming to the end of my speech. In a few
days time, all of us and many more will meet in The
Hague. It will not be a donor conference. It will be a
political manifestation of support and commitment. My
hope is that the conference will provide new energy
and shared readiness not to re-examine all our agreed
priorities, but to demonstrate readiness to implement
them and to use our resources in a flexible and
coordinated way. For me, the Hague Conference is a
test of political will. It is an occasion to push aside the
doom-and-gloom atmosphere, roll up our sleeves and
support the positive trends that we now see emerging
in Afghanistan.

And let us all avoid the impression that we are
discussing what to do about Afghanistan. We must
discuss what we can do together with the Afghans. If
they feel that a debate is going on somewhere out there
about them - and not with them - then we will
deeply offend their sense of dignity and ownership.

That sense of ownership is critical to the strength of
the Government in the eyes of its public, to its
confidence in itself and, ultimately, to our success in
defeating the insurgency.

