Mr. Farhadi (Afghanistan): I should like first of
all to congratulate you warmly, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for June 2001. We are also grateful to the head of the
Mission of the United States to the United Nations for
presiding over the Council for the month of May. We
are also very grateful to you, Sir, for arranging this
meeting, which is taking place at such an important
time.

As we have consistently and amply explained in
earlier statements to this Council and to the General
Assembly, foreign intervention in Afghanistan remains
the main cause of the present conflict and of all the
sufferings of the Afghan people. That is not mere
rhetoric or allegation, but a crystal-clear fact,
recognized in United Nations documents. In this
regard, I would like to draw the attention of the
Security Council to the observation made by the
Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human
Rights on the situation of human rights in Afghanistan
as early as September 1999. Paragraph 3 of his interim
report (A/54/422) states,

"the people of Afghanistan continued to be
victims of gross violations of human rights and
persistent breaches of international humanitarian
law. The basic cause of this was that the people of
Afghanistan continued to be virtual hostages in
their own land, where externally armed forces
seek to rule Afghanistan without the effective
participation or consent of the people."

These externally armed forces referred to by the
Rapporteur, Ambassador Kamal Hossain, in his report
consist of an alliance of Pakistani military junta,
religious extremists groups from Pakistan, Usama bin
Laden's groups, including the notorious Al Quaeda,
Central Asian extremist groups and the so-called
Islamic Emirate of the Taliban. This alliance is part of
a great scheme - let us call it a hallucination - for
the domination of Afghanistan and Central Asia by
Pakistan, which is seeking to secure "strategic depth".
This is a new version of Lebensraum, cherished by
groups with an anachronistic ideological agenda. This
is not only a threat to Afghanistan but also a serious
menace to the peace and security of the region and of
the world.
The discrimination against women and girls, the
massacre of the civilian population based on ethnic or
religious origin, cultural vandalism, the stigmatization
of religious minority groups, raids on hospitals run by
humanitarian organizations and many other atrocities
are part of politico-social agenda of the Pakistan-
Taliban-bin Laden alliance. All of these endeavours are
focused on establishing an Emirate of terror serving the
interests of Pakistan and achieving the dreams of dull-
witted people of an "ideal Islamic society". The
purpose is to establish in Afghanistan a so-called
Islamic regime which does not resemble any other
Islamic country of the world.

The pursuit of creating such an idealistic society
could be considered one of the main causes of the
humanitarian crisis in the country. This man-made
disaster has deprived more than one half of the Afghan
population of productive activities. There is no
infrastructural economic plan for the reconstruction or
rehabilitation of Afghanistan, due to the harsh policies
issued daily by the Taliban. The skilled workers,
intellectuals and knowledgeable people have already
left the areas occupied by the Taliban. This is part of
Pakistan's scheme regarding Afghanistan, where
ignorant people remain in power and become
increasingly dependent on Pakistan and on Pakistani
military intelligence.

Despite the international community's outcry
about Taliban policies and actions - including the safe
haven being given to international terrorists in the parts
of Afghanistan occupied by the Taliban - in spite of
the presence of thousands of Arab and Central Asian
fighters and their training camps in Afghanistan, and
given the drug trafficking by the Taliban, Pakistan
continues to cherish its infamous offspring and puppet,
called the Taliban. Pakistan encourages others to
recognize this strange entity as a legitimate
Government. The interview given by the head of
Pakistan's military junta to the Russian daily Izvestia
on 31 May 2001, demanding the recognition of the
Taliban, is clear evidence of the continuing aggressive
policy of Pakistan in Afghanistan and in the region.
General Musharraf does not cease to repeat his litany
that "Pakistan supports the Taliban". He believes that
this constitutes "the national interest of Pakistan".

The history of the world in the past century has
shown that any policy of appeasement towards an
aggressor and turning a blind eye to the facts cannot
serve the interests of peace, justice and stability. A firm
and strong position against an aggressor can highly
serve the interests of peace, justice and stability.
Unfortunately, in the case of Afghanistan,
Pakistan's direct involvement in Afghanistan and its
aggressive policies in the region, which are a threat to
international peace and security, are not addressed
properly in the Security Council. Thousands of
Pakistani fighters are recruited and openly sent to
Afghanistan from different segments of Pakistani
society, including its military. The United Nations has
confirmed this fact by a mere stereotypical phrase -
"deeply concerned" - which appears in United
Nations documents without the determination that this
action constitutes aggression, requiring appropriate
measures against the aggressor.

This indifference by the United Nations
encourages Pakistan to pursue its hegemonic adventure
in Afghanistan, and - in blatant violation of Security
Council resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1333 (2000) - to
continue to supply arms and ammunition for the armed
conflict there. Pakistan remains engaged in providing
the Taliban with support in the areas of planning,
mobilization, logistics and recruitment.

In this regard, I would like to quote from the
article written by Mr. Anthony Davis, the most famous
scholar and writer on Afghanistan. This article was
published on 30 May 2001 in Jane 's Defence Weekly.

"Intelligence sources understand Pakistan
has continued to provide logistic and advisory
support for the build-up of the Taliban despite
Islamabad's earlier assurances that it would abide
by United Nations Security Council resolution
1333 that since January has prohibited provision
of material or advisory support to the Taliban.
The United Nations has no mechanism in place
that might monitor the implementation of the
sanctions regime by Pakistan, which has backed
the Taliban since the movement's inception in
1994.

"In one week in early May two convoys of
about 15 trucks each were moving daily from the
Pakistan border at Torkham through Jalalabad to
Kabul, according to reliable sources. The
Mercedes-Benz trucks carried Pakistani AF
[applied for] plates [issued in advance of normal
registration plates], giving them a degree of
anonymity, noted the sources. Munitions are
understood to have been concealed under sacks of
wheat.

"Other munitions are understood to have
been moved across the southern borders at
Chaman between the Pakistani city of Quetta and
Kandahar in Afghanistan."

Once again we would like to put on the record
that the Islamic State of Afghanistan is firmly
convinced that there is no military solution to the
present conflict in Afghanistan. The Pakistani military
junta should withdraw its military personnel and so-
called volunteers from Afghanistan. All foreign
fighters should leave Afghanistan immediately. All
foreign fighters should leave Afghanistan immediately.
The Afghans should be left to resolve their problems
through negotiations.

The Islamic State of Afghanistan has already
expressed its readiness to attend the Japanese-proposed
peace talks, and also positively responded to the
Kazakhstan-proposed peace negotiations, to be held
under the auspices of the United Nations. It also
positively responded to the appeal by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Ruud
Lubbers, for a ceasefire. All these proposals were all
systematically rejected by the Taliban.

The Islamic State of Afghanistan strongly
believes that it is high time for the Security Council to
discharge its duty under the Charter of the United
Nations to save the people of Afghanistan, to end the
suffering of the Afghan nation and to maintain the
peace and security of the region. The Security Council
should determine the extent of Pakistani aggression in
Afghanistan and decide the measures to be taken to
maintain peace and security.

As my Government remains unwaveringly
committed to defending the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the country, I would like to
reaffirm our strong belief in a peaceful political
settlement of the conflict and to reiterate our
wholehearted support for the pivotal mediating role of
the United Nations, aimed at the establishment of a
broad-based, multi-ethnic and fully representative
Government in Afghanistan.

In this context, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs
of Afghanistan already 4 last Friday - sent identical
letters to the Secretary-General and to yourself, Sir.
These letters are to be published as an official
document of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. We expect you will give great attention to
the text and its annexes. We thank the Ambassador of
Colombia, Alfonso Valdivieso, the Committee of
Experts headed by Ambassador Haile Menkerios and
all Ambassador Menkerios' companions for their
efforts deployed to submit a report on how the arms
embargo and the closure of the terrorist training camps
could be implemented in accordance with resolution
1333 (2000).

Finally, let me endorse the conclusions of the
Committee of Experts, in particular the establishment
of a control mechanism and the ideas reflected in
paragraph 89 of the Committee's report, which I wish
to read out:

"The sanctions imposed on the Taliban must
be seen and implemented as part of an overall
package pursued by the United Nations to ensure
peace and stability in Afghanistan. Thus, the
sanctions, the search for a political solution, and
the humanitarian and economic efforts all need to
be taken as a whole and pursued as parts of an
integrated strategy leading to a broad-based and
responsible government in Afghanistan."

Paragraph 90 begins:
"No sanctions monitoring will be effective The President: In View of the lateness of the
unless there is total commitment of the Member hour, and with the concurrence of the members of the
States involved with its implementation." Council, I shall suspend the meeting now until 3 pm.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15pm.

monitoring mechanism from the regular United Nations
budget, so that it can be both predictable and secure.
