The Secretary-General: I am very happy to join
the Security Council today. I have come to share some
thoughts about my recent visit to Asia. If you agree,
Sir, Mr. Brahimi will then provide a more detailed
briefing on the situation on the ground in Afghanistan.

My trip took me to Japan, Pakistan, Afghanistan,
Iran and Qatar. In Japan, I met with the Prime Minister
and the Minister of Foreign Affairs and attended the
International Conference on Reconstruction Assistance
to Afghanistan. In Pakistan, I met with President
Musharraf and Foreign Minister Sattar and attended the
Pakistan Forum On Human Development. In
Afghanistan, I met with Chairman Karzai and members
of the Interim Administration, as well as with
representatives of civil society and women's group, and
received a briefing from General McColl of the
International Security Assistance Force. In Iran, I met
with Ayatollah Khamenei, the Supreme Leader, as well
as with President Khatami, Foreign Minister Kharrazi
and the Speaker of the Parliament. Finally, I met with
the Emir of Qatar.

With respect to Afghanistan, as I said, we will get
more information from Mr. Brahimi, but the situation
there was, of course, the main focus of my discussions
throughout the region. I was greatly encouraged in
Tokyo by the donations that were pledged - $4.5
billion for five years - and expressed strong support
for the political process emanating from Bonn.
Chairman Karzai stressed his firm commitment to
transparency and accountability in the use of all aid
and made clear his understanding that the role of the
international community is to help the Afghans help
themselves. I see that Mrs. Ogata, who chaired the
meeting, is here with us this morning.

At the same time, as we analyse the pledges, we
can see some critical gaps. The conference focused on
long-term needs, but the Afghan Interim
Administration needs money today, for example, to pay
the salaries of public servants. Indeed, help is
desperately needed right now. The international
community must rise to the challenge today and then
stay engaged for the long haul.

Security was the number one preoccupation of
everyone we met in Afghanistan. Indeed, the security
situation remains precarious and, without security,
reconstruction will not be possible and donors will not
be able to disburse the money they have so generously
pledged.

The second main concern was the need for the
Interim Administration to have the resources to pay
public servants. Without resources, the Administration
will quickly lose credibility and will be unable to
extend its authority elsewhere in the country, thereby
undermining the chances of success for the longer-term
peace process.

Mr. Brahimi will brief the Council in greater
detail about each of these issues.

One key element in Afghanistan's recovery will
be the support of its neighbours. President Musharraf,
for his part, was firm in his commitment to working
with the Interim Administration and the United
Nations. He invited Chairman Karzai and other
members of the Interim Administration to visit
Pakistan, and I conveyed that message to the Afghan
authorities. President Musharraf also promised to take
action against any Taliban or Al Qaeda personnel found
in Pakistan and to ensure that Pakistani territory would
not be used by Afghans interested in subverting the
central Administration in Kabul. The President also
made it clear that a stable Afghanistan was in
Pakistan's national interest and that of the wider
region.

Iran, too, is committed to strengthening the
authority of the Interim Administration. Iran, which
like Pakistan has hosted many refugees for many years
and has long had trade and other contacts with
Afghanistan, also recognizes the national interest in a
stable Afghanistan. The Iranian authorities also said
they would not tolerate the presence of Taliban or Al
Qaeda personnel on its territory.

Both Iran and Pakistan pledged to work with each
other and with Afghanistan's other neighbours as we
move ahead. Such a regional approach holds great
promise, and I intend it to be a major pillar of United
Nations strategy in confronting this challenge.

I also had a chance to talk in Islamabad with
President Musharraf about relations between India and
Pakistan. The President was very concerned about the
military build-up and expressed his readiness for
dialogue. He also reiterated his commitment, made in
his courageous speech of 12 January, to take strong
measures against extremist armed groups.

For my part, I stressed the need not only for
immediate military de-escalation, but also for a
sustained and determined dialogue aimed at resolving
this situation, so that there will not be another crisis in
a few weeks' or a few months' time. Towards that end,
I renewed my offer of good offices, should both parties
wish to avail themselves of them.

Another subject of great concern in Iran and
Qatar, and in my talks with Secretary Powell on the
margins of the Tokyo conference, was the downward
spiral of violence between Israelis and Palestinians. We
need to find a way to get the parties back to the
negotiating table, where all issues should be
addressed- terrorism as well as the occupation.
Without this wider political context, and without some
alleviation of the humanitarian plight of the
Palestinians, I fear that progress will be nearly
impossible and the risk of further violence all too great.

Mr. Larsen briefed the Council last week on this
issue, and I will continue to do my utmost in helping to
find new ways to break what is clearly a very
dangerous impasse.

In conclusion, I know that everyone is looking
forward to hearing from Lakhdar Brahimi, and I want
to end here. He and his team have done remarkable
work. Indeed, everywhere I went on this visit, United
Nations staff were a constant source of inspiration.
Despite extremely arduous conditions, their
commitment is steadfast, and the breadth of their work
is truly breathtaking. They are playing a key role in
helping the people of Afghanistan to seize this unique
moment of opportunity, and they merit our continued
support.

