Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are very grateful for the
briefings by the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Theodor
Meron, and the Prosecutor, Mr. Serge Brammertz.
We take this opportunity to reiterate to them our
strong support in the discharge of the duties that have
been entrusted to them. We should like also to thank
and congratulate Peru for its work at the head of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.

There is no doubt that the work carried out by
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) has made a landmark contribution
over the past 24 years to the fight against impunity.
Both bodies have played a major role in the quest for
justice and the restoration of the rule of law. On this
understanding, and following the closure of the ICTY
last December, the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals has taken on the primary
responsibility for concluding, in a timely and effective
way, the remaining trials transferred to its purview.

The Mechanism must implement, with the highest
degree of rigour, the mandate conferred on it in
resolution 1966 (2010), of 22 December 2010, not just
continuing with the case law, rights and obligations
of both tribunals, but also taking on the vital role of
strengthening and supporting the work of national
jurisdictions. In all this it must abide by its original
design concept, meaning that it must be a small,
temporary and efficient structure whose functions and
size will decrease over time.

We have taken due note of the progress made in
the jurisdictional activities carried out during the
reporting period, including a new, unanticipated
trial in the Stanisic and Simatovic' case, as well as in
appeals hearings and review procedures. We would also
highlight the assistance and cooperation provided by
the Office of the Prosecutor to national jurisdictions so
as to help them with the strengthening and development
of their domestic capacities.

Moreover, we believe that the holding of remote
hearings is an innovative initiative that is efficient
in terms of both time savings and budgetary savings.
Nonetheless, this initiative needs to be improved and
further developed in order to guarantee better levels of
interaction between the judges. It is also key to address
the possible risks that it might present in terms of the
security of data and of confidential information.

We would highlight the Mechanism's capacity to
discharge multiple functions simultaneously in the
cases handed over to it by the ICTR and the ICTY. We
urge the Mechanism to strengthen its harmonization
and integration efforts, taking steps to prevent the
differences in work culture between the Offices in
Arusha and The Hague from affecting the work of
the Mechanism.

Despite the progress reported, we wish to express
our alarm at the number of fugitives who have not yet
been apprehended and brought before the Mechanism
for trial, despite the unceasing coordination activities
carried out by the Office of the Prosecutor alongside
States, regional and international organizations such
as INTERPOL. It is important in that context to recall
that criminal responsibility is individual and that
no community or nation is responsible for the acts
committed by individuals. That understanding should
encourage States to cooperate with investigations in
order to avoid impunity and guarantee reparations
for harm caused, which is a vital prerequisite
for reconciliation.

Moreover, instances of early release and related
problems are an issue that give us cause for great
concern, given that there appear to be gaps in terms of
the criteria for their implementation. In that respect, we
call on the Mechanism, through its various bodies, to
take the measures necessary to resolve the situation and
to prevent the legacy and the work of the ICTY and the
ICTR from being tarnished or diminished by the release
of individuals who then proceed to deny their crimes or
attempt to justify their crimes against humanity.

We have taken note of the difficulties encountered
during the reporting period on the relocation of 11
individuals who had served their sentences fully or
who had been acquitted of all charges. There may be
a possible humanitarian situation in this respect that
needs to be resolved and addressed quickly by the
Mechanism. For this reason, the support and assistance
of the international community is particularly important.

We have taken note of the assessment carried out
by the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the
functions of and the work carried out by the Mechanism
for the period 2016-2017. We note the generally
positive assessment and have also taken note of the
six recommendations contained therein and call on the
various bodies of the Mechanism to implement same as
soon as possible.

Finally, we urge the Mechanism to continue to
develop its jurisdictional activities in a determined
manner, making effective and efficient use of the
resources allocated to it, abiding by its temporary nature
and taking the precautions necessary to implement its
actions over the short and medium term.

