Mr. O'Brien: Today marks World Humanitarian
Day, commemorating the 19 August 2003 terrorist
attack on the Canal Hotel, which served as the United
Nations compound in Baghdad. The attack killed
22 people and injured over 100, most of whom were
working tirelessly on the humanitarian relief effort in
Iraq.

Sadly, in the years since then, the number of
people attacked while delivering life-saving assistance
continues to rise. Ten humanitarian workers were killed
in every month of 2014. In Syria, 77 humanitarians
have lost their lives since the beginning of the conflict.
In Yemen, five aid workers have been killed, others
have been injured and another two were kidnapped this
year. Over the past 10 years in Yemen, 17 humanitarian
workers have died in the line of duty and 44 have been
kidnapped. The contexts in which humanitarian workers
serve around the world and the terrible plight of the
more than 100 million people in need of humanitarian
assistance they seek to reach continue to deteriorate.

I have just returned from Yemen, where the scale
of human suffering is almost incomprehensible. I was
shocked by What I saw. The civilian population is
bearing the brunt of the conflict - a shocking four out
of five Yemenis require humanitarian assistance and
nearly 1.5 million people are internally displaced. More
than 1,000 children have been killed or injured, and the
number of young people recruited or used as fighters
is increasing. As I highlighted in my 28 July briefing
on Yemen (see S/PV.7493), the needs of the people
are massive. That is exacerbated by impediments to
commercial imports, resulting in widespread scarcity
of food and fuel. Humanitarian assistance alone cannot
meet all the needs of an entire country with a population
of 26 million people. That is why airports and seaports
need to remain open and be used for both commercial
imports and humanitarian supplies without restriction.

Disregard for human life on the part of all parties
continues, with attacks on residential areas and civilian
infrastructure having a disproportionate impact on
the lives of ordinary people in Yemen. Reports of air
strikes and other shelling in and around the port of
Al-Hudaydah earlier this week damaged the main
lifelines for the import of basic goods: food, medicines
and fuel. Those attacks are in clear contravention of
international humanitarian law and are unacceptable. I
am extremely concerned that the damage to the port of
Al-Hudaydah could have a severe impact on the entire
country and will deepen humanitarian needs, making
more people food insecure and leaving them without
access to water or medicines, which could also mean
the spread of disease.

The parties to the conflict must ensure that
humanitarian aid is facilitated and not hindered. All
parties to the conflict must respect and implement
international humanitarian law; possible violations
must be investigated and perpetrators held accountable.
I have seen the anguish of the Yemeni people with my
own eyes - men, women and children alike, unsure
where their next meal will come from or if they will
ever be able to return to their homes.

In Sana'a, I witnessed queues for fuel that were
kilometres long, and people waiting for several days
to meet the basic needs of their families. I visited
Al-Thawra hospital, where the lights flickered as the
generators ran low on fuel, patients lay on the floor and
cardboard was used as mattresses. There I saw a young
man injured by shrapnel. He said he had been a soldier
since he was 15 years of age. I saw a young woman
who was grazed by a bullet across her face while sitting
in her own home, and I saw a young Somali man with
tuberculosis. The hospital has run out of examination
gloves and has insufficient quantities of essential
medicines because the supplier in Dubai is unable to
fly their cold-chain aircraft to Sana'a. Hospital staff
informed me that the blood bank recently closed due
to a shortage of laboratory reagents used for screening.

In Faj Attan, a neighbourhood in Sana'a, I saw
homes destroyed by air strikes; neighbours told me of
the numerous civilian deaths and injuries. In Aden, an
entire road of homes and businesses were destroyed
by street battles and air strikes, which left the streets
littered with tanks and unexploded ordnance. I heard
the story of a father and daughter who had been killed
just days earlier by an improvised explosive device.
The Governor of Aden informed me that some people
were slowly returning to their homes and basic services
were being restored, but not in vast swathes of the
city, where unexploded ordnance litter the streets and
buildings. People are overwhelmed by the scale of
the destruction and the task ahead in rebuilding their
shattered city. Electricity, essential for water-pumping
and cereal-milling, is rare and intermittent.

It is appropriate on the occasion of World
Humanitarian Day to reflect on the courage of my
colleagues - Yemeni and international - who continue
to deliver vital assistance despite the tremendous
operational challenges, often risking their own lives
to help others. Since the conflict began in late March,
nearly 7 million people in Yemen have been supported
by United Nations agencies and their partners with food,
water, shelter, health support and protection assistance.
I am humbled by the tireless efforts of my colleagues.

But much more needs to be done. We continue to
scale up the humanitarian response so that we can reach
all those in need with the assistance they so sorely
need. That includes positioning more international staff
across the country, outside of Sana'a and Al-Hudaydah.
We aim to establish operational hubs in Aden, Ibb,
Sa'ada and Al-Mukalla as soon as the security situation
allows.

The success of our efforts to continue to assist the
people depends on our having sufficient resources to
respond. Today, the World Food Programme warned
again that a lack of immediate and unhindered
access to people who urgently need food assistance
and the shortage of funding create the possibility of
famine for millions of Yemenis. To date, only 18 per
cent - some $282 million of the $1.6 billion requested
through the Yemen humanitarian response plan - has
been received. United Nations agencies have still not
received the funding from Saudi Arabia of $274 million
pledged in April. Even once those funds are received,
the response plan will be funded at only 33 per cent.
Substantial additional resources will be needed to
support the Yemeni people through the rest of the year
and beyond.

Throughout my mission, I emphasized that peace
is essential to ending the tremendous suffering of the
people. There is no military solution to this conflict.
Peace must be reached through a dialogue of words,
not a dialogue of weapons. We, the international
community, must match our actions with our words
and take immediate measures to end the violence that
is destroying the lives of millions of people across the
country. We must get the parties to stop the fighting
and return to the negotiating table before it is too late.
Otherwise, there will be nothing left to fight for.

As we reflect on the state of play globally on World
Humanitarian Day, we unfortunately see a worsening
situation and a scale ofneedless humanitarian suffering
that is truly shocking. We must act. We must do more to
ensure that those ofus in a position to do so prevent the
abuses perpetrated against those who can do nothing,
and that those who continue to carry them out are held
to account.

