Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I am delivering this
statement on behalf of the three African members of the
Security Council, Cote d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea and
my own country, South Africa.

We would like to thank Council members for
agreeing that now is not the time to continue the
drawdown of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The Council's unity
in taking this decision sends a message about the
importance of recognizing the current uncertainty
prevailing on the political and security fronts. Though
the African members of the Council would have
preferred a six-month technical rollover to ensure
adequate time to comprehensively evaluate the situation
in Darfur, we nonetheless agree with the four-month
period provided for in resolution 2479 (2019). That will
enable both the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations to make a thorough joint assessment and,
hopefully, the mediation initiative to consolidate that
process in the Sudan. The technical rollover supports
and complements the decision of the African Union
to postpone the drawdown. The decision taken today
is an example of the important cooperation between
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council in dealing with matters of peace and security
on our continent.

We trust that the leadership in the Sudan will
effectively utilize the time that has been provided
to address the political impasse, usher in stability
and fulfil the aspirations of the Sudanese people.
Moreover, the time allowed should ensure that all
UNAMID team sites are cleared for civilian purposes,
as originally intended.

Peace and stability in the Sudan are critical for the
region and for the continent as a whole, particularly
with regard to fulfilling the aspirations of the African
Union's Agenda 2063 and silencing the guns by 2020.
The Sudan has played an important role in finding peace
and security in Africa in the past and it should play that
role again. The African members ofthe Council hope that
the planned joint visit to Khartoum by Prime Minister
Abiy Ahmed of Ethiopia, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chair of the AU Commission, and Mr. Smai'l Chergui,
the AU Commissioner for Peace and Security, will soon
assist the Sudanese stakeholders in finding harmony on
a common transitional arrangement. We also hope that
they can agree on a local road map for peace in order to
give certainty and assurance to all the Sudanese people,
including in Darfur, so that their motherland will soon
enjoy peace, stability and prosperity.

Lastly, we thank the United Kingdom and Germany,
the co-penholders, for their leadership and transparency
during the negotiations.

