Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first to congratulate the Argentine
presidency for having convened, in a timely manner,
this open meeting of the Security Council to address
the situation in, and prospects for, Haiti. I am pleased
in particular to see among us the President-elect of
Haiti, Mr. Rene' Garcia Preval, to whom I reiterate the
congratulations of the Government of Spain upon his
recent election. In addition, the high level of
representation in today's debate is a sign of the
international community's great interest in the progress
and future of Haiti.

We are also grateful for the information provided
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Juan Gabriel Valdes, whose work as Head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) merits all of our appreciation and
support. Spain fully endorses the statement made by
the representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union. We would also like to add a few comments in
our national capacity.

The upcoming weeks and months will be crucial
for the future of Haiti. Through their large turnout for
the elections, the Haitian people have shown their
commitment to the democratization of their country, an
element that is fundamental to peacebuilding and to the
sustainable development of the country.

Spain has provided technical and financial
assistance to MINUSTAH and to the Organization of
American States. We have also taken part in the
European Union electoral observer mission. The
democratic process that is beginning now must be
inclusive, and the new institutions must represent the
whole of Haitian society and must promote dialogue
and national reconciliation.

Spain is firmly committed to maintaining and
strengthening its long-term commitment to
stabilization and reconstruction in Haiti. Although
current limitations on the deployment of Spanish
troops abroad - as decided by our Parliament - have
prevented us from further extending the presence of the
Spanish military contingent in MINUSTAH, Spain
would like to contribute towards the strengthening of
the work of the United Nations in Haiti, in line with the
aspiration expressed by the Ibero-American community
at the summits held at San Jose', Costa Rica and
Salamanca, Spain, to play an active role in the
stabilization and reconstruction of Haiti.

In this connection, the Spanish Government is
actively studying with the United Nations Secretariat a
way to enhance our support to MINUSTAH's police
contingent, since this component of the Mission is
going to become even more important in the period
that is now beginning. We are also studying the
possibility of implementing a programme of bursaries
and training courses in Spain for members of the
Haitian security forces in order to help to improve their
level of training within the context of the necessary
reform and strengthening of the Haitian national
police, as requested by the Security Council in
resolution 1608 (2005).

I would like to point out that Haiti has become a
priority country for Spanish cooperation. Not in vain,
we have tripled the amount of our contribution
commitments to reconstruction in the country,
compared to what was initially announced within the
framework of the 2004 Washington donor conference.
Spanish cooperation in Haiti now covers such relevant
areas as food security, access to drinking water, the
health sector and budgetary support. Moreover, Spain
is planning to cooperate with the new Haitian
authorities in areas such as strengthening the rule of
law and democratic institutions, as well as reform in
training.

As an expression of our desire to continue
participating in the reconstruction process, in
international efforts aimed at the process of political
and economic reconstruction of the country and in
defending and promoting good economic and social
governance, Spain is ready to host an upcoming donor
conference on Haiti.

A new phase is beginning in Haiti, where we are
sure that the new Government, the other political
forces and the entire Haitian population will be able to
face the future, as it appears today, with the full
support of the international community and, of course,
of Spain.

