The President (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I shall now make a statement in my capacity
as the representative of the Russian Federation.

I must note first and foremost that, yet again,
during today's discussions some members of the
Security Council did not attempt to objectively evaluate
the situation in Ukraine and its root causes. They
made insinuations and even threats against Russia. We
categorically refute them, and let us get to the heart of
the matter now.

For the first time in Ukraine, fragile encouraging
signs have begun to appear. That President Poroshenko
has declared a ceasefire is certainly important; there
can be no negotiations without one. Most important,
however, is that the ceasefire should lead to dialogue
among all the warring parties in order to reach a
compromise acceptable to all, so that people living
in south-east Ukraine feel without a doubt that they
are an integral part of the country, with all the rights
of citizens of that State, and that those rights are
guaranteed, including by the Constitution.

We value the first consultations that were held in
Donetsk between the authorities and official leaders of
Ukraine and militias of south-east Ukraine, with the
participation of the Russian Ambassador to Ukraine
and the representative of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We expect that
the agreement to support the ceasefire will be strictly
adhered to by the parties.

Dialogue has begun, although the so-called
Poroshenko plan did not originally include negotiations.
Not surprisingly, the representatives of the east
embraced him warily. They have no basis for trusting
the Kyiv authorities. For our part, we are convinced
that, without practical action and direct negotiations,
the peace plan process will not be viable or realistic.

In order to normalize and resolve the situation in
the eastern regions of Ukraine, as well as with regard
to the trilateral talks already launched on that matter,
Russian President Vladimir Putin sent a letter to the
Council of the Federation of the Federal Assembly
concerning the revocation of the Council's decision on
the use of the Russian Army on the territory of Ukraine,
dated 1 March.

From the outset, Russia has called for a political
solution to the crisis in Ukraine through inclusive
dialogue and swift constitutional reform. That was the
goal of the Geneva statement of 17 April, as well as
of the OSCE road map, which had our support along
with that of many other States, but for some reason
not that of Ukraine. We have repeatedly called for
the relevant documents to be adopted by the Security
Council, from short statements in support of the Geneva
statement to resolutions that stress the importance of
inclusive dialogue in resolving the humanitarian issues.
Unfortunately, our initiatives are invariably met with
stonewalling by Western colleagues.
That may be because Kyiv did not adhere to many
of the provisions of that document, even though they
had made a commitment to refrain from violence,
intimidation and provocation. Instead of halting its
punitive operations against its own people, Kyiv
actually intensified them.

Kyiv has not moved to disarm illegally armed
groups, particularly the co-called Right Sector and
other extremists, along with various regional militias
such as the Dnepr and Azov and the legally dubious
National Guard.

The Ukrainian crisis is strongly coloured by the
fact that it is a direct consequence of the violent and
unconstitutional change of Government in February.
Residents of the south-east were treated with contempt
by the self-proclaimed authorities. They copied the
tactics ofthe Maidan and took up arms in order to declare
their legal grievances, but then they were declared
separatists and terrorists, and punitive operations were
launched against entire cities with the use of heavy
artillery and aviation. For a long time, even against the
backdrop of President Poroshenko's peace promises,
those operations only gathered momentum, in both
intensity and scope.

Furthermore, the ceasefire was constantly violated.
Shelling even reached Russian territory, as a result
of which people were wounded and buildings were
destroyed in the neighbourhood of the Dolzhansky
Novoshahtinsk crossing point. The humanitarian
situation remains extremely difficult, with an unabated
flow of refugees to Russia. We are trubled by the
refusal of the Ukrainian Ministry for Foreign Affairs to
cooperate with us in that area. We call for the removal
of artificial obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian
supplies and for the establishment of safe corridors for
the evacuation of civilians from combat zones. The
corridors promised by President Poroshenko have yet
to be created.

Even under bullets, refugees continue to leave
Ukraine. Upwards of 450,000 Ukrainian citizens have
crossed the border and remain in Russia. The majority
are living with friends and family, but in the border
regions alone there are more than 220 temporary
shelters, including tent cities. There are currently more
than 19,000 people living in such accommodation,
including more than 5,500 children. However, it is
difficult for the central and southern districts to absorb
such an influx, and new welcome centres are being
established across Russia. Across the country, people
are collecting humanitarian aid for the residents of
south-east Ukraine. I will not hide the fact that we are
deeply disturbed that some of our colleagues on the
Council who are so prone to play the humanitarian card
when they find it politically expedient seem indifferent
in this case.

With respect to the latest report of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
on the situation of human rights in Ukraine, there is
actually no reason for the Council to be discussing the
report. The monitoring mission was established by the
High Commissioner for Human Rights at the invitation
of the Ukrainian authorities. Since the Security Council
did not provide instructions for the report, logic would
dictate that the report not be submitted to the Council.

However, it is surprising that Kyiv, which itself
invited the mission, is refusing to cooperate with it,
particularly with respect to the investigation of the
tragedy in Odesa. The report notes the lack of progress
in OSCE's parallel investigations, now numbering
six, which simply shows the efforts being made to
drown the truth in paper, and confirms the need for
a comprehensive international investigation into the
Odesa tragedy, as we have stated from the outset. As for
the Russian Federation, we did not invite the mission
and made no recommendations to it. We view the
inclusion of the recommendations in the document as
inappropriate.

The human rights situation in Crimea should
clearly not be the subject of the report. We also believe
that the mission's inability to provide an assessment
under the pretext of a lack of access is nonsense. The
consequences of Kyiv's action to cut off water in
Crimea are not mentioned in the report. However, the
lack of access did not prevent the mission from making
politically abhorrent statements on the deteriorating
situation in Crimea. There are several politically
motivated references in the report. According to the
guidelines for drafting the report, it seems that only
verified information should be used. That is probably
correct but that limitation has always benefited Kyiv in
the report.

There are a number of references in the document
to so-called reports of alleged human rights violations
by armed groups in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
However, why are many details overlooked with regard
to the residents of the area and journalists, as well as
videos showing artillery strikes on residential areas
in southeastern towns and casualties among civilians
as a result of the indiscriminate use of force by the
Government? The entire world saw the pictures of the
Ukrainian air strikes on the Luhansk administrative
building on 2 June, which could in no way be called a
military target. Civilians were killed. Despite the fact
that colleagues of the OSCE observers underscored that
the strikes were carried out by surface-to-air rockets,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for some reason makes the absurd assumption
that it was an unsuccessful attempt by militia to shoot
down a Ukrainian plane. Such a statement has been
rebutted by numerous sources.

In the section on propaganda, the report overlooks
the United Nations helicopter incident. For some reason
the incident is not mentioned. However, in order to
deal with the situation on the ground, we will have to
determine the position with regard to the helicopters
that had previously been provided to Ukraine for
United Nations operations and if they had really been
repainted. That should have been included and the
relevant United Nations resources provided to that end.

A separate discussion on the situation of journalists
is required. The report notes that on 24 May, an Italian
photojournalist, Andrea Rocchelli, and his colleague,
Andrey Mironov, were killed. On 17 June, following
mortar fire, the Russianjournalists Igor Kornelyuk and
Anton Voloshin were killed in Luhansk. There needs to
be a careful investigation of those events. There are too
many reports that indicate that it was a targeted attack.

The detention, intimidation and beating of
journalists continue. In addition to the cases in the
report, we would note the 14 June incident, in which
two correspondents of the Zvezda television channel
were brutally beaten by the Ukrainian armed forces in
order to obtain confessions. The Ukrainian authorities
then boasted that the journalists had apologized for the
reporting. There are continuing reports ofjournalists
being persecuted for carrying out their work, as well as
their expulsion from the country. In general, we must say
that the report undermines trust in the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and gives rise to
serious questions as to whether it is appropriate for the
mission to continue its work.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

