Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Sir, for convening today's meeting. We also thank
Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her important briefing.

We note the improvements in the security situation
in Darfur and wish to highlight the work of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, as
well as the efforts of the Government of the Sudan in
that area. We must also express our regret and concern
about the growing insecurity in the Jebel Marra area,
which has an impact on the delicate humanitarian
situation and leads to serious human rights violations.
We condemn the destruction of villages, killings,
forced displacements and cases of sexual and
gender-based violence, which must all cease. Those
responsible must be brought to justice. In that regard,
we wish to support the work of the Prosecutor and her
team and encourage them to redouble their efforts in
compiling testimonies and other evidence related to the
commission of atrocities.

We reiterate the need for States, including the
Republic of the Sudan and members of the Council, to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court and its
Prosecutor in order to allow access to justice, prevent
impunity and thereby assist in achieving lasting peace
in the Sudan. We deplore the fact that States parties
to the Rome Statute have not complied with arrest
warrants issued by the Court against suspects who have
entered their countries. We remind them that they are
obliged to comply with the Court's arrest warrants and
provide their timely and effective cooperation.

We recall that the Security Council referred the
situation to the Prosecutor for consideration. The
International Criminal Court has therefore established
itsjurisdiction over crimes against humanity committed
in Darfur. In that regard, we believe that the Council
should have specific procedures to respond to cases of
non-compliance and lack of cooperation, with a View
to holding the States concerned accountable for their
inaction. We support France's initiative in that regard.

Lastly, we recall that, while the Court is
fundamental to preventing the most serious crimes from
going unpunished, its jurisdiction is complementary to
the responsibility of any State to protect its population
and that trust in justice is particularly relevant to a
country affected by the conflict, such as the Sudan. In
that regard, we stress that the mandates and functions
of the Security Council and the International Criminal
Court seek to reach similar objectives, expressly
aimed at achieving the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. The
primary responsibility of the Council for maintaining
international peace and security and the competence
of the Court on the most serious international crimes
must be understood and executed as complementary
and interdependent tasks.

