Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing. I would also like to thank the Bolivian
presidency for presiding over and convening today's
important meeting.

Natural resources are the material basis for human
survival and development and an important factor in
peace and development for all countries. The illicit
exploitation and trafficking of natural resources,
as well as their misuse and unfair distribution, can
potentially play a key role in triggering and fuelling
conflicts and undermining peace. Security threats such
as war, conflicts and terrorism all have roots in poverty
and underdevelopment, and solutions to them must be
found through development.

In order to address the issue of conflicts caused
by the misuse of resources, we must help the countries
concerned take full advantage of their natural resources
and facilitate their efforts to industrialize and diversify
their economies, enabling them to follow their own
paths of sustainable development in line with their
particular conditions. I would like to emphasize the
following points.

First, the international community should respect
States' irrevocable sovereignty over their natural
resources in their territories, which is indisputable.
The proper protection, exploitation and management of
natural resources are a sovereign right and obligation.
The exploration, development and utilization of
natural resources should be decided independently
by the Governments and peoples of individual States.
Countries in conflict should pay greater attention to
the proper use and management of resources, prevent
their illicit exploitation and misuse in causing and
fuelling armed conflicts, translate their rich resources
into development advantages and enable all citizens
to benefit from their dividends. In exploiting natural
resources, multinational corporations and the private
sector should respect the host countries' ownership
and work sincerely to meet their corporate social
responsibilities and give back to local communities.

Secondly, the Security Council should continue to

play a constructive role in that regard, in accordance
with its own responsibilities and strengths. Considering
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
should place stronger emphasis on means such as
good offices and mediation, focus on preventing and
resolving conflicts and work effectively to meet its
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. Sanctions imposed by the Council are not an
end in themselves and should be carefully targeted for
a precise impact on organizations engaged in illicit
extraction, while minimizing the effects on the normal
exploitation conducted by the countries concerned.

Thirdly, the relevant United Nations entities should
improve their coordination and work together to help
conflict-affected countries to improve their management
of resources. When formulating a comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy, the Peacebuilding Commission
should give greater priority to the management of
natural resources in post-conflict reconstruction. United
Nations field missions and development agencies should
pool their resources and create synergies in order to
support countries in conflict in improving their ability
to exploit their own natural resources. The United
Nations can provide assistance in the proper extraction,
transportation and management of natural resources
at the request of the countries concerned, and should
promote the use of natural resources for sustainable
development and social stability in all countries.

Fourthly, regional organizations and relevant
mechanisms should play an active role in this area. In
recent years, the African Union and other regional and
subregional organizations have played an important
role in encouraging cooperation among African
States in building up their capacity for comprehensive
natural-resources management. Mechanisms such as
the Kimberley Process have been crucial in curbing
the illicit trade in natural resources and should be
encouraged to complement the efforts of the United
Nations and its Member States and continue to
contribute to the consideration and proper use of
natural resources.

China is committed to defending and building
world peace, based on the principles of equality, mutual
benefit and win-win cooperation. China actively
supports and helps other countries to properly develop,
utilize and manage their natural resources. We consider
coordinated economic, social and environmental
development very important, as it helps the countries
concerned to achieve sustainable development and
ensures that local communities benefit. We will work
with nations around the world to build a community with
a shared future for humankind and leverage the positive
role of natural resources in maintaining international
peace and promoting common development, so that
countries affected by conflict can overcome the curse
on their resources as soon as possible, invest their
natural resources in their peoples' pursuit of happiness
and contribute to world peace and development.

