Mr. Munoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
very important meeting.

The Government of Chile expresses its deepest
regret at the situation prevailing in the Middle East as a
result of the escalation of violence in the region. We
condemn the disproportionate measures taken by the
Israeli forces, which have caused hundreds of deaths in
Lebanon - a majority of them civilians - as well as
the intentional destruction of infrastructure in the Gaza
Strip and in Lebanon, which threatens to engender a
humanitarian disaster.

We condemn also the attacks carried out by
Hizbollah, which have caused the death of civilians, as
well as its kidnapping of two soldiers. The
indiscriminate missile attacks against cities in northern
Israel are unacceptable. The soldiers should be
released, as should the Palestinian Authority officials
who remain under arrest in Gaza.

All of these factors only intensify the spiral of
violence that is endangering peace and stability
throughout the region. For that reason, we call on all
parties involved to put an immediate end to armed
actions, and we call on Israel forces to withdraw from
Lebanon and from the Gaza Strip. We call also on
Hizbollah to stop the violence and its indiscriminate
attacks, and we urge that the Government of Lebanon
exercise its sovereignty throughout its territory, with
the help of the international community, if Beirut so
requests.

We firmly support the suggestion made yesterday
by the Secretary-General that a diplomatic approach be
taken involving a package of practical measures aimed
at addressing the emergency situation and providing a
solution - hopefully a lasting one - to the crisis.

The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon

includes Chilean military officers, and Chile will

continue to work along the lines that the Secretary-
General has suggested.

With regard to the severe humanitarian crisis that
is affecting the Palestinian and Lebanese people, the
Government of Chile has taken the following
measures.

First, we supported the resolution adopted by the
Human Rights Council, which decided to send a
special mission to assess the human rights situation in
Palestine. Secondly, we have sent a shipment of
medicines so as to help alleviate, at least in part, the
severe humanitarian and health situation of the
Palestinian people in Gaza. Thirdly, we will very soon
be sending medicines and other humanitarian
assistance to the thousands of civilians affected by
the bombings in central and southern Lebanon.
Fourthly, just today we sent a Boeing 707 to Damascus
in order to repatriate numerous Chileans and other
Latin American nationals trapped in the midst of the
conflict.

Finally, we repeat our call to return to the path of
dialogue and reason. The history of the region shows
that military solutions have always failed, and the cost
has been mainly paid by innocent victims.

The Government of Chile reiterates the
importance of strictly adhering to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly with respect to the settlement of disputes,
condemnation of the use or threat of the use of force
and full compliance with the resolutions of the Security
Council.

