Ms. Sapag Munoz de la Pefia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Egypt for convening today's debate,
and we listened with great interest to the statements
of the speakers who preceded us. We are particularly
grateful to have heard Ambassador Rosenthal, with
his experience in development and in peacebuilding
and his emphasis on the fact that the three pillars must
be integrated.

Faced with conflicts and theirterrible consequences,
we have a responsibility to act in a timely, efficient and
relevant manner, deploying coherent efforts to counter
political, economic, social or cultural situations that are
generally at the root of the conflicts to be prevented.
We are convinced that conflict prevention is the
most effective means of addressing its human and
financial costs. We therefore support the achievement
of the sustaining peace objective set forth in General
Assembly resolution 70/262 through an integrated and
multidimensional strategy within the framework of the
preventive vision promoted by the Secretary-General.

Sustaining peace will benefit from strategies for
planning, evaluation and withdrawal of peacekeeping
operations tailored to the appropriate interaction
between all stakeholders - namely, the host country,
United Nations staff, local civil society and national
contingents in close dialogue with regional and
international actors - under the principle of national
ownership that you mentioned in your statement earlier,
Mr. President.

The design of strategies in this direction should
take into account, among other things, the state of play
of defence institutions, critical infrastructures, such
as schools and hospitals, which is a subject that the
Council has been addressing - we note in particular
resolution 2286 (2016) - disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, including that of children, security
reform, strengthening of the rule of law, the human
rights institutional framework, national security
and the participation of civil society. We emphasize
in this regard the relevant role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in promoting stability and social cohesion,
in cooperation with the Security Council and Economic
and Social Council, among others.

Sustaining peace can also be facilitated by
proper use of crisis management tools, which range
from mediation and the deployment of an operation
to sanctions regimes. The missions in C6te d'Ivoire
and Liberia, which worked jointly on the issue of
cross-border cooperation, provide concrete examples
of integrated planning and withdrawal that bare
further study.

Peacekeeping operations must be periodically
reviewed to assess their contribution to sustaining
peace, it being the responsibility of the Security
Council to analyse whether or not the tasks entrusted
to a given mission and the general concept of a mission
are consistent not just with the political reality and
the operational needs on the ground, but also with
its purpose.

The declaration issued by the United Nations
Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Conference that
took place in London in 2016 reiterated the importance
of the role of women in peacebuilding and conflict
resolution, including the need for their greater
participation at all mission levels. In that regard, we
welcome the Senior Women Talent Pipeline for United
Nations Peace Operations, set up under the umbrella
of the Department of Field Support. We call for that
initiative to be expanded.

The planning ofmissions with the goal of sustaining
peace requires effective logistical preparation of
the critical capacities and operational tools that are
available through appropriate operational means, within
the framework of a mandate that enhances security and
protects vulnerable civilians. It should include child
protection advisers, gender advisers and other advisers,
who are all crucial when it comes to sustaining peace.
In that connection, we would point to resolutions 1325
(2000) and 2250 (2015).

In addition, personnel deployed to peacekeeping
missions should be properly trained and committed to
upholding the highest possible standards of conduct in
the framework of the zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse, thereby fostering the
necessary conditions for sustainable and lasting peace.

It is vital that we dedicate resources to sustaining
peace; for, notwithstanding the consensus reached
achieved with General Assembly resolution 70/262,
Member States have not sufficiently contributed
to those tasks as compared to those devoted to the
deployment of troops. We are concerned that the
United Nations Development Programme Conflict
Prevention and Recovery Thematic Trust Fund and the
Peacebuilding Fund, to which Chile and other States
contribute, receive less than a 3 per cent share of the
overall peacekeeping budget.

We would like to reiterate our commitment to the
sustaining peace agenda and call for the United Nations
system to develop a shared and practical vision of the
concept and the values that underpin it.

Finally, we would like to pay tribute to all those
United Nations staff who are currently deployed in
the field and who contribute day in and day out to the
building of peace. We hope that in the future they will
be able to contribute in the same way to sustaining
peace under this innovative concept. Once again, we
especially thank the delegation of Egypt for its excellent
work during its presidency of the Council and for the
transparency with which it has led its work.

