Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): The Council's
consideration of a single agenda item today - "An agenda
for peace: peace-keeping" - is, in our View, most
appropriate and timely. This issue has become all the more
important at this critical juncture of history, particularly
after the end of the cold war, when, on the one hand,
demands are increasingly being made on United Nations
peace-keeping operations, while, on the other hand, the
United Nations is confronted by a severe financial crisis. In
the light of these new realities, it is incumbent upon the
Member States to discuss this particular item, since it
relates to an issue to which we all devote considerable
interest: the improvement of the working methods of the
Security Council.

It is against this background that the Indonesian
delegation would like to associate itself with the statement
made by Ambassador Cardenas of Argentina on behalf of
the group of Member States interested in exploring the
possibility of establishing viable mechanisms to enhance the
productive relationship between the Security Council and
troop-contributing countries. Proper communication between
the Security Council and troop-contributing countries is
particularly important. While the Indonesian delegation
recognizes that improvements have indeed already been
made in this respect, we consider that further progress
could still be made in order to significantly enhance
transparency in the work of the Security Council. Enhanced
transparency in the Council's decision- making process is,
in our opinion, of the utmost importance, particularly with
regard to peace-keeping operations, where the interests of
contributor nations are involved.

It is the view of my delegation that such
transparency and consultations would promote the active
participation of troop- contributing countries, which could
ultimately generate wider appeal and support for peace-
keeping endeavours launched by the Security Council,
while lending greater credibility and legitimacy to its
activities.

As regards consultations, my delegation would like
to underline the necessity for them to be held well in
advance of any decisions by the Security Council, in
order to allow ample opportunity for both the Council and
troop-contributing countries to undertake comprehensive
and in-depth discussions, particularly considering that
peace-keeping operations are presently dealing with a new
brand of more complex conflicts, thus making them more
expensive and entailing a high degree of dangerous risks.
Such consultations would give the Council sufficient time
to take the appropriate decisions to extend, modify or
terminate the mandate of a particular peace-keeping
operation. Such a measure would also make the Council
sensitive to the viewpoints and legitimate concerns of
troop-contributing countries that are not members of the
Council.

On the other hand, it would also allow the troop-
contributing countries fully to understand the scope and
magnitude as well as the nature and characteristics of
such operations, including the possible risks involved.
Moreover, it is imperative that these consultations be
substantive in nature and practical in approach, thus
reflecting a closer dialogue between the Council and
troop-contributing countries, which in turn could
guarantee their implementation or improve the prospects
of their implementation. In this context, the role of the
Secretariat as the knowledgeable source in providing
detailed, accurate and relevant information in a timely
manner is of paramount importance. We therefore fully
support the idea that the Secretariat should provide such
assistance.

In View of the foregoing, my delegation believes that
the work of the Council would be greatly facilitated if the
elements contained in the statement made by the
Ambassador of Argentina were to be given serious
consideration. In particular, my delegation would like to
emphasize the importance of considering the proposal to
establish a subsidiary organ, as provided for in Article 29
of the Charter, alluded to in the statement of Argentina.
We look forward to the Council's taking appropriate
action in due time, and my delegation is ready to
participate in the deliberations.

 

Finally, my delegation regards the Security Council's
decision of 4 November 1994 to improve the consultative
process as a first step in improving the overall
communication between the Security Council and troop-
contributing countries. Hence, we regard the statement
delivered by Argentina to be a logical and appropriate
development towards the establishment of a consultative
mechanism that affords the Council and troop-contributing
countries the opportunity to participate in a modality that is
mutually beneficial and constructive.

