Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): Mr. President, my
delegation is particularly grateful to you for convening
this important meeting.

In West Africa, many States are suffering the
consequences of long years of conflict and instability,
an issue that has been demanding the Council's
continued attention. Today, we have before us a
comprehensive and progressive report by the Secretary-
General (S/2003/1l47) that provides proposals on ways
of implementing the recommendations of the Security
Council, following its mission to West Africa last June.
We are grateful to Assistant Secretary-General
Kalomoh for introducing the report and to Ambassador
Jones Parry for his comments.

As seen in the report, the United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) has been carrying out
successful multidimensional work and will continue to
do so through the local elections in May and
throughout the year. Careful consideration should be
given to the drawdown of the mission, the pace of the
drawdown depending on how efficiently security forces
build up in the country. UNAMSIL is also helping
consolidate Government control over the diamond-
mining areas and formulating a national resource
policy. This is a crucial element of a sustained peace.
This year Brazil is chairing the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1132
(1997) concerning Sierra Leone, and we intend to find
a way to reflect the emerging realities made possible by
the peace process. The need for a remaining United
Nations presence in Sierra Leone will have to be
examined in due time by the Council.

In Liberia, the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and resettlement or repatriation (DDRR)
action plan has been completed for tens of thousands of
combatants, many of them children, and the
deployment of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) in October 2003 has improved security in the
country. Violations of human rights are being
documented, and the implementation of a human rights
declaration is expected. We welcome these
developments and look forward to further United
Nations action in that country.

In Cote d'Ivoire, by the time the report was
issued, progress was being threatened by the stand-off
between the Government and the Forces nouvelles.
Fortunately, the most recent accomplishments in the
political process are encouraging, as stated by Assistant
Secretary-General Kalomoh. The Council has the
responsibility not to let the momentum be lost and to
urgently approve the establishment of the full-fledged
peacekeeping operation that is under its consideration.

Last but not least, the case of Guinea-Bissau is
very close to our hearts and minds. Apart from Brazil's
traditional ties with Africa, Guinea-Bissau is one of the
eight members of the Community of Portuguese-
Speaking Countries (CPLP). We fully agree with the
Secretary General's assessment that:

"it is essential that, as called for by the Security
Council, the international community remain
fully engaged with Guinea-Bissau, including by
providing urgent financial and other support to
help the authorities follow through on their
commitments". (S/2003/IZ47, para. 65)

We welcome the positive steps taken recently by the
new civilian authorities, in particular the President's
announcement of the date of 28 March 2004 for
parliamentary elections.

We take this opportunity to commend the work of
the Economic and Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Guinea-Bissau and the Security Council's Ad
Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa, which is very effectively chaired
by another CPLP member, Angola. These groups have
proved to be very dynamic tools, designed to promote
mobilization of the international community -
including international financial institutions - and
dialogue with national authorities within the United
Nations framework. Guinea-Bissau is emerging as a
remarkable example of cooperation between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
in dealing with post-conflict situations, and my
delegation supports the comments made by the
delegations of the Philippines and Benin on the need
for further efforts in that area of coordination as
regards the region as a whole. We also believe that
other countries of the region could benefit from this
kind of coordinated and multidimensional approach.

The situations in West African countries are the
subject of individual consideration by the Security
Council. This meeting gives us an opportunity to assess
the situation by means of a comprehensive regional
approach. While it is clear that the Council must give
individual and specific attention to each situation under
review, it is also evident that a regional approach can
contribute to the solution of problems that affect, in a
similar way, all the countries of the region and that
may require common solutions and concerted efforts.

As indicated in the report, there are a number of
interrelated cross-border problems underlying conflict
and instability in the subregion, such as those related to
the use of child soldiers, the resort to mercenaries, the
existence of flows of refugees, the repatriation of ex-
combatants, the proliferation of small arms and the
need to strengthen the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) processes. All countries in
West Africa can benefit from a concerted effort to
tackle their problems. We are looking forward to the
upcoming recommendations - mentioned by the
Secretary-General in the present report - on practical
ways of addressing cross-border issues.

The revitalization of the Mano River Union is also
a very positive step towards subregional stability, and
we have seen how the early involvement of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) was crucial to containing the expansion of
humanitarian calamities in the region. Full cooperation
among countries and cooperation between countries
and the United Nations are essential in consolidating
the progress made in every peace process undertaken,
as well as in drawing up an effective strategy to deal
with those cross-border issues; so too is cooperation
among United Nations agencies and missions in the
region. To that end, meetings are being held, and they
reflect the usefulness of cooperation arrangements with
the United Nations Office for West Africa, as stressed
in the report.

We are pleased that the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries is also playing a part in
the promotion of peace and stability in West Africa.
Together with ECOWAS, the CPLP provided its good
offices in Guinea-Bissau after the events of 14
September 2003 and has worked with the parties in
order to ensure a peaceful and constructive solution to
the political crisis. Creating conditions for the holding
of parliamentary elections and for an orderly
transitional period in the country is at the centre of our
efforts at the present stage. We believe that much better
conditions for economic and social development in
Guinea-Bissau are now present there. We believe also
that the time is coming for the international community
to expand its commitments to that end.

Addressing the root causes of conflict is indeed a
matter of utmost concern, without which no sustainable
peace and stability can be achieved. My Government
has consistently and constantly advocated the
importance of Africa's own initiatives and ownership,
as well as the importance of the partnership between
Africa and the international community. The New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) is an
African-born initiative based on a profound
understanding of the daily realities of the continent. We
are very confident that this initiative will contribute to
the creation of a virtuous circle of socio-political
inclusion, development and peace in the whole of
Africa. As one listens to Under-Secretary-General
Ibrahim Gambari, one hears encouraging comments
regarding Africa. In his words, "winds of change" are
blowing over the continent, as illustrated by several
conflicts having been resolved or being on the right
path to conciliation. We are, of course, stimulated by
those views and are convinced that bilateral and
international support is crucial.

During his recent visit to several African countries
in November, President Lula da Silva stated that

"developing countries should play a new role,
more affirmative and result-oriented. Those that
have the capacities can and should promote
compassionate policies in favour of those nations
most in need, exploring all possibilities of
cooperation".

President Lula has also recalled the importance of
cooperation among developing countries and has
affirmed our willingness to foster partnerships in the
areas of capacity-building and the development of
technologies compatible with the specific needs of
African countries. We are also assessing means to
improve the access of African products to our market,
in accordance with the rules of the World Trade
Organization.

My country is convinced that there will be no real
political stability or economic prosperity in the world
during the twenty-first century if all countries cannot
benefit from them. We should work with Africa to
make this possible, not only by assisting countries to
overcome their present difficulties, but also by
providing political conditions for effective recovery
and sustainable development. Brazil is ready to make
its best efforts as a genuine contribution to the stability
and development of the region.

