Let me express my appreciation to the German presidency for holding this open debate on women and peace and security, focused on sexual violence in conflict. I would also like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict Pramila Patten and the representatives of civil society for their presentations. Ukraine reiterates its full support for the mandate and work of the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. We reaffirm our commitment to the zero-tolerance policy regarding all forms of sexual violence and stand in solidarity with victims and survivors of such crimes. It is worth mentioning that Ukraine aligns itself with the statement of the European Union (see annex 25). This year provides a fitting opportunity to assess the effectiveness of two decades of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, and to mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. As an elected member of the Security Council, Ukraine co-sponsored the landmark resolution 1325 (2000) in 2000, reaffirming the important role of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, peace negotiations, peacebuilding, peacekeeping, humanitarian response and post-conflict reconstruction. Unfortunately, in recent years the global security environment has only worsened, and this year it was further undermined by the coronavirus disease pandemic. After years of joint efforts, the international community has not tackled the main drivers of this violence. The reality of sexual violence against women and men and girls and boys continues to constitute a part of each and every armed conflict around the globe. Sexual violence has becomea part of warfare tactics, torture, terrorism, interrogations, repressions and even control of some territories. We are particularly concerned that sexual violence and related human trafficking could be used by terrorist groups to generate revenue and lead to abductions of human beings, especially women and girls, for sale. The report (S/2020/487) before us clearly indicates that focusing on 19 countries only points out the difficulties related to the underreporting of incidents resulting from the intimidation and stigmatization of survivors, as well as the limited capacities of United Nations staff. At the same time, it is imperative to follow up on General Assembly resolutions that include provisions directly dedicated to the situation of human rights in conflicts and in the occupied territories. We expect that future Secretary-General reports on the topic will be more comprehensive and reflect situations in major conflict-affected zones. In this connection, we fully support the Secretary-General's recommendation to continue to include sexual violence as a stand-alone designation criterion for sanctions and targeted measures. Since the establishment of the mandate of the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, more than 10 years ago, the Security Council has adopted a number of resolutions focused, first and foremost, on the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence. Nevertheless, the list of perpetrators presented in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General has remained almost unchanged for years. This is a result of poor compliance with relevant obligations and commitments not only by non-State actors, but also by States. We cannot tolerate such behaviour and should send a clear message to those who commit these grave violations under international law that statements about the inevitability of accountability and justice will not remain merely solemn declarations, but will be translated into concrete, immediate actions. Perpetrators of sexual violence must, regardless of their affiliation or rank, be held to account. It is therefore imperative that the international community, and the Security Council in particular, continue to look for the most effective ways to enhance the implementation of the existing resolutions on the women and peace and security agenda in order to tackle and to prevent atrocities from being committed. In that light, Ukraine, as the country that pioneered the issue of prevention and initiated the relevant process in the Human Rights Council, fully supports the Secretary-General's recommendations regarding the strengthening of prevention efforts by demanding that all State and non-State actors make formal commitments to including the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence in security sector reform. Nonetheless, the path towards the prevention of all forms of gender-based violence lies in the genuine empowerment of women, ensuring gender equality in all spheres of life. Ukraine attaches great importance to the equal and full participation of women in all activities in areas of national security, conflict prevention and resolution, peacebuilding and peacekeeping. With the aim of implementing the women and peace and security agenda at the national level, Ukraine, while facing foreign military aggression, was among the first countries to adopt a comprehensive national action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) for 2016-2020. The national action plan is aimed, inter alia, at achieving the greater participation of women in decision-making, in particular in the areas of national security and defence and peacemaking, and at ensuring the protection of all victims of violence, including the prevention of and response to conflicts and gender-based violence. The plan also includes a recommendation on the national strategy for the prevention and response to the conflict-related sexual violence in Ukraine, in particular relating to education and training programmes for the security sector on aspects of prevention, protection and response, along with psychological assistance and rehabilitation programmes for survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, as well as an information campaign on the prevention of sexual violence. The active integration of gender equality into the activities of the armed forces of Ukraine fostered changes to the list of military specialties and positions open to women candidates. Currently, the Government of Ukraine, in cooperation with international and non-governmental organizations, is developing a new national action plan for the period 2021-2025, which is expected to be adopted by the end of this year. The Government of Ukraine has enhanced its efforts to ensure gender equality and women's empowerment in all spheres of public life, as well as the necessary support for, and reintegration of, women victims who have suffered sexual violence as the result of the ongoing foreign aggression. In the light of that I have mentioned, I must once again reiterate our regret at the omission of a reference to the Russian-Ukrainian armed conflict and its victims in the Secretary-General's latest thematic report. In conclusion, I would like to report that, in May, Ukraine joined the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security and will continue its efforts aimed at promoting awareness of the women and peace and security agenda and strengthening its implementation within the United Nations, in particular advancing women's rights and protecting them from sexual and gender-based violence.
