Mr. Mohd Isa (Malaysia): Since this is the first
time I am speaking in the Council as Chair of the
Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement,
let me congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
Presidency of the Security Council for the month and
assure you of our full cooperation. I also wish to pay
tribute to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Germany, for his excellent
stewardship of the Council last month.

On behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, and members of the
Council, for again agreeing to convene this open
meeting of the Council on the current situation in Iraq.
As members of the Council will recall, serious efforts
were made earlier this month to avert war in Iraq and
we clearly expressed the views of the Non-Aligned
Movement at the open meeting of the Council on 11
March 2003. Unfortunately, those efforts failed.

Military action against Iraq has been going on for
one week. The relentless assaults from sea, land and air
are continuing as we sit here in the Council chamber.
While this is taking place, the Council has remained
silent until today. While the Council remained silent,
stark images of this twenty-first century war are seen
all around the world continuously. We have just today
seen the image of a market being struck by a missile.
Millions who see these images daily must be
wondering where the United Nations, in particular the
Security Council, stands on this issue. The prompt
decision of the Council to hold this meeting today is a
welcome development. It should offer some hope to
those of us in the international community who remain
committed to multilateralism and the central role of the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Non-Aligned Movement
strongly maintains that commitment.

The Non-Aligned Movement strongly believes
that all Member States should observe and abide by the
Charter and the principles of international law in
dealing with problems among nations. In this regard,
the Non-Aligned Movement has continuously stressed
the vital role of the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security and the
strengthening of international cooperation. We oppose
all unilateral military actions or use of force, including
those made without proper authorization from the
Security Council. We deplore any unilateral action
against the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of Member States.

The war against Iraq has been carried out without
the authorization of the Security Council. This war is
being carried out in violation of the principles of
international law and the Charter. In this regard, it is
highly regrettable that the parties concerned had
chosen early in the day to cast aside multilateral
diplomacy and take the path of war, while efforts to
avert conflict were continuing in earnest. We View
unilateral military action as an illegitimate act of
aggression. This war should not have been started in
the first place. Therefore, it should end immediately.
Let us return to the Security Council to find the
solution to this complex problem.

The Non-Aligned Movement wishes to reiterate
its commitment to the fundamental principles of the
non-use of force, non-interference in the internal affairs
of States and respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and security of all
Member States. We continue to believe that the
problem of Iraq should and could be resolved
peacefully through the United Nations. We reaffirm our
commitment towards achieving a peaceful solution to
the current situation and stress the vital role of the
United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. We call on the Security Council to
use its power and authority, as mandated by the
Charter, to revert to the multilateral process in the
common effort to resolve this issue.

The Non-Aligned Movement stated last month at
its thirteenth Summit in Kuala Lumpur its belief that a
war against Iraq would destabilize the whole region
and it could have far-reaching political, economic and
humanitarian consequences, not only for Iraq but also
for the rest of the world. We reiterated this in the
Council two weeks ago. We continue to maintain this
position today.

With the military activity now escalating in Iraq,
we are extremely concerned over the humanitarian
situation of the civilian population in that country.
There are reports, for instance, that the people in Basra
will be facing a serious humanitarian disaster,
including shortage of basic needs such as electricity
and water, if relief supplies do not reach them in time.
We hope that the sufferings of the civilian population
can be relieved as soon as possible. While the
responsibility for this lies with those countries that
initiated military action against Iraq, the international
community must also assist the United Nations in
carrying out the important task of providing
humanitarian relief.

It is important that all parties to the conflict
observe human rights and other humanitarian issues
such as treatment and protection of civilians. They
must respect international humanitarian law, including
the Fourth Geneva Convention.

We strongly believe that all avenues in the
peaceful disarmament of Iraq should have been
explored. We regret that despite confirmation by the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) that Iraq was actively
cooperating and that the inspections were producing
results, the inspectors were not given adequate time to
fulfil their mandate and had to be withdrawn because
of the war. We also regret that the inspectors were not
allowed to continue with their work, despite the
overwhelming calls by the international community,
including the majority of the members of the Security
Council.

We had welcomed the decision by Iraq to
facilitate the unconditional return of, and cooperation
with, the United Nations inspectors in accordance with
Council resolution 1441 (2002). However, it was
unfortunate that the war has now made it impossible
for the inspectors to work. We note that the Secretary-
General emphasized on 24 March 2003 the importance
of the resumption of inspections by the United Nations
inspectors.

The Non-Aligned Movement believes that
international peace and stability can be preserved, with
all States adhering to the fundamental principles of the
non-use of force and respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and security
of all Member States. We appeal to all concerned to
exert all efforts to urgently return to a peaceful solution
in enforcing Iraqi compliance with relevant Security
Council resolutions. We will continue to work closely
with Member States on the appropriate course of
action- including upholding the centrality and
sanctity of the principles and purposes of the United
Nations Charter - in addressing issues relating to
international peace and security, now and in the future.

The Security Council, as the custodian of
international peace and security, has a special and
heightened responsibility to ensure that the
international world order is based on the principles of
justice and international law and not on military might.

Now I wish to speak on behalf of Malaysia.

Malaysia takes the position that unilateral
military action undertaken without the support and
authorization of the Security Council violates
international law and the United Nations Charter.
Furthermore, the doctrine of pre-emptive strikes has no
foundation in international law. Malaysia views the
unilateral military action undertaken by the United
States and its allies as illegal and as being tantamount
to an invasion of an independent and sovereign nation.
What is more, it is a unilateral action taken on a
selective basis and premised on tenuous evidence,
while a viable mechanism exists to ensure Iraqi
compliance with relevant Security Council resolutions.
Malaysia is, therefore, compelled to condemn that
action.

Malaysia wishes to underline that the pre-emptive
use of force threatens the very foundation of
international law, making war once again the tool of
international politics and of the powerful in
subjugating the weak and defenceless. It also
erroneously asserts the notion that might is right.

In view of the humanitarian catastrophe that is
now unfolding in Iraq, as well as the grave threat to
international and regional peace, security and stability
arising from unilateral military action, Malaysia calls
upon the United States and its allies to return
immediately to peaceful but firm methods for bringing
about Iraq's compliance with relevant resolutions of
the Security Council.

Malaysia joins the international community in
underlining the urgency to address the humanitarian
catastrophe in the wake of military action. We share the
view of those who take the position that the United
States and its allies that have initiated military action
must bear the full cost of providing humanitarian
assistance.

