Mr. ibogar (Slovenia): One week has passed since
the will of the East Timorese was announced by the
Secretary-General in this very Chamber. The East Timorese
have, in the exercise of their right to self-determination,
overwhelmingly expressed their will to begin the process of
transition towards independence under the auspices of the
United Nations. The Security Council assured them of its
commitment to see the 5 May Agreement and their will
implemented. The situation in East Timor since has led to
intensification of violence resulting in widespread killings,
violations of most basic human rights and fundamental
freedoms, destruction of property and displacement of
thousands of innocent civilians. The recent events are
creating an unfolding humanitarian disaster.

As the representative of France said earlier today, it
is probably happening again. Once again innocent
civilians are subjected to the worst kind of orgy of
intimidation, forced displacement and killing. My
delegation shares the concerns expressed by all Member
States today regarding the need for the campaign of
Violence and terror to end immediately.

The Council has, in the past week, followed the
situation in East Timor closely and issued daily
statements to the press calling upon Indonesia to fulfil its
obligations. Yesterday, the Council endorsed a statement
of the Secretary-General to the press in which the
Secretary-General urged the Indonesian Government to
accept international assistance in the form of an
international force, in order to bring order and security to
the East Timorese and to allow the displaced population
to return home safely. Simultaneously, the Council has
sent a mission to Jakarta and Dili to convey its
determination, and that of the United Nations as a whole,
to the Indonesian Government to see the 5 May
Agreement implemented in full and violence in East
Timor brought to an end. Today the mission Visited Dili,
and according to the accounts to our ambassador, Mr.
Tiirk, the situation there is, in one word, appalling. The
mission is going to have its final talks in Jakarta
tomorrow in the hope that the Government of Indonesia
will take heed of their appeal and accept international
assistance.

We agree that it is time for the Security Council to
act and exercise its responsibility for maintenance of
peace and security, to restore peace and order in East
Timor and to prevent further humanitarian catastrophe.
We listened carefully and attentively to the views
expressed by the Members of the Organization in this
open debate. Their views and assessments complement
our information and that provided by the non-
governmental organizations. The views of the Member
States expressed today will, together with the report and
the recommendations of the Security Council mission that
we eagerly expect, provide solid basis for the Council to
take the necessary decisions.

 

