The President: I wish to express warm
congratulations on behalf of the Council to the African
members of the Council and of the United Nations on
the historic inauguration yesterday of the African
Union. I am sure that the Council will wish to work
closely with the new Union on matters of African
peace and security.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Letter dated 3 July 2002 from the Permanent
Representative of Canada to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2002/723)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Denmark, Fiji, Germany,
India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan,
Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Mongolia, New Zealand,
Samoa, South Africa, Thailand, Ukraine and
Venezuela, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kusljugie
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the
Council table; Mr. Fonseca (Brazil), Mr.
Heinbecker (Canada), Ms. Chassoul (Costa Rica), Ms. Laj (Denmark), Mr. Naidu (Fiji),
Mr. Schumacher (Germany), Mr. Nambiar (India),
Mr. Fadaifard (Islamic Republic ofIran), Prince
Zeid Ra 'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan),
Mrs. Fritsche (Liechtenstein), Mr. Hasmy
(Malaysia), Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia),
Mr. MacKay (New Zealand), Mr. Slade (Samoa),
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Kasemsarn
(Thailand), Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine) and
Ms.Pulido Santana (Venezuela) took the seats

reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and if I hear no objection, I shall take it
that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
to the Permanent Observer of Switzerland to the United
Nations to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Staehelin
(Switzerland) took the seat reservedfor him at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in response to a request contained
in a letter dated 3 July 2002 from the representative of
Canada, which was issued as document S/2002/723.

As there is no list of speakers from among
Council members, I invite those members who wish to
take the floor to so indicate to the Secretariat as from
now.

With the agreement of the members of the
Security Council, I intend to give the floor to the
speakers inscribed on my list by alternating between
Council members and non-members of the Council. In
the first instance I shall give the floor to the first four
non-members of the Council inscribed on the list.

The first speaker is the representative of Canada.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.


