Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): First, I
should like to congratulate New Zealand on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We also commend the presidency for convening this
meeting on a subject that is of great importance to the
Islamic and Arab world.

On a note of hope, I should like to congratulate the
Libyans on the negotiations, in which we assisted, in
reaching the the Skhirat agreement, which has been
ratified and which augurs the possibility of exiting
from the Libyan crisis. It is a major accomplishment in
Libya's efforts to put an end to the conflict and to help
establish a Libyan State that is modern. The people of
Libya wish this. My country, inspired by the guidelines
from our King, Mohammed VI, supports Libya in
trying to reach its aspirations based on the principles of
justice and dignity. The people of Libya are entitled to
this. The Kingdom will continue in its determination to
support Libya in future so that it will be able to recover
and regain its status among the nations.

Since the last open debate on the Middle East
(see S/PV.7430), no breakthrough has been noted and
the economic and social situation for the Palestinians
keeps getting worse. The political situation continues
to encounter obstacles months after the beginning of
negotiations. We deplore the situation in Palestine, in
particular in Jerusalem. The legal status of Jerusalem
must be protected and must not be threatened, and
measures must not be taken to change that status. All of
the measures to change it must be considered null and
void. It is a place for Christians and Muslims. Our King
has said in international meetings that the settlements
and Judaization must be condemned as well as attacks
on the faithful. In Marrakesh in 2014, the Committee
chaired by our King reiterated the principles of a sacred
city for Muslims. This is at the heart of a political
solution. Attacks against the Al-Aqsa Mosque will lead
only to further violence and will serve only to achieve
the interests of extremists and those who try to sow the
seeds of hatred. The perpetrators of such actions are
co-terrorists, to which desperate young people will be
drawn if the situation continues as it is.

As part of the efforts by the Arab Ministerial
Committee at the summit held at Sharm El-Sheikh
in March, Morocco welcomes the efforts of Egypt, a
fraternal country, as well as of Jordan, a member of
the Council, Palestine and the Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States, all of whom are trying to
mobilize international peace efforts for the Palestinian
cause and put an end to the occupation according to a
determined timetable, so as to establish an independent
Palestinian State along the borders of 4 June 1967.
A final settlement must also be found on the basis
of the Arab Peace Initiative, the resolutions of the
United Nations and the relevant documents. Morocco
will continue to support the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital and along the lines of the 1967 borders, as
part ofa solution based on two States living side by side
in peace and coexistence in line with the Arab Peace
Initiative.

In earlier statements to the Council, we warned
of the possibility of a conflict in Yemen given the
instability and selfishness of the position of certain
parties. Some parties are trying to proclaim a fait
accompli, in violation of resolutions 2201 (2015) and
2216 (2015). Those parties are attempting to get out of
their obligations and ignore the outcome of the National
Dialogue, which is leading to an undermining of the
political transition process, a flexible process in Yemen.
That is leading to a cycle of violence and aggravation
of the humanitarian situation in the country. Once
again, we call on all the parties in Yemen, including
the Houthis, to implement those resolutions, withdraw
their forces from all invaded areas and put an end to
the violence. We welcome the efforts of Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed.
We call on the Yemeni parties to use wisdom and make
sure that the overall interests prevail in order to protect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country.

The people of Syria continue to suffer from the
repercussions of the crisis in that country. Five years
after it began, we still see no ray of hope. The crisis
continues to claim lives and produce refugees and
internally displaced persons by the millions. Morocco
has contributed to the work of the third international
donors conference in order to support and help the
humanitarian situation. On 31 March in Kuwait, we
offered assistance to our Syrian brothers, especially the
refugees, to alleviate their suffering. This took the form
ofa multi-purpose hospital in the Zaatari refugee camp,
which King Mohammed VI had been calling for since
2012. The hospital provides therapeutic and medical
services on a regular basis to thousands of Syrians.

Morocco will spare no effort to find a political
settlement to the crisis in Syria. We believe that the
solution in Syria requires dialogue, not war, as well as
finding ways and means to implement the first Geneva
communique (S/2013/522, annex). My delegation
supports the efforts of Mr. Staffan de Mistura to find a
way out ofthe crisis. We need to protect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria.

We also support the independence, unity, and
territorial integrity of Lebanon. We welcome the
responsible national spirit demonstrated by the
Lebanese people at the highest levels to protect the
security, stability and sovereignty of that country.

