Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, let me
thank you, Sir, for convening this important open
debate and express our gratitude to the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2009/158) on children and
armed conflict. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict for her comprehensive
presentation, as well as the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations and the Executive
Director of UNICEF for their briefings on the matter.

We reiterate our commitment to continuing to

contribute to the activities of the existing United

Nations mechanisms and other relevant organizations

and agencies with the aim of ensuring more effective

protection of child rights and improving the situation
of children affected by armed conflict.

Azerbaijan's interest in the topic under
consideration is obvious and derives from its practical
experience in addressing the impact on children of the
armed aggression against my country and in engaging
in international efforts to ensure respect by the relevant
party of its obligations under international law.

The occupation by Armenia of the territories of
Azerbaijan exerts considerable influence, inter alia, on
the humanitarian aspect of the problem and primarily
affects the most vulnerable groups. Azerbaijan
continues to suffer one of the highest proportions of
refugees and displaced persons in the world, large
numbers of whom are children. The most serious
international offences have been committed in the
course of the conflict. Even children have not been
spared. During one night alone in February 1992, when
the town of Khojaly in the Nagorny Karabakh region of
Azerbaijan was captured by invading Armenian forces,
63 children were intentionally killed and dozens were
maimed and taken hostage. Of more than 4,200 people
reported missing in connection with the conflict, 47 are
children.

In recent years, the issue of children and armed
conflict has been inscribed firmly on the international
agenda and a solid body of international legal norms
and standards has been elaborated. Important steps
have been taken through the application and
enforcement of these norms and standards to achieve
accountability for grave child rights violations. Indeed,
the international community has witnessed some
unprecedented initiatives to address impunity.

The engagement of the Security Council has
increased the general awareness of the need to protect
children in armed conflict, significantly advanced the
scope of actions and created opportunities to improve
common approaches in this regard. Although progress
has been made in a number of situations of armed
conflict, children are still suffering in many places
worldwide and continue to be the primary victims of
war. This bitter truth represents a profound challenge to
the international legal order and therefore requires the
international community to redouble its efforts to
eliminate and prevent illegal practices affecting
children's rights, as well as to fight impunity for grave
violations.

It is important to acknowledge the equal weight
of all grave violations. Azerbaijan shares the view that
the existing criteria of violations should be expanded to
include those responsible for the intentional killing and
maiming of children. At the same time, particular
consideration should be given to internally displaced
children in the context of ensuring their inalienable
right to return, and to the implications for the
protection of child rights of illegal policies and
practices in situations of foreign occupation.

Another challenging issue requiring urgent action
is that of children taken hostage and reported missing
in connection with armed conflict. The General
Assembly, in its resolution 63/183, of which
Azerbaijan was a main sponsor, requests States to pay
the utmost attention to the problem of missing children
and to take appropriate measures to search for and
identify such children and to reunite them with their
families.

We look forward to the adoption of the
presidential statement, which will focus on the ways
and means by which the international community can
continue to contribute to identifying long-term and
sustained solutions to the problem.

