Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I would like to
thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his comprehensive
briefing. I would also like to extend a particularly warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Gustavo Meza-Cuadra,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru.

Today's withdrawal of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) marks the
first time in 15 years that Haiti will not have a United
Nations peacekeeping operation present on its soil.
We would like to commend the women and men of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and
MINUJUSTH who dedicated their efforts and sacrifices
to contributing to the stabilization of Haiti. Today, the
United Nations is embarking on a new partnership with
the country. We enthusiastically welcome the start-
up of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH). We would like to emphasize the need for
BINUH to be appropriately equipped and staffed from
the time it begins its operations. A seamless transition
from MINUJUSTH to BINUH is crucial.

Germany strongly supports the new approach to
the benchmarks, which reflects the mutually supportive
relationship between the peace and security pillar and
the development pillar of the United Nations system.
We especially welcome that two of the benchmarks
are contextual, as they reflect minimum conditions
for socioeconomic progress to sustain stability in
the country and enable progress towards sustainable
development. We welcome in particular that one of
the proposed indicators refers to increasing resilience
to climate-related threats, including through disaster
management and risk mitigation.

Haiti is one of the countries in the world most
vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change.
For Haiti, the effects of climate change constitute a
threat multiplier, as they threaten to further destabilize
the country, create new conflicts over increasingly
diminishing resources and derail peacebuilding and
stabilization efforts. As the Security Council, we need
to include the security-related effects of climate change
into our overall assessments and decision-making. To
do so, we need a proper information base, including
a substantial risk assessment. With regard to the way
forward, we encourage BINUH and the Government of
Haiti to agree on specific targets for each indicator as
soon as possible.

Today, it is crucial that we get the transition right.
Rather than sticking mechanistically to benchmarks,
we must take a regular and comprehensive look at the
security and socioeconomic situation. In that context,
we very much welcome the fact that the President of
the Economic and Social Council has joined us at this
morning's briefing.

The transition to a non-peacekeeping United
Nations presence in Haiti comes at a moment when the
country finds itself in the midst of a multidimensional
crisis. We are deeply concerned about the recent
developments and violent events in Haiti. It goes
without saying that freedom of assembly and freedom
of expression must be respected. But all protests have
to be peaceful; collaborating with armed groups is
completely unacceptable. We strongly condemn all
actions that undermine democratic processes and the
rule of law. Any spoilers of the transition, including
criminal gangs and those who support them, need to
understand that there will be consequences and that
there will be no impunity for crimes.

Like France, Germany would strongly support
the Council publicly expressing its concerns about the
situation in Haiti in the follow-up to today's debate.
Ending a l5-year United Nations peacekeeping
engagement is the very opposite of business as usual and
deserves the Council's appreciation. It also provides a
good opportunity to say something about the way ahead
and the continued United Nations commitment to Haiti
in difficult political circumstances.

We are worried about the persistent political
deadlock in Haiti and deeply disappointed with
the failure of the national authorities and political
stakeholders to find a lasting solution. We therefore
encourage the Haitian Government and opposition to
make use ofinternational assistance by accepting offers
of mediation.
Finally, with regard to the development of the
Haitian National Police, and looking back at the
progress that has been achieved over the past 15 years,
we welcome and salute the increasing self-sufficiency
of the Haitian National Police in providing security
across the country, while also recognizing that certain
gaps still exist, as the Under-Secretary-General pointed
out in his briefing. It will be imperative to further
strengthen the capacity of the police.

In conclusion, I want to say that the past weeks
have proved how volatile and unpredictable the
situation remains. We must remain closely engaged
and be ready to adapt our response to the crisis quickly
and nimbly, including in the start-up phase of BINUH,
which we wish every success in implementing its
important mandate.

