Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for having convened this meeting
of the Council on threats to international peace and
security and the fight against genocide. I also thank
Mr. Jan Eliasson and Ambassador Colin Keating for
their statements.

The world is commemorating the twentieth
anniversary of the genocide of Tutsis in Rwanda,
which cost more than 800,000 human lives. It was a
massacre that shocked the conscience of the entire
world in its brutality and scope. Chad remembers all
of those who lost their lives and expresses its support
to the survivors and relatives of the victims who
continue to seek the truth. Chad welcomes the efforts
of the Rwandan Government and its reconciliation and
peacebuilding policy, which has enabled the country to
restore stability and pursue its economic recovery.

The world is increasingly threatened by conflicts
within States arising from multiple and varied causes.
Given its inability to end conflicts, the international
community must use all the tools necessary to anticipate
conflict and thereby prevent its tragic and incalculable
consequences, including genocide, war crimes, crimes
against humanity and other types of atrocity.

The 2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1)
places the prevention of mass crimes - genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity - at the core of the responsibility of States
to protect civilians. The lessons learned from the
genocide of the Tutsis in Rwanda call upon the entire
international community to reconsider its means of
action and capacity to act when faced with such mass
atrocities. In that context, the international community
should not only continue to assess the effectiveness of
its measures, but also and above all to provide itself
with an early-warning mechanism to detect situations
that are likely to lead to crimes on a mass scale.

While the genocide of Tutsis in Rwanda escaped
the vigilance of the international community at the
time, my country notes with great concern that,
unfortunately, the latter remains powerless in the face
of mass crimes perpetrated in some parts of the world.

Although the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic Operation
Sangaris has saved thousands oflives and set in motion
a stabilization process in Central African Republic,
the international community remains paralysed when
it is faced with other situations of grave violence
perpetrated against civilian populations. Confronted
with large-scale atrocities, States - and the United
Nations - must above all meet their responsibilities to
end them before it is too late.
Former Secretary-General Kofi Annan, in a
statement he made at the Human Rights Council in
Geneva, said,

"We have little hope of preventing genocide, or
reassuring those who live in fear of its recurrence,
if people who have committed this most heinous of
crimes are left at large, and not held to account. It
is therefore vital that we build and maintain robust
judicial systems, both national and international, so
that, over time, people will see there is no impunity
for such crimes."

We therefore cannot speak about reconciliation or
lasting peace in Rwanda without raising the question
of justice for the victims and their families and the
impunity that certain perpetrators of genocide and
their accomplices enjoy. Indeed, only an independent
and impartial justice system can make a significant
contribution to healing wounds and mending broken
hearts. In that regard, we welcome the work done by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in
arresting and prosecuting perpetrators of genocide and
their accomplices. That initiative sounded the end of
impunity and sent a strong signal to all those who might
be tempted to commit mass crimes. The ICTR has
shown that strengthening international criminal justice
could go beyond playing a deterrent role to efficiently
contributing to prevention.

The United Nations, whose principal role is the
maintenance of international peace and security,
must strengthen its cooperation with the regional and
subregional organizations to be even more effective
before, during and after conflict throughout the world.
In that regard, we welcome the current partnership
between the African Union and the United Nations and
call for it to be strengthened. Concerted action between
the United Nations and the African Union has allowed,
despite the lack of resources and some difficulties
in coordination, to contain and/or push away serious
threats to peace at various levels in certain African
countries, including Mali, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Central African Republic, to cite but
a few.

In conclusion, we believe that the Security Council
should react with urgency in the event of mass crimes
based on its responsibility to protect. The resolution
that we have just adopted (resolution 2150 (2014))
translates, we hope, our shared determination and will
to continue to fight against the crimes of genocide and
serious violations of human rights.

