Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We too would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his briefing and his valuable
work and leadership as Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).

The subregion of Central Africa continues to face
numerous interlinked and crosscutting challenges.
As evident in the recent crisis in the Central African
Republic, instability in any part of the region has
ramifications beyond the borders of the State directly
affected. The overall fragile security situation in
the Sahel, the lack of economic opportunities, the
proliferation of weapons, the threats posed by terrorism,
the increasing incidents of piracy and armed robbery in
the Gulf of Guinea, cross-border criminality, including
poaching, and the continued threat posed by the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) to civilians impact all countries
of the region. Those challenges can be addressed only
through a unified, well-coordinated regional and
international approach that factors in the cross-border
nature of those problems, as well as national ownership.

The overall focus should remain on building the
capacities of the national authorities to address those
threats in line with their national priorities, as well
as to increase regional cooperation and collaboration.
In that regard, we support the important role of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
in coordinating regional efforts and addressing those
issues in line with its mandate. The technical support
and capacity-building initiatives of UNOCA in the
areas of preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention and
mediation, especially for the regional and subregional
organizations, remain crucial in addressing the regional
challenges and need to be strengthened further.

The presence and continued activities of the Lord's
Resistance Army remain a major threat to the safety
and security of civilians in the entire subregion. Despite
several advances towards countering the scourge of the
Lord's Resistance Army in the recent past, the danger
posed by the group still looms large and thousands
remain displaced due to LRA attacks. Furthermore, the
ongoing crisis in the Central African Republic has the
potential to undermine the fragile gains made against
the LRA.

The LRA scourge can best be addressed through
a comprehensive approach consisting of anti-LRA
measures, as well as strengthening the capacity of
relevant States. The political stability and strong
national security institutions in the region will prevent
the group from taking advantage of the security vacuum
and lack of border controls. At the same time, dealing
with the plight of persons displaced by LRA attacks, as
well as addressing the long-term development needs of
the LRA-affected areas, should remain an integral part
of that comprehensive approach.

The full implementation of the United Nations
regional strategy to address the threat and impact of
the activities of the LRA, with the help of UNOCA
and regional peacekeeping missions, is crucial
for countering the LRA threat. The successful
implementation of the strategy against the LRA hinges
on a timely and adequate availability of resources, as
well as on building the requisite capacities of judicial
and Government systems and the military capabilities
of the countries affected by the LRA. The international
community should provide the necessary political,
technical and financial support for the successful
implementation of that initiative, in line with the
priorities identified by the African Union, as well as
the principle of national ownership.

We welcome the finalization of the concept of
operations and other strategic documents for the
operationalization of the African Union Regional Task
Force against the LRA, and encourage the LRA-affected
countries to follow up on their commitments, especially
by increasing their troop contributions to the Task Force.
There is also an urgent need to resolve the funding gaps
in order to address the humanitarian situation in the
LRA-affected areas.

We welcome the important role that UNOCA,
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in the Central African Republic and United Nations
peacekeeping missions in the region continue to play in
the fight against the LRA. We commend in particular
the important role of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in that regard. The Mission's role, through
training and capacity-building of the Forces arme'es de la
Republique democratique du Congo, as well as the local
authorities, support for the justice and police sectors,
the implementation of early warning mechanisms
and of disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration programmes remain
integral to the international response against the LRA.
The Mission should remain focused on its core mandate
to protect of civilians in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including in the LRA-affected
regions of that country.

Pakistan remains strongly committed to peace,
prosperity and long-term stability in the Central African
subregion. We hope that the region will continue to
receive the due attention and full political support of the
international community, as well as that of the Security
Council, to help address numerous challenges it faces.

