Ms. Landgren (spoke in French): Resolution 2027
(2011) of last December noted Burundi's progress
towards peace, stability and development, and charged
the United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB) and
its partners with supporting further consolidation.
Since my last briefing (see S/PV.6677), Burundi has
continued to advance strategies for critical sectors,
notably by adopting its new poverty reduction strategy
and beginning to implement its strategy for good
governance and the fight against corruption. The
country has remained free of large-scale violence, and
the Government has strengthened security throughout
the territory. The country continues, however, to
experience a disturbing underlying climate of impunity
and extrajudicial killings. At the same time, there
have been some encouraging contacts between the
Government and the extra-parliamentary opposition.

As this will be my final briefing to the Council on
Burundi, I intend to focus particularly on matters that
merit attentive management by Burundi's leadership in
the coming months ifthe country is to fulfil its promise
of stability, democracy and development. One is the
importance of political dialogue; others fall broadly
under the rubric of accountability in the political and
financial spheres, including freedom of expression and
assembly, addressing the human rights abuses of the
past and the present, and enhancing public financial
management. I will also look ahead and address the
issue of the United Nations transition, taking account of
the benchmarks circulated to the Council in May 2012.

As the Council is aware, the United Nations has
continued to encourage the normalization of relations
among all political parties and groups. Looking ahead
to the 2015 elections, the need for political parties to
function with full freedom takes on fresh urgency.
The United Nations has documented several cases
in which political parties have been prevented from
going about their everyday activities, especially in the
provinces outside of Bujumbura. A legal obligation to
give advance notice of public meetings would be seen
by local administrators and the police as a requirement
to permit political parties to call meetings.

The extrajudicial executions of several political
party members in 2011 and the January 2012 arrest in
Tanzania of Alexis Sinduhije, head of the Movement for
Solidarity and Development party, also had a dampening
effect on parties outside the ruling coalition. Arrested at
the request of the Burundian authorities, Mr. Sinduhije
was released after 13 days. More recently, opposition
parties have contested the new law on the workings
and organization of political parties, establishing new
conditions for the registration of all parties. Its entry
into force has been deferred.

Since the end of March there have been a number
of direct contacts between members of the Conseil
national pour la de'fense de la democratic-Forces
nationales pour la defense de la democratie and the
extra-parliamentary opposition. Especially notable are
the 28 May meeting in Caux, Switzerland, organized
by the non-governmental organization (NGO) Initiative
and Change, and a workshop in the National Assembly
on draft legislation on the status of opposition
parties, held 28 March in Bujumbura. That increased
engagement has led in general to a more moderate tone
on all sides. Heads of extra-parliamentary opposition
groups have firmly denied accusations by the Group of
Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo in its
final report in December 2011 (S/2011/738, enclosure)
that they were complicit in attempts to galvanize a new
insurgency.

The Government has reiterated its willingness
to accept the return of extra-parliamentary figures
currently outside the country, and the presidential
spokesperson said on 29 June that those who return
can choose their bodyguards from among the ranks
of the Burundi security forces. On 1 July a member of
the extra-parliamentary opposition, Pancras Cimpaye,
returned to Burundi from exile for the fiftieth
anniversary of independence. BNUB looks forward
to working with all partners to promote the further
normalization of political relations, and continues to
plan for a participatory exercise on applying lessons
from the 2010 elections to the preparation and conduct
of the 2015 elections.

(spoke in English)

Civil society has continued to raise awareness on
issues from human rights and corruption to rising food
prices, but it has also continued to come under pressure
and, occasionally, threat for doing so. In February,
Mr. Faustin Ndikumana, President of the advocacy
group Parole et action pour le reveil des consciences
et l'evolution des mentalites, was jailed for two weeks
following his statement alleging corrupt practices in
the recruitment ofjudges. After alleging that a member
of the national intelligence service was implicated in a
torture case, the human rights organization Association
pour la protection des droits humains et des personnes
detenues was threatened with severe sanctions if it
failed to provide evidence. Those two cases reflect a
broader pattern of pressure and intimidation.

This period has also seen the Government and civil
society organizations cooperate in defusing potentially
volatile situations. Following sharp rises in the price of
food and utilities, some civil society organizations and
trade unions called for a general strike on 27 March.
That was denounced by the authorities, whose warnings
included the threat to withdraw the NGO status of
participating organizations. Following the strike, which
was unevenly observed, discussions were held among
the authorities, civil society and trade unions on the
high cost of living, and the Government subsequently
adopted some remedial measures. With assistance from
the United Nations, a technical committee has been
set up by the Ministry of the Interior to create a more
permanent framework for dialogue on any issues of
common concern that may arise.

Burundi has continued to make institutional
progress on human rights. The National Independent
Human Rights Commission, set up in June 2011, has
already investigated several sensitive cases involving
the security forces. Human rights violations persist,
including extrajudicial executions, torture and the
excessive use of force, as does impunity for such
crimes. As the Council will recall, the United Nations
documented 61 extrajudicial executions in the course
of 2011. Of the 61 cases, perpetrators in 10 cases have
been sentenced. In five of those 10 cases, victims were
members of the police or Government officials. Of the
remaining 51 cases, nine are still in court, while in
seven others the authorities claim to have insufficient
evidence to open a case file. No action has been taken
in the other 35 cases.

That continuing impunity reflects challenges faced
by the judicial system as a whole, including a lack of
independence and significant capacity gaps. In the first
six months of 2012, the United Nations has documented
13 cases of extrajudicial killings - a high number, but a
reduction from 2011. Most were apparently perpetrated
by members of the police, including six victims killed
in alleged prison escapes. Documented instances of
torture have dropped from 36 cases in 2011 to 11 cases
since the beginning of 2012.

On 22 May, the verdict was handed down in
the trial for the murder of Ernest Manirumva, the
late Vice-President of the anti-corruption NGO
Observatoire de lutte contre la corruption et les
malversations economiques. Mr. Manirumva was
killed while investigating several sensitive cases,
including allegations of large-scale police corruption
and illegal weapons purchases. While 14 individuals
received lengthy prison terms, in this case, as in the
case of the Gatumba massacre, seemingly important
lines of inquiry - possibly pertaining to high-ranking
officials - were not followed during the investigation.

While there remain long-term challenges to the rule
of law in Burundi, the judicial system has registered
some progress since my last briefing. The Ministry
of Justice adopted its 2011-2015 strategic plan, which
focuses on enhancing the independence ofthe judiciary,
improving access to justice and strengthening criminal
justice. The Ministry is also finalizing a new code of
penal procedure, including guidelines for prosecutors,
and BNUB and partners continue to support the
professionalization of magistrates. For BNUB, such
support forms part of a comprehensive United Nations
strategy on the reform of the justice sector in Burundi,
which prioritizes the independence of the judiciary and
the accountability of magistrates.

BNUB and partners continue to provide technical
assistance in respect of prison overcrowding and
pre-trial detention. Pre-trial detention has been reduced
from 52 per cent of all detainees in 2011 to 45 per cent in
2012, up to 31 May. On 25 June, President Nkurunziza
issued a decree pardoning certain categories ofprisoners
and commuting to life imprisonment death sentences
passed before the death penalty was abolished in 2009.
Those measures have the potential to reduce the prison
population significantly and to provide immediate
relief from prison overcrowding. Preparatory work has
begun for a national conference onjustice, supported by
BNUB, and we anticipate an inclusive and transparent
national debate.

The Council will recall that Burundi's commitment
to creating transitional justice mechanisms received a
boost in 2011, when the Government set up a technical
committee that produced a draft law and a proposed
budget in October and foresaw the work of the truth and
reconciliation commission beginning in January 2012.
By letter of 19 December, the Secretariat provided
comments on the draft law, highlighting changes
required to bring it in line both with international
norms and standards and with the expectations of the
Burundian people, expressed through the 2009 national
consultations process.

We remain confident that Burundi will fulfil the
commitments made at Arusha in 2000 and reiterated
many times since. Critical issues include the exclusion
from amnesty of those guilty of grave human rights
violations or war crimes, the eventual composition
and inclusiveness of the truth and reconciliation
commission, the establishment of a special tribunal
and its relation to the commission, and the protection
of victims and witnesses. President Nkurunziza
subsequently indicated that the commission would be
set up before the end of 2012. In April, the Government
offered to share with the United Nations a revised
draft law prior to its consideration by the Council of
Ministers. On 8 June, the First Vice-President told the
international community that the issue would be taken
up in the second half of 2012 and that a law is under
consideration.

Strengthened public administration is both a goal
and a requirement for Burundi to consolidate peace
and democracy and accelerate equitable economic
development. The Government has stated its intention
to erase Burundi from the list of the world's poorest
countries by 2020 and to have zero tolerance for
corruption.

In 2011 Burundi moved up by eight places to number
169 in the world rankings for ease of doing business.
The Burundi Revenue Office contributed broader and
more efficient tax collection, outperforming revenue
expectations by nearly 20 per cent. The Office recently
came under severe pressure, including interrogations of
its staff and, according to reports, a mid-May document
from the National Intelligence Service accusing its
leadership, Burundi's donor partners, and even the
Second Vice-President, of acting in a manner hostile
to the interests of the Government. The President
subsequently expressed confidence in the Revenue
Office and the Second Vice-President, two offices that
I and many partners regard as central to Burundi's
reform efforts.

Measures have also been taken towards the
implementation of the Strategy for Good Governance
and the Fight against Corruption, adopted in October
2011. The Ministry of Good Governance intends to
assign inspectors to work within the ministries and will,
with the Ministry of Justice, establish a consultative
mechanism to follow up sensitive corruption files.
The two ministries have already set up a committee to
revise the 2006 law on the prevention and fight against
corruption and related offences, including a review of
the burden of proof when corruption is suspected.

The great majority of Burundians continue to live
in conditions of extreme socio-economic difficulty,
and the country has been grappling with the impact of
persistent shocks stemming from the high prices of food
and petroleum products, in addition to a sharp decline in
budget support. Food insecurity persists in many parts
of the country, producing chronic malnutrition among
children. An overwhelming reliance on agriculture,
coupled with a high birth rate, creates extraordinary
pressures on land and other resources. This year, an
estimated 35,400 refugees are expected to return to
Burundi from Tanzania.

The National Commission on Land and other
Issues, the national body responsible for handling land
disputes, continues to address difficult cases and to
have its findings contested. Balancing the interests of
those who return and of those who stayed behind is
delicate and, at times, incendiary.

Solutions include developing alternative livelihoods
beyond subsistence agriculture and strengthening
education at all levels, including vocational training
for youth. These solutions are reflected in Burundi's
second-generation poverty reduction strategy, validated
by the Government and its international partners in
February 2012. The strategy addresses peacebuilding
as well as development priorities, reducing the stress of
multiple planning frameworks on a system with limited
capacity. A development partners conference is planned
for late October and will be supported by the United
Nations and other partners.

In May, the Secretary-General communicated to the
Council benchmarks for the eventual transition from a
special political mission * BNUB - to a regular United
Nations country team, as requested by resolutions 1959
(2010) and 2027 (2011). Those benchmarks and their
associated indicators were devised through discussion
and consultation with the Government of Burundi, as
well as with the broader United Nations country team in
Burundi and the United Nations Integrated Task Force
on Burundi here in New York.

Consistent with best practice, those include
indicators related to Burundi's broad progress in
peace consolidation and indicators related to progress
in accomplishing the BNUB mandate. Within
those indicators, which seek to capture the range of
endeavours relevant to stability, BNUB anticipates
further refining those relating to its own role and to
that of the country team. Ideally, those benchmarks
offer a long-range framework for discussions with the
Government of Burundi. Within six months, BNUB
anticipates providing baseline data and assessments,
with observations on timing and trends for each issue
and on BNUB's role, where appropriate.

Burundi labours under the heavy historical memory
of what Burundians call the dark years. It is less than
20 years since political and ethnic violence roiled the
country, and less than a decade since civil war still
raged. The Burundian people have had the courage
to make hard compromises. As a result, Burundi in
2012, celebrating its 50 years of independence, looks
immeasurably different.

But Burundi in 2012 is also at a crossroads.
Determination will be required in continuing to develop
democratic institutions that are trusted by the public
as legitimate and authoritative. There are challenges
in discarding old attitudes that label dissenters as
enemies. Parallel and extra-legal measures of repression
continue to undermine the rule of law. Powerful pockets
of resistance to transitional justice have emerged.
Corruption, if allowed to persist, risks undermining
the very institutions that will advance Burundi's
development. But Burundi can look with pride to
successes in its recent past, including its integrated
army, which now deploys six battalions to the African
Union force in Somalia. In a recent nationwide opinion
survey, the army scored a confidence rating of 79.3 per
cent.

Freedom of expression in Burundi comes at a price,
but it exists, nonetheless, to a degree rare in many other
countries emerging from conflict. It merits nurturing
as a strength and an asset. This is a moment for decisive
and confident leadership. The people of Burundi have
the right to make peace with their past and to craft a
brighter future, accompanied by international partners.

It should no longer surprise us that war-torn
countries do not put away their weapons and blossom
instantly as plural and stable democracies with
functioning institutions, accountable Governments,
responsive parliaments, rights-respecting security
forces and tolerant populations. As last year's [itals]
World Development Report [end itals] concluded,
peace consolidation must be pursued and assessed
on a generational time scale. In the meantime, this
fragile, beautiful and courageous country has traveled
a long and difficult distance along the road of peace
consolidation in little over a decade.

As I conclude my assignment to Burundi, I wish to
extend my warmest thanks to all BNUB's interlocutors
and, particularly here in New York, the former
and current Burundian Permanent Representatives
Ambassador Zacharie Gahutu and Ambassador
Hermenegilde Niyonzima, for their collaborative spirit
and their generosity in imparting knowledge about
Burundi. I also thank former Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe, all my colleagues
and Ambassador Paul Seger of the Peacebuilding
Commission. I convey all my good wishes to my
successor, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga.

