Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting and the Secretary-General for his report
on enhancing mediation and its support activities
(S/2009/189), which makes a useful contribution to
addressing the challenges faced in providing mediation
assistance.

A number of mediation efforts have been
successfully undertaken. They have helped to reduce
tensions and ensured that peace processes moved
forward. Both the United Nations and regional
organizations and arrangements play an important role
in helping to mediate conflicts.

At the same time, despite the relevant binding
provisions set forth in the United Nations Charter, we
continue to face inconsistent behaviour that
undermines the basic elements of the international
legal order, threatens the integrity and stability of
States and leads to grave violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law.

The ongoing armed conflict between Armenia and
Azerbaijan has resulted in the occupation of almost one
fifth of the territory of Azerbaijan and has made
approximately one out of every eight persons in the
country an internally displaced person or refugee.
Although the mediation efforts that have already been
carried out for quite a long period of time within the
framework of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe have not always been consistent
and have yet to yield results, Azerbaijan continues to
be committed to resolving the conflict by political
means and in a constructive manner. The conflict can
be solved only on the basis of respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and inviolability of the
internationally recognized borders of Azerbaijan.

In order to ensure the success of the settlement
process and mediation efforts, the factor of military
occupation must be removed from the conflict
settlement context and Armenia must completely
withdraw from all occupied territories of Azerbaijan.
Delaying the return of the territories could complicate
the already difficult settlement process. Following the
liberation of the occupied territories, internally
displaced persons should return in safety and dignity to
their places of origin in the Nagorny Karabakh region
of Azerbaijan and adjacent districts. Upon the release
of the territories of Azerbaijan from occupation, the
rehabilitation and economic development of the region
shall take place and all communication technologies
there shall be made available for mutual use.

The aforementioned understanding, reflected also
in General Assembly resolution 62/243 of 14 March
2008, is an expression of the constructive compromise
that Azerbaijan is ready to make within the framework
of international law and with a view to achieving
lasting peace, stability and cooperation. It is obvious at
the same time that the success of the settlement process
will depend on a constructive approach on the part of
both sides, as well as on the active contribution of the
international community and mediators.

However, it is very difficult to hope for a
substantial breakthrough on the basis of the position
that Armenia persists in holding. It is more than clear
that Armenia is seeking to achieve a transfer of
sovereignty over Azerbaijani territories that it seized
through military force and in which it carried out
ethnic cleansing. It is precisely for the purpose of
annexation that Armenia wants to retain control over
Nagorny Karabakh and some other occupied districts
of Azerbaijan, prevent the displaced Azerbaijani
population from returning to their homes and thus
exclude equal consideration of the opinions of both
communities.

Armenia openly disregards the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and General
Assembly, refuses to recognize the territorial integrity
of Azerbaijan, is building up its military presence in
the occupied territories of Azerbaijan, and is thus
clearly demonstrating its annexationist intentions. The
approach of Armenia is unconstructive and unrealistic;
it cannot serve as a sound basis for resolving the
conflict and has led to the further prolongation of the
settlement process.

While committed to the peaceful settlement of the
conflict, Azerbaijan will never compromise its
territorial integrity.

Mediation is a diverse and complex process that
is influenced by the specific conditions brought by the
parties involved into the conflict management system.
Success depends on a number of critical factors, among
them the need to ensure that the behavioural
parameters of mediators are based on the normative
standards set by the Charter of the United Nations and
international law and on the objective of the
comprehensive settlement of conflicts. Therefore, the
resolution of outstanding conflicts requires the joint
and committed efforts of the international community
as a whole. An ambiguous approach inevitably serves
to generate mutual suspicion and mistrust and to
reinforce perceptions of the centrality of military
strength; as a result, it contributes to further escalation
and destabilization, with unpredictable consequences.

There can be no justification for attempts to make
participation in peace processes conditional on
demands for immunity from responsibility. In that
sense, the Security Council has an important role to
play in all stages of the conflict. It should be better
understood that acting in contravention of international
law, undermining the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States and ignoring Security Council
resolutions that explicitly condemn such behaviour
may be hazardous and seen as shifting gears towards a
more determinative decision.

Furthermore, it is clear that there can be no long-
term and sustainable peace without justice. Therefore,
ending impunity is essential to enhancing not only
State responsibility and individual criminal liability for
serious international crimes, but also peace, truth,
reconciliation and the rights of victims.

