Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (Spoke in Chinese): First
of all, my delegation wishes to express its warm welcome
to the newly nominated Facilitator of the Arusha peace
process, President Mandela. We would like to thank the
President of the Council for having arranged for this
meeting today to give us an opportunity to exchange
views with President Mandela and to explore together
ways to settle the conflict in Burundi. We would also like
to thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan for the important
briefing he gave.

China strongly supports the facilitating efforts of
President Mandela. We believe that with his outstanding
wisdom and experience, he will instill new vitality into
the peace process in Burundi. The recently concluded
meeting at Arusha serves as proof in this regard. We
believe that many views and proposals put forward by
President Mandela merit study and attention by the
Council. At the same time, we also believe that the
realization of peace and reconciliation in Burundi depend
ultimately on the people of Burundi and the leaders of the
various factions. As President Mandela pointed out, no
one else can take their place in the achievement of peace.

Achieving a political settlement through negotiations
is the only way to end the internal conflict and bring
about reconciliation in Burundi. Military means can only
render futile any achievement made so far in the peace
process and will once again plunge the people of Burundi
into the abyss of war. We therefore appeal to the relevant
factions in Burundi to proceed on the basis of the
fundamental interests of the people of Burundi,
immediately cease hostilities and participate fully in the
peace process so that an agreement may be reached as
soon as possible. We fully agree with President Mandela
that the leaders of the various factions in Burundi have
the responsibility in this regard.

The severe economic situation is the main cause of
the turbulent situation in Burundi. Without a fundamental
and thorough elimination of poverty, it will be hard to
achieve and maintain peace and stability in Burundi. We
therefore appeal to the international community and to the
donor community to intensify economic assistance to
Burundi. As always, my Government will continue to
provide assistance to the peace process in various aspects.

We would like to emphasize that peace and stability
in Burundi are inseparable from peace and stability in the
Great Lakes region as a whole. The conflict and
confrontations among countries in the region are often
interrelated and mutually affect one another. The

 

international community must commit itself to
fundamentally resolve the conflict in the entire Great Lakes
region. We support the proposal to hold an international
conference on the Great Lakes region, and we believe that
the Security Council and the entire United Nations should
take practical measures to promote the convening of such
a conference and that we should give it the support it
needs, including financial and human resources.

Finally, my delegation believes that the draft
resolution that is to be adopted will demonstrate the
Council's support for the Arusha peace process and move
that process forward.

