Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Council for organizing this
debate to consider the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/470) assessing the recommendations of the
African Union-United Nations panel on the modalities
for support to peacekeeping operations authorized by
the United Nations and led by regional organizations,
in particular the African Union. I would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy, Mr. Tete
Antonio, Acting Permanent Observer of the United
Nations, and Mr. Romano Prodi for their important
statements.

Following the Security Council's consultations
regarding the report submitted by the African Union-
United Nations panel in December 2008 (S/2008/813),
we awaited the Secretary-General's report with a great
deal of interest. It would thus be remiss of us not to
convey our wholehearted thanks to him for his report.

We also wish to reiterate our appreciation for the
panel's timely recommendations, which make
significant contribution to collective efforts to
strengthen the African Union's capacity to meet the
challenges facing the African continent and to mobilize
greater support on the part of the international
community, especially with the aim of improving the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of financing
for African Union peacekeeping operations authorized
by the United Nations.

That is all the more important because, despite
their repeatedly demonstrated goodwill, subregional
and regional organizations, especially the African
Union, encounter objective difficulties in supporting
increasingly expensive long-term peacekeeping
operations or increasingly complex crisis situations.
The most egregious and pressing such case is that of
Somalia, where, as a result of insufficient financial
assistance in support of the African Union's
commitment, the conflict is only deteriorating. The
diagnosis is therefore clear: a lack of modalities for
guaranteed, flexible financing and limited institutional
capacities. We now need to find the best way to address
these difficulties, which are certainly not
insurmountable.

Since the report addresses United Nations-
authorized missions, we feel that the optimal solution
is to be found in establishing cooperation, or better yet,
an open partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union, based on Chapter VIII of the
Charter. The complexity of conflicts and threats to
peace demand a collective response based on genuine
political will on the part of the Organization, and in
particular the Security Council, to support the African
Union's efforts.

Frankly, after all the statements of faith that have
been made and commitments undertaken within this
very body, which is fond of recalling its principal
responsibility as a bulwark of international peace and
security, the time has come to act. In the wake of the
Secretary-General's assessment, my delegation would
therefore like to underscore the importance of the
following tasks.

First is the need to strengthen strategic relations
and to develop a common strategic vision for the
United Nations and the African Union through reliable
arrangements between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council, as well as between the
United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission, in order to improve their coordination
and effectiveness in the prevention and management of
conflict and on issues of common interest.

The partnership between the two organizations
must be maintained and reinforced in order to
strengthen the African Union's human resources. In
this regard, we support establishing a special joint
United Nations-African Union team for peace and
security whose mission is to review current and long-
term strategic and operational issues.

With respect to making financing for
peacekeeping more predictable, sustainable and
flexible, we need to establish appropriate financing
mechanisms for United Nations-authorized African
Union peacekeeping operations, with the ultimate aim
of creating a standing African Union peacekeeping
capacity and of providing African Union missions with
operational resources.

The African Union must pursue its internal efforts
to set up its own logistical capacities. We must seek
ways and means to strengthen the African Union's
institutional and operational capacities in
peacekeeping, and to give it all the support necessary
to establish the African Peace and Security
Architecture and to build a standing emergency
response force.

While we recognize the importance of
peacekeeping activities, special attention should also
be paid to prevention and mediation efforts and to
exploit the comparative advantages of regional and
subregional organizations in this respect. We encourage
the United Nations to maintain its support for the
African Union's 10-year capacity-building programme,
and we welcome the capacity-building activities
undertaken by many United Nations departments with
the African Union with respect to elections, mediation,
conflict settlement, and peacekeeping planning and
implementation. These efforts will have to continue,
and we await with interest the assessment to be made
later this year of the 10-year programme. We must also
focus our attention on close cooperation between all
international partners assisting the African Union's
institutional and logistical capacity-building.

Turning specifically to the issue of financing, the
Security Council, through its resolution 1809 (2008),
itself recognizes that the absence of predictable,
sustainable and flexible resources constrains the
African Union's capacity for action. Although it is true
that voluntary contributions have facilitated the
deployment and implementation of peacekeeping
operations by the African Union, as many here have
recalled, the lessons to be learned from the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan or the African Union
Mission in Somalia have highlighted the deficiency of
such contributions in covering all the needs of a large-
scale peacekeeping operation. With that assessment in
mind, and given the difficulties facing the African
Union in assuming the financial and logistic
responsibilities for peacekeeping operations on the
continent, we reiterate our support for the
recommendations of the African Union-United Nations
panel and for the Secretary-General's assessment
regarding the re-allocation of United Nations-assessed
contributions to back African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by the United Nations.

It will be recall that the African Union decided in
August to devote 12 per cent of its regular budget to
financing the African Union Peace Fund. That decision,
which we commend, reflected the continent's desire
and political commitment to find solutions to the
thorny issue of taking responsibility for peacekeeping
operations. Despite that very important decision, it is
quite clear that there remains a need for partners and
donors to support the efforts of the African Union.

Regional organizations, especially the African
Union, and indeed the Security Council cannot shirk
their responsibility in the maintenance of peace under
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations. Faced with the increased complexity of
conflicts and peacekeeping mandates and with
mounting requests for assistance, they must pool their
efforts and define and strengthen the framework of
their partnership and their action.

We reiterate our gratitude to the Chairman of the
high-level panel, Mr. Romano Prodi, as well as the
members of his team for their very valuable
contribution. We hail the constructive assessment of the
Secretary-General regarding their recommendations.

In conclusion, we wish to convey our gratitude to
the Ugandan delegation for its efforts to promote the
adoption of a draft presidential statement at the end of
this meeting. Of course, we support the draft.

