Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I repeat again, Sir, the
personal greeting I extended to you yesterday.

While, as the Assistant Secretary-General's
briefing has sadly made very clear, there are a number
of regional issues that deserve consideration by
the Security Council. I want to take this, our first,
opportunity to outline our position on five points that
guide New Zealand's approach to the Middle East peace
process.

First, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has endured
for too long, and its resolution is overdue. It has
devastated Palestinians and Israelis alike. It contributes
to insecurity and instability in the region and beyond.
It is a threat to international peace and security. New
Zealand therefore believes the Council does not just
have a responsibility to remain seized of the issue, but
that it should go further and actively promote a just and
sustainable long-term peace agreement.

Secondly, a two-State solution is the only real basis
for an enduring Israeli-Palestinian peace. Although
final status issues can be agreed only by the parties,
New Zealand believes that a two-State solution should
be based on Israel and a Palestinian State existing
side by side, in mutually agreed and accepted peace
and security, with pre-l967 borders with agreed land
swaps, a solution on the status of Jerusalem, mutual
recognition, and agreement on security arrangements
and refugees. None of those elements will startle
anyone. The parameters are well known; most of them,
over the years, were supported by the Council. Indeed,
the two-State solution is almost universally supported,
not least by the parties themselves. New Zealand has
therefore supported initiatives towards those ends and
particularly acknowledges the recent, unstinting efforts
of Secretary Kerry.

Thirdly, New Zealand believes the two-State
solution should be achieved by a negotiated agreement
between the two parties and regrets that currently there
are no such negotiations, despite sustained efforts
by others, notably the United States. The parties
themselves have previously supported and agreed to
many of the elements of a peaceful settlement.

Fourthly, without a recommitment to negotiations,
the prospects for a lasting, two-State solution will
further diminish. Both sides need to cease provocations
that impede peacemaking, provocations that lead
Israelis to face threats to lives and communities from
missile and rocket attacks, provocations that led to the
devastation most recently wrought upon Gaza in July
and August of the past year. Israeli settlement activity
also inflames the situation and is now rapidly closing
the window of opportunity for a two-State solution.
Settlement activity must stop. It is illegal under
international law and it is prejudicial to ajust peace.

Fifthly, the status quo is unsustainable; doing
nothing is simply not viable. More time - time
out - will not, by itself, resolve matters. Delay only
breeds further hostility. Tensions are rising, driven by a
cycle ofviolence and loss ofhope and reducing prospects
of a settlement. Increased radicalization within some
Palestinian communities prompts responses from Israel.
All of that means an ever-growing risk to regional and
international peace and security.

For all those reasons, New Zealand believes that
the failure of the Security Council to bring leadership
to this issue, at this time, amounts to an abdication of
its responsibilities. Arguments that the Council does
not have a role or that it cannot add value can no longer
bejustified, particularly as other ways to find a solution
simply have not succeeded. Indeed, with its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, if the Council does not have a role in the
current circumstances, it is hard to envisage when it
might have such a role.

None of that diminishes in any way the ongoing
efforts, particularly of the United States, to resolve
the issue. United States leadership is essential; it is
indispensable. But, as recent events have demonstrated,
only the coordinated and focused efforts of the whole
of the international community can now bring the
momentum that is required. Therefore, while it is for
the parties to reach final agreement, the Council can
promote and support negotiations. It can legitimize
any resulting agreement. And it can use its moral and
legal authority and the practical tools at its disposal to
shift the dynamics back to productive negotiations. We
acknowledge the acute sensitivity of the conflict. We
acknowledge the roles of multiple stakeholders. We
acknowledge the difficulty both sides have in talking
with one another. All ofthatjustifies the Council taking
a proactive role in supporting the peacemaking process.

This present debate is not the time to promote
approaches that might be initiated or supported by
the Council. But that time will come very soon. There
are a number of possibilities that might at least lend
momentum to the negotiations, that might draw on
the United Nations legitimacy and convening power,
that might also draw on the authority of the Security
Council, that might, for example, require that the
Secretary General's monthly Middle East report be
more specific and more action-oriented. All those are
possibilities that could support the parties working
with their major stakeholders in reaching an agreement.
New Zealand commits to exploring those options in an
effort to inject new momentum into negotiations once
elections are concluded in Israel in March. Any resumed
negotiations will be no less difficult than before, but
at least the Council would be better placed to play its
part in moving the process forward, with momentum
hopefully maintained through the good offices the
United Nations, supported by the Council's authority
and by its determination to support a lasting settlement.

Against that background, New Zealand supports
in principle the idea of a suitably balanced Security
Council draft resolution touching on the final status
issues, possibly also promoting specific steps to
support a resumption of negotiations. If peacemaking
is to proceed with reasonable expedition, it might also
be appropriate to establish a realistic time frame for
completing that process. For the Council to support
such a timeline does no more than others have before;
Oslo and Annapolis come to mind.

New Zealand staunchly supports the existence of
the State of Israel and supports its right to defend that
existence in accordance with international law, and we
accept that security arrangements will be fundamental
to any final agreement. We will remain alert to
Israel's security concerns. New Zealand likewise
acknowledges that both States comprising the eventual
two-State solution will be entitled to sovereignty, to
security and to membership of the Organization, and
consistent with that view we supported the Palestinian
request to become an observer State in the General
Assembly. We have told both the Israeli Government
and the Palestinian Authority that New Zealand would
positively consider contributing to any third-party
presence that secures the sovereignty and security of
both States, just as, since 1982 in the Sinai, we have
supported the Egyptian-Israeli treaty of peace.

New Zealand has strong friendships with Israelis
and Palestinians alike. In the spirit of that friendship
and as an elected member, we will seek and support
initiatives for the Council to speak on this issue with a
more credible and authoritative voice and to use its legal
powers and authorities to engage proactively towards a
sustainable Middle East peace. We therefore call on the
Security Council to live up to its responsibility to seek
an enduring solution to that conflict.

