Mr. Choat (South Sudan): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for presiding over this important meeting. I
would also like to thank Mr. Ladsous for his remarks.

The Government of the Republic of South Sudan
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Abyei Area (S/20ll/74l). We wish to
express our appreciation to the Government of Ethiopia
for providing troops to the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) and for its
continued efforts in support of peace and stability in
the region.

The Republic of South Sudan supports the
Secretary-General's calls for a full withdrawal of all
troops from Abyei. We note that the 20 June Agreement
on Temporary Arrangements for the Administration and
Security of the Abyei Area provides for

"the redeployment of Sudanese military forces
(Sudanese Armed Forces and Sudan People's Liberation Army) from the Abyei Area,
immediately consequent on the deployment of an
Interim Security Force for Abyei (ISFA)
composed of Ethiopian troops" (5/2011/384, annex, para. 1).

The Secretary-General has reported that UNISFA
is operational. It is therefore incumbent on both parties
to withdraw their troops. As the Secretary-General
noted, the vast majority of South Sudan Armed Forces

troops has now been withdrawn from the Abyei Area.
Elements of the South Sudan Police Service remain in
the area as they will be integrated into the Abyei Police
Service, pursuant to the 20 June Agreement. Their
presence also serves to maintain law and order and
prevent further looting and property damage in the
absence of area residents.

It is now incumbent on the Republic of the Sudan
to make arrangements for the full withdrawal of its
troops from the Abyei Area. The imposition of
additional conditions, such as the establishment of the
Abyei Area Administration prior to a withdrawal, is
unacceptable. In no agreement between the parties is
the withdrawal of troops conditioned on the
establishment of that institution. Only once the
Republic of the Sudan initiates a withdrawal can
further progress be made.

We remind the Council that, in May, the Republic
of the Sudan used excessive force to occupy the Abyei
Area, driving roughly 110,000 people from their
homes, looting, damaging their property and destroying
their livelihoods. It is not realistic or fair to expect
South Sudan to do more than it has already done
without any movement from the Republic of the Sudan.

The Republic of South Sudan shares the
Secretary-General's regret that the provisions of the
20 June Agreement have not been implemented, and is
fully prepared to move forward with establishing the
Abyei Area Administration. We note that in line with
the Agreement's provisions, the Republic of South
Sudan must accept the Republic of the Sudan's
nomination for the position of Deputy Chief
Administrator for the Abyei Area. The current nominee
is not a resident of the Area, as required by the Abyei
Protocol of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, as
well as the more recent Agreement between the parties.

Furthermore, while the Republic of South Sudan
accepted that the position of Speaker of the Legislative
Council for Abyei could be a nominee from the
National Congress Party, it was agreed that that person
would be a Ngok Dinka from the Abyei Area. The
Republic of South Sudan will consider any nominee
who meets the criteria agreed on by the parties. It is
essential for the Abyei Area Administration to be
established quickly, and my Government is ready to do
what it can to ensure that this happens.
We are concerned for the Ngok Dinka residents
of the Abyei Area, large numbers of whom have been
unable to return to their homes. Their humanitarian
situation remains extremely difficult. As the Council is
aware, roughly 110,000 residents were displaced from
their homes in the Abyei Area in late May. Rampant
looting and burning of homes took place in the
aftermath of the Republic of the Sudan's occupation of
the area. Civilian returnees will require significant
assistance in rebuilding their lives and homes.

In this context, we regret that the mission of the
Office of the High Commissioner of Human Rights
sent to assess the possibility of establishing a human
rights presence in the Abyei Area, pursuant to the
provisions of paragraph 10 of resolution 1990 (2011),
has repeatedly been denied access to the Abyei Area by
the Republic of the Sudan. We request the Council to
take action to ensure that the human rights monitoring
it called for in resolution 1990 (2011) be allowed to
take place.

The Republic of South Sudan is also fully
committed to the successful implementation of the
29 June and 30 July Agreements between the Sudan
and South Sudan on border security and the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism. We welcome the
willingness of the Security Council to mandate
UNISFA to support the operational activities of the
joint border verification and monitoring mechanism.
My Government is ready to begin implementation of
all agreements on border security. We call once again
on the Republic of Sudan to join us in moving to
demarcate those areas of the border that have not yet
been demarcated, and to reach final agreement on the
five areas that are contested between the parties.

In this context, we are very concerned by the
recent escalation of tensions at the border, and in
particular the recent attack by the Sudanese Armed
Forces on Jau, in Unity state. We stress that Jau is part
of South Sudan. Since the beginning of the interim
period of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
consistent with the security arrangements agreed by the
parties, Jau has served as the headquarters of the
9th Division of the Sudan People's Liberation Army.
The Republic of the Sudan has always accepted this.

The Republic of South Sudan emphasizes that it
is willing and ready to continue serious negotiations
with the Republic of the Sudan on all outstanding
issues. We seek a lasting peace in the Abyei Area that
provides for the return with dignity of the displaced
populations of the Abyei Area to their homes. We wish

to see the security situation on the ground stabilize in
order to enable the civilian population to return
peacefully. We recommit to negotiating in good faith
the terms of a final agreement on the status of the
Abyei Area, consistent with the relevant provisions of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the 2009
award of the Permanent Court of Arbitration.

With regard to the other outstanding issues, my
Government has been praised for putting a constructive
proposal on the table during recent talks in Addis
Ababa concerning transitional flnancial arrangements.
We regret that this generous proposal was not accepted
by the Republic of the Sudan. We recommit to the
negotiation process and look forward to the next round
of talks later this month. We thank the Council for its
continued support for peace and stability in the region,
and stand ready to continue cooperation with the
Council, the United Nations peacekeeping missions,
the African Union and regional partners in support of
that purpose.

I would like to affirm once again that the
Republic of South Sudan is in no way giving support to
any opposition, although the Republic of the Sudan has
repeatedly stated that we are supporting the opposition
in South Kordofan and Blue Nile. This has no grounds.
Our policy has clearly been one of non-interference in
the affairs of any country. I repeat that all of these
allegations are groundless and have no basis in fact.

