Ms. Murmokaite: I have the honour to brief
the members of the Security Council in my capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic. I intend to brief members on the work of the
Committee carried out since my most recent briefing
to the Council during its consultations on 21 February.

During the Committee's informal consultations
on 5 March, the coordinator of the Panel of Experts
on the Central African Republic presented the Panel's
programme of work. Besides the coordinator, who also
serves as the Panel's armed groups expert, the Panel's
arms and finance/natural resources experts briefed the
Committee members on their respective investigative
priorities. The Committee members provided the Panel
with guidance on the work programme presented.
A number of Committee members underscored the
importance of close cooperation between the Panel
and the transitional authorities of the Central African
Republic, as well as with the neighbouring States.

The Committee received a briefing from
INTERPOL'S General Counsel and Acting Special
Representative during its consultations on 1 May. He
explained that the INTERPOL-United Nations Security
Council Special Notice was a useful tool for quickly
disseminating information about individuals and
entities subject to targeted sanctions to law enforcement
agencies at airports and border crossings in all of
INTERPOL's 190 member States. The Committee
members welcomed the Special Notice as an important
tool for improving the implementation of sanctions.

On 9 May, the Committee listed three individuals
subject to the measures imposed by paragraphs 30
and 32 of resolution 2134 (2014) and issued a press
release in that connection (SC/11389). On 18 June, the
cooperation agreement between INTERPOL and the
Committee, which includes the issuance of Special
Notices, entered into force. On 5 May, the Committee
was briefed during its informal consultations by the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflicts and on Sexual Violence
in Conflict. Both Special Representatives provided
the Committee members with pertinent information
on individuals engaged in activities stipulated by
resolution 2134 (2014) as listing criteria for targeted
measures. Those include committing acts of sexual
violence and recruiting or using children in armed
conflict in the Central African Republic.

The Committee members expressed their
appreciation for the work of the Special Representatives
and the information that they had provided, including
proposalstolistcertainindividualsfortargetedsanctions.
Furthermore, the Committee members expressed the
view that the designation of certain individuals for
financial and travel sanctions would send a strong
message that the international community would no
longer tolerate the serious atrocities being committed
by all sides in the Central African Republic and that
perpetrators of such acts would be held accountable. In
that connection, delegations encouraged both Special
Representatives to exchange information on possible
designations with the Panel of Experts. Subsequently,
the Committee issued a press release on its interaction
with the Special Representatives (SC/11388).

On 29 May, Committee members received the
interim report of the Panel of Experts. According to
the Panel, the total impunity that allows individuals to
engage in or provide support for acts that undermine the
peace, security and territorial integrity of the Central
African Republic remains the main stumbling block on
the road of the political transition. Repeated cycles of
violence have been fuelled by the lack of accountability,
which created a fertile ground for rebel and criminal
activities in the country.

The Panel has been able to identify several political
actors who are taking advantage of the security vacuum
in the country to fund, organize or manipulate armed
groups, such as some components of the "new Seleka"
or the self-declared anti-Balaka militias, in order to
position themselves in the national transitional process
or promote the partition of the country. The Panel noted
that personnel of the Central African armed forces and
gendarmerie remain at command positions of some of
the main anti-Balaka groups. Furthermore, the Panel
reported that armed groups have been involved in the
illicit trade and exploitation of natural resources. In
the west, anti-Balaka members are digging and trading
diamonds, while in the east Seleka forces retain a tight
grip on artisanal gold mines.

The Panel has not documented any major transfers
of weapons, ammunition or military equipment since
the imposition of the arms embargo on 5 December
2013. Armed groups mainly use small arms that were
circulating in the country before the crisis or were
obtained from Government stockpiles following the
collapse of the defence and security forces and the
subsequent Seleka rule in Bangui.

Finally, the Panel has documented 103 incidents of
obstruction of the delivery of humanitarian assistance
between 5 December 2013 and 30 April 2014. It has
also documented approximately 2,424 unlawful
killings of civilians, including aid workers, committed
by all parties to the conflict during the same period.
The interim report was issued as an official Council
document on 1 July under the symbol S/2014/452.

During the Committee's informal consultations on
25 June, the Panel's coordinator briefed the Committee
on developments since the submission of the interim
report, and Committee members considered the
recommendations contained therein. The briefer told
Committee members that the voluntary disarmament
operations carried out by the transitional authorities
and the African-led International Support Mission in
the Central African Republic on 8 June had not been
successful. The country was still de facto partitioned
into two, and almost all inhabited areas were still
under the direct or indirect control of armed groups.
The Panel was investigating who was responsible
for the recent violence and killings in Bambari. He
informed Committee members of three recent seizures
of diamonds in the United Arab Emirates, Cameroon
and Belgium that were most likely exported from the
Central African Republic. With regard to the Panel's
work on humanitarian issues, the coordinator informed
the Committee that its database of incidents had been
recognized by the humanitarian community as a
unique tool and helped the Panel to chart out its further
investigations in the area.

In their reactions to the interim report and the
presentation by the coordinator, Committee members
expressed their appreciation for the detailed findings
presented by the Panel, especially with regard to armed
groups and violations of international humanitarian law.
They also welcomed the fact that the Panel had been
able to travel to quite a few places outside of Bangui
despite security and logistical constraints. Furthermore,
they expressed concern about the continued illicit
exploitation of natural resources and poaching, which
are a major source of revenue for armed groups. They
encouraged the Panel to provide the Committee on an
ongoing basis with well-documented information on
individuals who should be listed for targeted sanctions.
Lastly, with regard to the four recommendations
contained in the Panel's interim report, Committee
members agreed with three recommendations and took
note of one.

I would now like to update the Security Council
on the implementation reports the Committee has
received from Member States to date. So far, the
Committee has received 25 such reports, as well as
four addenda, from three Member States. Twenty-one
reports have been posted on the Committee's website.
Of the 15 Committee members, seven have submitted
reports so far. Only two African States have reported
to date, and neither is located in the Central African
region. I have encouraged Council members to lead by
example and to submit their implementation reports in
a timely manner. I will continue my outreach activities
to the Central African Republic and its neighbours,
who reported to the Committee during its 6 February
meeting on their needs for implementation assistance,
and will encourage those States to submit their reports
to the Committee as soon as possible, including details
of their assistance needs, to enable the Committee to
approach potential partners and donors such as the
Peacebuilding Commission, international financial
institutions and other international, regional and
subregional partners.

On 19 June, I met with the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda.
During the meeting, we discussed possible cooperation
between the Committee and the Prosecutor's Office
with regard to the fight against impunity in the Central
African Republic and agreed to continue to meet
informally with interested members of the Committee
in the future. I encouraged the Prosecutor to informally
share information on alleged perpetrators of violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights law
with the Committee and the Panel of Experts and she
agreed to do so.

On 23 June, a security incident involving two
experts ofthe Panel occurred in the border area between
the Central African Republic and Chad. In reply to the
Secretariat's note to Committee members on 25 June,
a note verbale from the Permanent Mission of Chad
was circulated in the Committee on 3 July, providing
initial information on the incident. I strongly encourage
Chad to investigate the matter further and provide all
relevant information to the Committee. I also invite
all the neighbouring countries of the Central African
Republic to cooperate fully with the Panel of Experts
and provide it with all necessary support.

It is my intention to visit the Central African Republic
later this year in my capacity as Chair of the Sanctions
Committee and to meet with the representatives of the
transitional authorities in order to present the sanctions
regime and discuss various related aspects with them. I
will inform Council members of the details of the visit
planned as they become available.

In closing, I would like to assure Council members
that, as Chair of the Committee, I will do my utmost
to ensure that the Committee makes a meaningful
contribution to the efforts of the Council, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and
international partners to bring an end to the ongoing
violence that threatens to completely destroy the social
fabric of the Central African Republic in order to set
the country on a path of reconciliation, durable peace
and sustainable development.

