We welcome both of our briefers and thank them for their continued commitment to the Yemeni people. It is with regret that we must now accept that Yemen is fighting on two fronts. Years of war have destroyed many of the country's institutions, and now the Yemeni people are contending with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), the transmission of which continues to increase. As a result of the long-standing conflict, Yemen's health-care system has been shattered and is under strain, with only half of its hospitals operational. Most of the population still desperately needs humanitarian aid, as they lack food, drinking water, fuel and access to health care. In that regard, the unimpeded delivery of humanitarian relief in accordance with international law is key for the survival of many people. The scaling down of some operations and the possible closure of others represent the difference between life and death, and we take this opportunity to thank those countries and agencies that continue to sustain aid operations through their donations. The impact of COVID-19 will be felt acutely across the country, where many are grappling with lost livelihoods. The situation in Yemen remains the world's largest humanitarian crisis, and it is unthinkable that the humanitarian needs of people will be worsened with the impact of COVID-19. It is critical, therefore, that the international community assist in strengthening the capacity of the Yemeni Government to protect people's lives and livelihoods in future, and we welcome the humanitarian pledging conference elaborated by Ramesh. Amid the COVID-19 response, there remains a need for a political solution to the protracted crisis. We welcome the extension of the ceasefire and emphasize the need for Yemeni responsibility and collective ownership over the political process in Yemen. That is the only path to a dignified advancement of Yemen, its institutions and political expressions. In order to strengthen the sociocultural rubric necessary for sustainable peace, it is critical that all groups in society be included throughout the political process. In conclusion, we once again underscore the need for progress in addressing concerns over the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which threatens the marine environment, as well as the lives of many people in the region. Like Mr. Griffiths, I remain hopeful, on behalf of the Yemeni people, that sustainable peace can be achieved and their dignity restored.
