Mr. Bale (Republic of Congo) (spoke in French): At

the outset, upon the accession of the sisterly Republic

of Equatorial Guinea to the presidency of the Security

Council for the month of February, allow me to convey

to you, Mr. President, the heartfelt congratulations of
your great friend and brother His Excellency Mr. Denis
Sassou Nguesso, President ofthe Republic ofthe Congo,
who was unable to travel to New York. He reiterates
his support for your mandate, Sir, at the helm of this
organ entrusted with maintaining international peace
and security.

Your presence, Mr. President, in this Chamber
dedicated to peace and security throughout the world
confirms your constant commitment to peace and
development in Africa, particularly in our subregion
of Central Africa. My delegation is extremely
grateful to Equatorial Guinea for having invited the
Congo to participate in this important debate on
mercenarism, with particular reference to the Central
African subregion. Equatorial Guinea represents a
victimized African country, not to mention one that
has endured more than one attempt at destabilization
by mercenaries, the most recent of which took place
in December 2017. The Central African Republic and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo - countries
of the subregion - are further emblematic victims of
predatory mercenary activities.

I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the peace agreement reached on 2 February in
Khartoum between the Government of the Central
African Republic and armed groups, establishing high
hopes for the reconstruction of that country of the
subregion, at peace and reconciled with itself, which
will hereafter be able to play its part in realizing the
peace, security and development agenda in our Central
African subregion.

The issue of mercenaries - often scrutinized in
the shadow of major current affairs such as terrorism
or maritime piracy - does not receive much attention
from the international community. Yet it is akin to
other threats to peace, stability and security. By way of
illustration, in the case of Central Africa, uncontrolled
movements of illegal groups between States in our
subregion have a negative impact on trust. It is well
known that the promotion of confidence-building
measures among States at the regional and subregional
levels alleviates tensions and conflicts and promotes
lasting peace, stability and sustainable development.
Moreover, it has been noted that it is easier for these
non-State actors - the mercenaries - to incite
coups d'etat, destabilize legitimate institutions,
carry out activities of economic and/or political
intelligence-gathering, perpetrate acts of terrorism
and participate in conflicts alongside mutineers,
insurgents, rebels or other armed oppositions with a
view to overthrowing legitimate Governments.

It is clear that mercenary activities and related
activities have, unfortunately, multiplied in conflict
situations in recent years. The African continent has
suffered a great deal and continues to suffer from
mercenaries who dangerously hamper its development.
The issue of mercenaries is, in that respect, a major
security concern for our countries and one that should
engage us further. That is why my delegation welcomes
its inclusion on the Council's agenda and hopes that
today's debate will shed more light on this phenomenon,
given the developments in the situation that call for
renewed consideration.

I am pleased to note that the issue of mercenarism
is at the heart of the concerns of the leaders of the
subregion. It was the subject of particular attention in
Brazzaville at the forty-sixth meeting of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa. In the declaration that
led to the consideration of this item, a commitment
was made by members of the Economic Community of
Central African States to making the necessary efforts
and collaborating in order to eliminate the risk of
mercenary infiltration in the countries of the subregion.

The ministerial meeting of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, as well as the Joint
Summit of the Economic Community of West African
States and the Economic Community of Central African
States Heads of State and Government on Peace,
Security, Stability and the Fight Against Terrorism and
Violent Extremism, which gathered the Heads of State
and Government of West and Central African States
in July 2018, touched on the problem of mercenarism,
which affects the countries of the two subregions,
which are already prey to maritime piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea; the activities of terrorist groups such as
Boko Haram and the Lord's Resistance Army; as well
as transnational organized crime and security threats
related to pastoralism and transhumance.

Strengthening cooperation at the subregional and
regional levels in the areas of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and combating cross-border crime,
terrorism and the illicit circulation of weapons - areas
in which mercenaries are very active - are, among
others, measures that resulted from those two meetings,

which, as the Council is aware, contribute to reducing the

impact of mercenary activities in conflicts. Improved
demobilization and reintegration programmes have also
proven to be a means of preventing former combatants
from returning to service as new mercenaries.

In that context of combating this phenomenon,
we must include the entry into force of the Central
African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and
Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and
Components That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture,
Repair and Assembly. That agreement, known as the
Kinshasa Convention, is a living expression of the will
of our States to prevent the illicit and uncontrolled
circulation of small arms and light weapons, particularly
in areas of internal or border conflict. However, the
issue of mercenarism is a complex and sensitive subject
and combating mercenarism is no easy task - far
from it - even if the issue has earned the unanimous
condemnation of the international community.

We have certainly dedicated international
instruments to the issue. The Convention for the
Elimination of Mercenarism in Africa, signed in
Libreville on 3 July 1977, entered into force on 22 April
1985. It is an important regional instrument in view
of the dangers that have been posed by mercenarism
to many African States since the beginning of
decolonization. That text was adopted less than a
month after the Additional Protocol of 1977 to the
Geneva Conventions of 1949. Mercenarism is not
identified by the 1977 Additional Protocol as a serious
offense, whereas the African Convention criminalizes
mercenaries and mercenarism. The United Nations
International Convention against the Recruitment, Use,
Financing and Training of Mercenaries, of4 December
1989, considers mercenarism to be an offence. It entered
into force on 20 October 2001.

Some countries have adopted related national laws
and regulations that contribute to their commitment
to better governance of the phenomenon. However, in
order to effectively combat mercenarism in its current
form, the adaptation of all instruments, taking into
account the evolution of the phenomenon in its various
current configurations, is a necessity requiring a more
in-depth update with which national legislation must be
aligned. Strengthening cooperation at the subregional,
regional and international levels, based on genuine
and decisive political resolve, is crucial to support the
implementation of those revised instruments.
In that regard, the members of the Economic
Community of Central African States have affirmed
their will to develop a strategy within the framework
of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee
on Security Questions in Central Africa, with the
technical support of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa, the African Union and international
partners, in order to eradicate the phenomenon of
mercenarism in our subregion.

