Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you once more, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would also like to reiterate
my thanks to Egypt, the Council's President last month,
as well as to its Permanent Representative, for having
efficiently presided over the Council 's work, in May and
for ensuring that certain topics of prime importance to
Member States in general, and to the Group of African
States in particular, continued to be part of the agenda
and work of the Council, bearing in mind that issues
pertinent to the situation in Africa account for more
than 60 per cent of the Council's work, albeit not in a
positive sense, in our opinion, as most of them relate
to sanctions and coercive measures that are based on
the feasibility concept, which guides, for instance, the
work of the so-called International Criminal Court
(ICC), including its report on my country, which is the
subject of this review.

It is important, however, to emphasize at the outset
that I am delivering this statement in my capacity as
the Permanent Representative of the Republic of the
Sudan on behalf of the President of the Republic of the
Sudan, in respect of the Court's report, which is being
discussed solely in the Security Council. I would like
to reiterate that we have no connection whatsoever to
the Court, to which the Council makes referrals within
its purview, not pursuant to the provisions of a certain
Chapter of the Charter of the United Nations, but in
accordance with an article in the Rome Statute of the
ICC that is not applicable to the United Nations or to
any State Member unless such State wilfully elects to
be party thereto or subjects itself to the jurisdiction of
the Court. This is the principle of pacta sunt servanda,
stipulated in article 34 of the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties of 1969, which has become part and
parcel of established customary international law and
ofjus cogens, which cannot be set aside.

That leads me directly to resolution 1593 (2005),
which the Council adopted under Chapter VII of the
Charter and whereby it referred the situation in Darfur
to the Court. It should be noted that article 13 (b) of
the Rome Statute does not indicate in any way, neither
expressly or implicitly, that the Statute is applicable to
States that are not party thereto. The Council might
also recall that this fact is repeatedly emphasized in
every provision throughout the Statute that relates
to non-party States, such as the provisions covering
issues of cooperation. It should also be noted that the
application of article 13 (b) has opened the door wide
for political manipulation and for the use of power
politics and influence to subjugate some victimized
countries and compromise the status of the African
continent, since only those considerations are used
as decisive factors in making referrals to the Court
by the main political organ of the United Nations,
namely, the Security Council. That is a fact that I
attest to here before the Council in my capacity as
the representative of a country with an authentic and
long-standing membership in the Organization, and
which is substantiated by international law in its letter,
interpretation and rationale.

The least one can say about the decision to make

this referral, upon which the Court has to date submitted
23 reports to the Security Council, is that it was made
on entirely unfounded grounds. In addition, paragraph
6 of the resolution I mentioned, which was the result
of bargaining among some permanent members of the
Council, rendered the resolution null and void. I should
like to refer to some quotations from what was said in
the Council about the resolution by the representative
of Brazil when it was adopted, on 31 March 2005. Here
is what the representataive of Brazil had to say:

"Brazil also was not in a position to support
operative paragraph 6, through which the Council
recognizes the existence of exclusive jurisdiction, a
legal exception that is inconsistent in international
law." (S/PV5J58, p. 11)

At the same meeting, the representative of the
Philippines stated,

"[o]perative paragraph 6 of the resolution is killing
its credibility" (ibid, p. 6).

Nor was the representative of your country, France,
Mr. President, happy with adoption of the resolution.
He stated that

"the jurisdictional immunity provided for in the text
we have just adopted obviously cannot run counter
to other international obligations of States and will
be subject, where appropriate, to the interpretation
of the courts of my country." (ibid, p. 8)

The International Criminal Court seized on that
flawed decision of the Council, and the Court's Office
of the Prosecutor made it a point to add to its defects,
inadequacy and irrelevance by insisting on disregarding
article 53 of the Rome Statute, thereby creating a deep
rift between the principles ofjustice and peace, which
are intrinsically complementary. We have a shining
example in Africa, for instance, when South Africa,
a leading nation in the struggle against racism and
apartheid, succeeded in blending the two principles
and created an exemplary system of both justice and
peace, and chose to look beyond the horizon and build
a future. The same continent - Africa - is now prey
to the ruthless efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor,
which wrote its present report while seeking to exercise
the power and apply the jurisdiction of the Court
selectively over the Continent.

On the other hand, successive resolutions of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
and decisions of African Summits issued since 2008,
including the latest two resolutions adopted at those
meetings, have invariably condemned the practice of
the Court to target African leaders. It is unfortunate
that countries of the Northern Hemisphere have
practically exempted themselves, thanks to Security
Council resolutions and bilateral agreements that
grant them immunity, while African countries suffer
discriminatory treatment that is worse today than
what they suffered during the colonial era and in
which they are denied the right to equal sovereignty
and their leaders are targeted. Meanwhile, the Court
seems to have no competence whatsoever over certain
nationalities, no matter how gruesome the crimes
committed by the holders of those nationalities are and
regardless of the status of the perpetrators, from the
top of the hierarchy, both political and military, to the
lowest-ranking soldier.

The report also notes that courts in South Africa
are fulfilling the country's obligations under the Rome
Statute, to which South Africa is a party, and hastens to
anxiously take up an issue that is still being appealed
by the Court. However, I should like to include here
an excerpt from our previous report of December 2015,
depicting a moment when the Foreign Minister of
South African stood in a meeting of the Assembly of
States Parties to the Rome Statute, in November 2015,
and said:

(spoke in English)

"I wish to be absolutely clear. The perceptions of
inequality and unfairness in the practice of the ICC
do not only emanate from the Court's relationship
with the Security Council. We ask ourselves,
as have many, why no investigations have been
open in Afghanistan, Iraq and Palestine after long
periods of preliminary analysis notwithstanding
clear evidence of violation?"

(spoke in Arabic)

African countries have received the President of the
Republic of the Sudan in fulfilment of their rights and
obligations as independent sovereign States, pursuant
to the provisions of international law, as reflected in
its well-established norms and customs, as well as in
article 98 of the Rome Statute of the ICC itself, but the
Court has chosen to misinterpret that article and apply
it selectively, as we explained earlier. Likewise, African
countries received the President of the Republic of the
Sudan pursuant to the provision of article 23.2 of the
Constitutive Act of the African Union, which continued
to be reiterated at the Union's successive summits, with
directives to Union members to abide by, adhere to and
act upon.

The African continent, which is now witnessing
such discriminatory treatment against its people, knows
for sure that it was not a culprit in the horrors of the
Second World War, which led to the establishment of the
court in 1998, and that the credibility and impartiality
of the Court - which have in fact been lacking since its
inception - are being jeopardized by those who make
its membership a cornerstone of their foreign policy,
while providing the best part of its financial resources,
monopolizing its offices, selectively nominating
candidates for the remainder of its posts on the basis
of political affiliation, and mandating that what
development assistance and humanitarian aid they give
is conditional to acceding to its membership.

How can we end any armed conflict in the world?
How has the United Nations ended armed conflicts
around the world? Has it not been Via negotiated,
political and peaceful settlement? That is exactly what
the Sudan has done, in cooperation with the United
Nations in Abuja in 2006 and when the Abuja agreement
was later superceded in Qatar. Holding meetings with
those who reject peaceful settlement, the way the
Prosecutor has done, undermines international peace
and the rights of the victims. Peaceful settlement is the
practical and sole interpretation of what the Council has
called for in claiming that there is no military solution
to the conflict. The Prosecutor and her supporters can
ask those who are thwarting the peace process why they
are doing so.

When the Council reviewing the Court's report
on Libya, the representative of the Russian Federation
pointed out that the report in fact appeared to be more
of a report from a monitoring mission. That would
typically apply, word for word, to the report on the
Sudan before us. We would also like to add that the
Prosecutor's Office, headed by the Prosecutor of the
Court, has resorted to blatant lying when it refers,
in paragraphs 14 to 20, of the deteriorating situation
in Darfur and the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation, in what looks like a pretext to justify the
perpetuation of the Court's jurisdiction over the Sudan.

We would like to call attention the report of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2016/268) for the same period covered by
the court's report, which was reviewed by the Council
on 6 April (see S/PV.7666), and which spoke of a
decline in cases of tribal conflict, a decline in criminal
acts, an increase in coordination between Sudanese
security agencies and the Operation with respect to
the prosecution of perpetrators of attacks against
the mission's personnel, and a decline in criminal
acts against voluntary organizations, and as regards
national efforts to protect human rights and establish
local branches of the National Commission for Human
Rights in all the states of Darfur region.

I would like also to draw attention to the recentjoint
report of the joint working group of the United Nations,
the African Union and the Government of the Sudan,
issued on 22 May, which acknowledges the completion
of procedures for an administrative referendum in
Darfur as a last key step towards implementing the
2011 Doha Peace Agreement for Peace in Darfur; the
role of the Implementation Follow-Up Commission in
monitoring the implementation of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur; a higher number of cases of
human rights violations reported in Darfur, which
reflects the enhanced awareness of citizens regarding
their rights and growing confidence in relevant
Government agencies; increasing cooperation between
the African Union Mission in Sudan and Government
authorities in Darfur; the interest of state governors in
and their willingness to cooperate with humanitarian
organizations and allow them full and unhindered
access to the areas they may wish to reach; the efforts
aimed at containing any tribal conflicts; and most
importantly, the fact that environmental degradation
and climate change are among the root causes of the
conflict in Darfur. Consequently, do we not have the
right to come to the conclusion that the ICC is willing
to lie to justify its ongoing exercise ofjurisdiction over
the Sudan?
Finally, the ICC is seeking to exercise itsjurisdiction
based on the alleged and unfounded presumption that
the judicial system in the Sudan is unwilling and unable
to administer justice. In that respect, I would only like
to recite, calmly and objectively, the following excerpt
from the latest joint report of the United Nations, the
African Union and the Government of the Sudan on the
situation in Darfur:

(spoke in English)

"The joint working group acknowledges the
efforts of the state Governments and Prosecutor
for Darfur Special Crimes Court to address the
crimes committed during the conflict and restore
law and order through the deployment of additional
police, corrections and judicial human and material
resources across the five states of Darfur, including

legal advisers, prosecutors, legal aid assistants and
family child protection units."

(spoke in Arabic)

I hope I have thus made my contribution to the
Council's work in respect of establishing the fallacious
nature of the report of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
ICC, in the hope the Security Council will decide to set
aside such reports and play close heed to the demands
made by the Open-Ended Committee of African
Ministers on International Criminal Court, which was
set up by the African Summit held in South Africa to
end the meddling of the Court in the African continent.

