Mr. Jallow: I feel particularly honoured, first, by
the Council's decision to appoint me as the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), and, secondly, by its having invited me to
address the Council specifically on our plans for
implementation of the Tribunal's completion strategy
and generally to report on the work of the Tribunal. I
shall endeavour, to the best of my ability, to discharge
my duties as Prosecutor, and I look forward to the
cooperation of all States and to the support of the
United Nations in this regard.

Since my appointment, 1 have had a briefing
session with my immediate predecessor, Ms. Carla Del
Ponte, whose immense and invaluable contribution to
improving the efficiency of the ICTR, and, more
generally, to the cause of international criminal justice,
I wish to acknowledge. Representatives of the
Government of Rwanda whom I have met here in New
York and in Arusha all have assured me of the
cooperation of their respective Governments with the
Tribunal for the effective discharge of its mandate. I
am greatly encouraged by such assurances and look
forward to fruitful cooperation with them. I myself
propose to go to Rwanda shortly for consultations with
that Government.

1 am also pleased to report to the Council that I am
now based in Arusha, the headquarters of the Tribunal,
where I have been holding discussions with the President,
as well as with the Registrar, the Deputy Prosecutor,
Mr. Bongani Majola, and the rest of the staff.

As I enter the early stages of my mandate, I am
acutely conscious of the challenges that lie ahead. The
process of international criminal justice is for many
reasons, many of which have been well documented,
very difficult. But it is a process which can and must be
undertaken if we are to succeed in reducing, if not
eliminating, impunity and preventing egregious
Violations of human rights which are a blot on our
conscience and a threat to peace, justice and security.

I believe that there has been a substantial learning
experience, which should now provide an adequate
foundation for this next, crucial phase in the Tribunal's
mandate. Our focus in this phase will be set firmly on
the proper and effective implementation of the
completion strategy. In that respect, I shall be guided
by the Statute of the Tribunal, particularly with regard
to the selection for prosecution of those persons who
bear the greatest responsibility for the tragedy which
occurred in Rwanda. Similarly, the concerns of the
Council, expressed in inter alia its resolution 1503
(2003), of 27 August, will guide the policy of the
Office of the Prosecutor.

In the ensuing months, while the investigation
and prosecution processes continue - particularly with
the cases involving top Government and military
leaders - my staff and I will devote considerable
effort to reviewing the case load with a view to
determining which charges should be proceeded with
or transferred to national jurisdictions, as well as the
measures which need to be taken to meet the target date
set by the Council for the conclusion of all
investigations, the completion of all trial activities at
first instance, and the conclusion of the work of the
Tribunal, as stated in the resolution.

I have already put in place mechanisms for a
review of the cases of those in detention without
trial - those have not been brought before the courts;
of the 16 indicted fugitives who are at large; of the 26
targets of investigation; and of the 40 cases earmarked
for possible transfer to national jurisdictions. The aim
of the review is to determine within the next few
months more realistic figures, which I do not expect to
exceed and which may indeed fall below the
completion strategy ceilings indicated for the workload
of the Tribunal.

With regard to work in progress, there are
currently four trials involving 12 accused before the
Trial Chambers. We have the so-called Military 1 case,
with four accused; the Butare case, with six accused;
and the Gacumbitsi and Ndindabahizi cases, with one
accused each.

Moreover, the Tribunal plans to commence two
additional trials, involving four accused each, on
3 November 2003, following the filing of first charges
by the Office of the Prosecutor. These are the so-called
Government cases, which will bring to the dock a large
number of political leaders of Cabinet rank who were
responsible for, inter alia, the planning of the genocide
and instigating others to carry out the terrible events of
that tragedy. The Military 1 trial, the Butare trial and
the Government cases are big and voluminous cases
which involve multiple accused persons and high
numbers of witnesses per case. They are at a relatively
early stage of development.

All these cases are, by their nature, quite
complicated and difficult. It is therefore not easy to
predict how long each will take or how long the two
aforementioned trials will last. We have only our
experience from the previous multi-accused and multi-
witness trials on which to base estimates. The
experience of cases such as the Media trial, which
lasted three years, and the Cyangugu trial, which also
lasted three years, enable us to estimate roughly that
the Butare trial may last four to five years and the
Military II trial may last about two and a half years.

The Gacumbitsi and Ndindabahizi trials are
relatively small. Both the Chambers and the Office of
the Prosecutor plan to complete the hearing of all the
evidence and the closing arguments in those two cases
before the end of 2003. If that happens, it will have
taken less than four months per trial to complete the
hearing of the evidence.

For our part, we in the Office of the Prosecutor
will make greater efforts to use the Rules of Procedure
and Evidence which are aimed at shortening trials. For
instance, the time required to adduce the testimony of
genocide experts has been considerably shortened by
resort to Rule 94 bis of the Rules of Procedure and
Evidence, which permits the presentation of written,
instead of oral, testimony to Chambers under specified
circumstances. We shall also constantly review
witnesses in order to avoid duplication and wasting the
time of the Trial Chambers. A major effort will also be
launched to ensure that all trial teams meticulously
keep to the Rules of Procedure and Evidence in order
to reduce the incidence of motions, which consume a
large part of the Tribunals' time. Internal measures are
also being implemented in the Office to enhance the
monitoring and supervision of prosecutions as well as
to foster a greater sense of urgency on the part of the
staff with regard to the work at hand.

Regarding the other accused currently in
detention at the facility in Arusha, the Office of the
Prosecutor is ready to proceed in the first quarter of
2004 with trials in six cases involving nine accused.
Another seven cases, each with a single accused, could
be ready for trial in the second quarter of 2004.
However, owing to limits in the availability of
Chambers to handle these trials, I do not expect that all
the cases that will be trial-ready in the first and the
second quarters of 2004 will go to trial during those
periods, unless there is an increase - from the current
four to nine - in the number of ad litem Judges made
available to the ICTR at the same time, and unless an
amendment is also made to the Statute to increase the
competence of those Judges, as proposed by the
President of the Tribunal. Those measures would
enable the ICTR to commence the trials during the
periods mentioned, and I would urge that a decision be
taken in that direction.

In line with the strategy of concentrating on the
prosecution and trial of the most senior leaders
suspected of being most responsible for crimes falling
within the ICTR's jurisdiction, I have also begun the
process of reviewing the case of each accused who is
awaiting trial, with a View to assessing the level of
responsibility. With respect to those who do not meet
the standard, the Office of the Prosecutor will
immediately take steps to file motions in Chambers,
under Rule 11 bis, requesting that indictments against
them be suspended and that their cases be referred to
other jurisdictions for trial. The review will also assess
the relative strength of each case. Should there be any
case with significantly questionable chances of
success, a decision will have to be taken whether to
withdraw the indictment or indictments. It is quite
possible that that process will reduce the number of
those awaiting trial from the current 21. I plan,
following that review, to make the cases of the rest of
those detained ready for trial before the end of 2005 .

With regard to guilty pleas f the case for which
has been very well put by the President of the Tribunal
for Yugoslavia - we at the ICTR are now adopting
much more of an open-door policy towards plea
bargains and, as a result, towards acceptance of guilty
pleas. This is an acceptable part of the criminal justice
process, provided that the rules relating to protection of
the accused and to fair trial are scrupulously observed.
Once that is done, I think it is fair enough that plea-
bargain processes be engaged in and that guilty pleas
resulting from such bargains be respected and
recognized. In the ICTR, of course, we have had past
experiences which have inhibited guilty pleas or plea
agreements. But we are committed to removal of the
factors that have so far inhibited detainees from
entering into such agreements. If there is any success in
this direction, we are certain it will again reduce the
number of detainees that will eventually have to be
processed in full and lengthy proceedings before the
chambers of the ICTR.
In addition, there are twenty-six new targets for
investigation. Again, with regard to those targets we
are carrying out a process of assessing the evidence
collected so far in respect of each suspect. Where the
evidence is weak and there are poor prospects for
producing fresh, strengthening evidence, the file will
probably have to be closed and no more resources and
time spent on it.

Where the evidence indicates that the target is not
one of the most senior leaders suspected of being most
responsible for crimes within the ICTR jurisdiction, I
propose to take such measures as are necessary to
divert the target away from prosecution before the
ICTR, and to explore possibilities of transfer to
national jurisdictions.

These measures would include transferring
targets to national jurisdictions. I believe making
allowance for the fact that some of the targeted
suspects may not be reached for reasons of death or
other cause and that some who are apprehended may be
jointly charged and tried, it is reasonable to assume
that the final number of indictments within this
category will be lower than the 26 projected so far.

An important mechanism, therefore, for the
successful implementation of the completion strategy is
the referral to national jurisdictions of those cases in
which the accused does not fall within the category of
those bearing the greatest responsibility for the
atrocities, whether the accused are already in detention
pending trial or they are merely targets for investigation.
The numbers of persons that we may have to deal with in
this manner will become known only after the
completion of the review that is in progress.

My immediate plan in this regard after the review
would be to establish contact with States in which
those in detention were arrested to negotiate the
transfer of the accused concerned to their jurisdictions
where appropriate.
There is another category of cases comprising 40
case files which were partly investigated but, because it
was clear at the very early stages of investigations that
the targets in question bore low levels of responsibility,
they were already earmarked for transfer to national
jurisdictions. We do intend to carry out a review of
these files, with a View to determining the viability of
each case before final plans can be drawn up for
transfer. Those cases that clearly have no prospect of
success will be expunged from the system, as it would
serve no purpose to send them to national jurisdictions.

Regarding the remainder of the cases, I intend to
negotiate with States, including the Government of
Rwanda, for their transfer to the respective national
jurisdictions. Because investigations are not complete
in many of these cases, I am convinced that States that
agree to receive such files, including Rwanda, will
need assistance from the international community and
from the United Nations to complete the inquiries and
to mount the prosecutions under the supervision of the
ICTR, which will continue to retain its primary
responsibility for these cases.

It is evident from what I have said that, whilst the
ICTR has formulated a well considered completion
strategy, in line with the request of the Council, the
picture of the full extent of our workload will become
clearer in the few months ahead, and probably before
the end of the year.

International cooperation from States remains a
crucial factor in the successful conclusion of the
strategy. Several high-ranking military and political
indictees remain at large. We shall continue to search
for them and to negotiate with the States in which they
reside for their surrender to the Tribunal or their
prosecution by the host State. Further surrenders of
such high-level suspects to the Tribunal may also
require the Office of the Prosecutor (OTP) and the
Tribunal as a whole to re-evaluate their priorities in
terms of targets for prosecution.

Our planning is based on the assumption that we
shall receive the fullest cooperation from all States,
particularly those within whose jurisdiction the
fugitives are found. A policy of transferring
appropriate cases to national jurisdictions in order to
enable the Tribunal to deal with the major cases can
only succeed with the cooperation of States that are
willing and able to dispense justice under conditions of
due process and fair trial. Those who are willing but
are inhibited by shortcomings should receive assistance to
enable them to discharge their obligations. In all these
matters the Tribunal looks to the cooperation of all States
and ultimately to the support of the Security Council.

