Mr. Parrilla (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish):
For more than a week the international community and
the United Nations have been witnessing one of the most
flagrant violations of the most fundamental rules of

 

international law: Israel's new, active aggression against the
people of Lebanon. There is not and cannot be any
justification of this aggression. As it did in this Chamber
only three days ago, Cuba condemns and calls for an end
to Israel's aggression against the people of Lebanon.

We demand the following: Israel's implementation of
General Assembly resolutions and Security Council
resolution 425 (1978); respect for the territorial integrity,
sovereignty, independence and internationally recognized
boundaries of Lebanon; compensation for damage; the
return of all the occupied Arab territories; and recognition
of the right of the Palestinian people to a State of its own,
with Jerusalem as its capital. We join in the appeal to the
United Nations and the international community to assist
the Lebanese people in their reconstruction efforts.

We regret that it was not possible for the Security
Council to adopt draft resolution S/ 1996/292, which had
been submitted by a group of Arab countries. In our view,
the credibility of the Security Council is at stake here. Its
credibility is already being undermined by its unjustifiable
omissions and excesses, by its lack of democracy, by the
irrelevance of its decisions and by its abandonment of them,
by its headstrong hastiness and by its unacceptable
delaying: in other words, by its adoption of a double
standard. We all know that the Security Council is very
often impotent in the face of the veto. We believe also that
a kind of "silent veto" is deployed with the mere threat of
a negative vote.

Because it is the truth, we must state that the real
source of this latest conflict is the historical impunity for
actions taken against Arab nations. The United Nations, for
legal, political and ethical reasons, is obliged to support the
rights of any State Member against aggression of this kind.

Cuba, which has for more than 35 years been the
victim of terrorist acts and acts of aggression that have cost
many of our people their lives, has condemned, and
continues to condemn, any act of terrorism. But no reason
of national security, no reason of state, no pretext
associated with international or regional peace and security,
and not even a terrorist act could justify aggression, state
terrorism, the occupation of territories, the massacre of
civilians, the violation of the rules of international
humanitarian law or unilateral measures that silently murder
children, women and elderly people.

The right of the Lebanese people deserves to be
defended. Nowadays, there is much debate over the public
image of this Organization; but the problem is not one of
image, but one of deeds. The events of recent days have
shown that the principles that gave birth to the United
Nations are still alive. They have also shown that the
practice of the United Nations should be changed only in
accordance with those principles and only in their service.
