Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Since 11 September, the global community has moved
beyond condemnation, condolences and solidarity to
practical action against terrorism. To a very large
extent, that action is guided by resolution 1373 (2001),
which marked an exceptionally important step. We are
pleased to see that this dynamic continues. We remain
acutely aware that we must work in the spirit of
multilateralism and partnership to find new and
creative ways to face common threats in our
increasingly interdependent world.

I should like to offer my compliments to
Ambassador Greenstock and to the Vice-Chairmen of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) for the
remarkable work that they have accomplished.

(spoke in English)

On 19 September 2001, leaders of the Group of 8
(G-8) issued a statement that condemned the terrorist
attacks of 11 September and cited the 12 United
Nations counter-terrorism instruments as the standard
for international action in the fight against terrorism.
Those conventions and Security Council resolution
1373 (2001) provide us with the requisite counter-
terrorism architecture. We urge all countries to
implement these instruments as soon as they possibly
can.

Canada recently ratified the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism and, just last week, ratified the International
Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings.
That means we have now implemented all 12 United
Nations counter-terrorism instruments. I should like to
add that under our system, treaties are ratified only
when we have the necessary measures in place to
implement them.

In their 19 September statement, the G-8 leaders
also requested their foreign, finance, justice and other
relevant ministers to draw up a list of specific measures
to enhance counter-terrorism cooperation. As this
year's Chair of the G-8, Canada has initiated a
cooperative relationship with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee - one that, we hope, will mature into a
strong and effective partnership.

At the first meeting between the G-8 and the
CTC, the issues of capacity-building and outreach were
discussed. With respect to capacity-building, the G-8
respects the CTC as the central body for monitoring
and facilitating the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). The G-8 will cooperate closely with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, supporting its efforts in
any way that is appropriate.

In terms of capacity-building, we are aware that
members of the global community face challenges with
regard to both financial and human resources.
Technical assistance - providing expertise in a
number of fields, from the drafting of legislation to law
enforcement and security - is perhaps even more
important, and definitely more enduring, than financial
assistance.

Representatives of the G-8 and the CTC have
agreed to meet quarterly, with the next scheduled
meeting in June 2002. In the meantime, G-8 expert
groups and ministerial groups will also meet. We
believe that, by the time of the next exchange between
the G-8 and the CTC, we will have more progress, and
more significant progress, to report.

Multilateralism and partnership remain key if we
are to develop long-term solutions to this horrific
challenge to us all. The G-8 will focus on practical,
multidimensional action. The priorities and goals are
clear and the G-8 looks forward to cooperating with the
CTC as we all work to meet these goals. No single
country will be able to achieve its security on its own.

I wish to say a word about Secretariat support.
Canada is one of the countries most insistent on
limiting the growth of the United Nations budget. We
do recognize nonetheless that the membership cannot
just dump new, unsourced obligations on the
Secretariat. At the same time, we in Canada are also
one of the more insistent countries in urging that
resources be shifted to meet changing and new
priorities. In our view, counter-terrorism is such a
priority and we assume the Secretariat agrees. In fact,
some parts of the Secretariat have adjusted
appropriately and we call on those departments that
still have not done so to adjust their support so that the
CTC gets the back-up that it so urgently and
appropriately needs.

