Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): It is indeed a great
honour for me to speak at this very important debate.
I shall limit my statement to the issue of occupied
Palestinian territories.

The saga of Palestinian misfortune is often repeated

in international discourse without any effective remedy.
It is a unique story of the long suffering of one segment
of the human race inflicted by another, starting with
the occupation of land, the alteration of history and
then the escalation of violence and military incursions,
leading to the imposition of inhuman conditions on the
Palestinian people through the demolition of homes, the
confiscation of land, closures and blockades. The Gaza
borders have been subjected to a regime of closure
that is without precedent anywhere on the planet. The
quality of life of the Palestinians in the entire occupied
territories has been reduced to a subsistence level.
For example, in Gaza 1.7 people have been living in
a 360 square kilometre area. Of that number, 80 per
cent are extremely poor and rely on food handouts.
Some 90 per cent of the available water is unfit for
human consumption, and 30 per cent of vital medicines
are unavailable in the hospitals. Those are only a few
disturbing statistics that demonstrate the precarious
condition in which the people of Palestine, particularly
women and children, are languishing. Unfortunately,
all that is happening before the eyes of the international
community and in the absence of any resolute action.

Despite the global outcry and International Court
ofJustice advisory opinion against it (see A/ES-10/273),
Israel continues to build a separation wall on the West
Bank, dividing and isolating communities, destroying
livelihoods and preventing hundreds of thousands
access to their jobs, families, markets, schools and
hospitals. The repeated appeals of the international
community to improve the deteriorating conditions of
the Palestinian people remain unheeded.

It is abundantly clear now that there cannot be a
military solution to that longstanding conflict. Peace
cannot be achieved in that land by force or through
military means. Only through negotiations can there
be a viable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The Security Council cannot evade its role, particularly
since its own resolutions adopted over time on the matter
remain unimplemented. The stalled peace process must
restart. We believe that the Fourth Geneva Convention,
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978), the
principle of land for peace, the terms of refernce of the
Madrid Peace Conference, the road map and the Arab
Peace Initiative are the best guides for achieving a
peaceful solution. We see a flicker of hope in Secretary
of State John Kerry's efforts to bring the parties to the
negotiating table. We fully support that initiative.

The root cause of the conflict is the occupation,
which must end sooner than later. The settlements
present an existential threat to the viability of a future
Palestinian State. They are contrary to international law
and the road map, and must therefore cease. If peace in
the Middle East is to be achieved, we must prevail upon
Israel to cease further illegal settlements and dismantle
the existing ones, in line with its obligations under
article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention. In that

regard, we consider the recent action of the European
Union to be the right move in the right direction.

The upgraded status of Palestine at the United
Nations last year was a small step towards amending
a historical injustice. Much work lies ahead to create
the conditions that will allow a meaningful and just
solution. Our goal remains realizing the inalienable
and legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people
by creating an independent, viable and contiguous
State of Palestine based on the 1967 borders with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel in
peace and harmony. The realization of that goal needs
our collective resolve. Let us all commit to working for
lasting peace in the Middle East.

