Almost four months after the failed move by the United States to destroy the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), the Security Council is again considering the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. According to resolution 2231 (2015), the JCPOA was concluded as "a comprehensive, long-term and proper solution to the Iranian nuclear issue" in order "to build a new relationship with Iran" and to promote and facilitate "normal economic and trade contacts and cooperation with Iran". The JCPOA is an agreement coming out of hard-won negotiations involving difficult gives and takes, and any proposal for its revision, renegotiation or extension would run counter to resolution 2231(2015) and is absolutely unacceptable to Iran. After its withdrawal from the JCPOA, on 8 May 2018, the United States reimposed all its nuclear-related sanctions. By pursing a hostile policy towards the JCPOA and Iran since then, the United States has also engaged in persistent widespread public and private harassment of Iran's business partners. By doing so, the United States has committed multiple cases of "significant non-performance" under the JCPOA. As such, it is in continuous systematic material breach of its legal obligations under resolution 2231 (2015), the Charter of the United Nations and international law. Likewise, by brazenly threatening other States to either violate resolution 2231 (2015) or face punishment, the United States has not only failed to honour its own commitments under that resolution but has also substantively obstructed the implementation of commitments by other Member States. The United States has also defied the unanimous order of the International Court of Justice, issued on 3 October 2018, which includes an obligation to remove impediments to humanitarian trade with Iran. Nevertheless, instead of taking remedial measures, as authorized in the JCPOA, Iran, upon the request of the E-3 - France, Germany and the United Kingdom - exercised restraint and strategic patience for one year. That maximum restraint was met with the so-called "maximum pressure" of the United States and its ever-increasing unlawful sanctions, as well as the utter failure of the E-3 and the European Union to implement their commitments. That left us with no choice but to take certain remedial steps, in full conformity with the paragraphs 26 and 36 of the JCPOA, pursuant to which, in the case of "a re-introduction or re-imposition of the sanctions", Iran has the right "to cease performing its commitments under this JCPOA in whole or in part". Therefore, Iran's steps are in full accordance with our rights and commitments under the JCPOA and, more important, are completely reversible. The damages and suffering inflicted upon Iran, however, are almost entirely irreversible. Over the past four years, the United States has imposed over 1,500 sanctions against Iran, targeting nearly every sector of our economy and practically removing every benefit Iran could draw from the JCPOA. Such sanctions, which are expected to increase even up to the very last minute of the current United States Administration, is, in fact, an all-out war with economic measures instead of weapons. According to the United States officials, the objective of sanctions is the "starvation" of the Iranian people through weaponizing food and medicine, which is prohibited even in wartime. Sanctions prevent the import of humanitarian goods, including vital medicines and medical equipment needed for patients, particularly those with rare or complicated diseases. At a time when Iran is experiencing one of the worst outbreaks of the coronavirus disease, sanctions are drastically hindering our national response to the pandemic. The United States claim that humanitarian goods are exempt from sanctions is an absolute lie. As an example, even today, we cannot easily import medicine for relieving the breathing problems of those injured by chemical weapons that were provided by some Western countries to Saddam and used by him during his aggression against Iran. The United States also claims that sanctions are "not directed at the people of Iran". This is also a sheer hypocrisy, as sanctions target the most vulnerable people the most, harm the poor more than the rich, the ill people more than the healthy ones and infants and children more than adults. Sanctions do not merely create economic hardships; in many cases, sanctions claim the innocent lives of people from all walks of life. By any measure, the United States sanctions are illegal, illegitimate, immoral, inhumane and oppressive, and have no designation other than economic terrorism and crime against humanity. Yet sanctions are only one part of the destructive bullying policies and practices of the United States against my country, which include its systematic Iranophobia campaign, warmongering, military adventurism in the Persian Gulf, interference in our domestic affairs and many other unlawful and provocative actions. The living example of this bankrupt policy is the horrific assassination of martyr Qasem Soleimani, almost one year ago. This terrorist act, conducted at the direct order of the United States President, is a gross violation of international law. There are also serious indications that the assassination of martyr Fakhrizadeh, a prominent Iranian scientist, on 27 November 2020, was conducted by the Israeli regime - the closest regional ally of the United States with a long dark record of such terrorist acts against Iranian nuclear scientists in the past. During the past four years, the United States and its regional allies have, through a series of orchestrated measures, employed all possible means, including illegitimate and unlawful measures, to destroy the JCPOA. As an example, you, Mr. President, and Council members witnessed this summer how stubbornly the United States attempted to abuse the process of the Council and the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015) to extend the arms-related provisions of that resolution. However, even when the United States proposed draft resolution (S/2020/797), in addition to United States itself, received only one more affirmative vote, the United States did not stop its destructive policy and unsuccessfully attempted, through abusing the so-called snapback mechanism, to destroy the JCPOA and 2231 mechanism altogether. This time, none of the Council members supported the United States request and, more importantly, 13 members of the Council rejected it, orally and in writing, and consequently two consecutive Presidents of the Council stated that they were not in a position to take any action with regard to the United States claims. Hence, the United States move faced a total defeat in the Council. The United States is now desperately attempting to raise the same issue in the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly. This unlawful move aims to establish and fund a Security Council sanctions regime without a Council mandate. United Nations Member States are expected not to allow United Nations mechanisms to be misused and, if needed, vote against United States proposals on the programme budget for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) for 2021. Once again, I sincerely thank members of the Council for their valuable support. Their votes and voices were not merely in support of the JCPOA as a historic achievement of diplomacy but were strong support for multilateralism and the rule of law and a loud and clear "no" to unilateralism and bullying. The continuation of such support is critical for ensuring the full and unconditional implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA by all its participants. As the arms- and travel-related provisions of resolution 2231 (2015), consistent with the established timelines in the resolution, were terminated on 18 October 2020, all other provisions of the resolution must be implemented and terminated according to the timelines identified therein. Iran has paid a heavy price and has done much more than its fair share to preserve the JCPOA. Therefore, no one can expect us to do more. In fact, those JCPOA participants who have for years violated their commitments under resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA must bear more responsibility. Iran has been implementing its commitments under the JCPOA. However, the illegal United States sanctions as well as the E-3's non-compliance with their JCPOA commitments have not only deprived Iran from its benefits foreseen in the JCPOA, that is, to enjoy normal economic and trade relations with others, but have also inflicted severe damages and sufferings upon our economy and people. The so-called maximum pressure policy of the United States against Iran has faced with our maximum resistance and has not been able to bring us to our knees, as United States officials have been dreaming. It should have been clear by now that the policy of intimidation and pressure on Iran does not and will not yield any result. The only way out is to go back to the prompt, full and unconditional implementation of the JCPOA. As has been clearly stated by our officials, as soon as all JCPOA participants start implementing their commitments unconditionally, effectively and in full, Iran will also resume implementing all its JCPOA commitments. This has always been our principled position throughout recent years, and now it has become a binding legal obligation for the Government following the recent adoption of a new law by our Parliament. The JCPOA cannot be linked to any other issues, as the agenda of the nuclear talks from the beginning was the nuclear issue. We decided not to allow other issues to complicate the already difficult negotiations. That was a very wise decision made by all JCPOA participants. Therefore, any attempt now to link the future of the JCPOA to extraneous issues will be doomed to fail. We have on numerous occasions made our position on the defensive capabilities of our country quite clear. To develop a conventional missile programme is an inherent right of any country under international law, and Iran is no exception. Consequently, Iran will not negotiate its legitimate ballistic missile programme. Living in such a volatile region as the Middle East, we will not allow our security and conventional defensive capability be compromised, restricted or undermined. Bullying policies of certain Powers will not intimidate Iran to relinquish its legitimate defensive means. The only source of instability and insecurity in our region is the presence of a large number of American forces in almost all Iran's neighbouring countries, the Persian Gulf and the Oman Sea, as well as the flow of unprecedented amounts of the most sophisticated weaponry by the United States and other Western countries to this region. The United States must leave our region immediately. The Persian Gulf region has been suffering from many years of foreign intervention and conflicts. This region is turned into a powder keg as a result of the unfettered flow of dangerous weapons from Western countries. In order to sell more weapons to this region, these countries sow discord and apply a divide and rule policy among countries in the region. It is high time for regional countries to engage in good faith and work towards the establishment of a better, safer and more prosperous region. Our Hormuz Peace Endeavor is a recipe for bringing regional countries closer to each other with the aim of resolving their differences and establishing friendlier relations among them. We hope that our honest and sincere call for opening a new page in regional cooperation will be heeded by our neighbours in the Persian Gulf soon. Finally, our observations on Secretary-General's report (S/2020/1177) are contained in my letter already sent to the Council covering our views on issues that I did not address in my remarks today.
