At the outset, allow me to convey my sincere thanks, through Mr. Sergei Lavrov, to the Russian Federation for convening this important meeting. I should also like to convey our utmost gratitude to the Secretary-General for his valuable efforts to promote security and peace in the exceptional and difficult circumstances that the world is currently undergoing. I should also like to take this opportunity to reaffirm our support for the Secretary-General's initiative, the role of the United Nations and multilateral action. The Middle East region has taken on extreme geostrategic importance at both the regional and international levels owing to its political and economic heft. That is not to mention its historical cultural importance and its moral and symbolic place in the world. For decades, the region has been feeling the effects of crises - both longstanding and recent - whose implications for security and stability and whose impacts on relations among the region's countries are ongoing. Tension and strife have been the region's hallmarks. That makes us vulnerable to flareups of existing conflicts and outbreaks of new conflicts, especially when the logic of arms prevails over the choice for dialogue. In that connection, I should like to point out that the restoration of security and stability to the region cannot be treated in isolation from the overall situation in the Middle East, and above all the continuing Israeli occupation of Arab territory and the prolongation of the Palestinian problem with no solution in sight, with its various regional and international dimensions and implications. In our view, it is impossible for the region to regain its security and stability in the absence of a just and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian problem based on United Nations resolutions, the internationally agreed terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the two-State solution. We must also push ahead with solutions to other regional conflicts and crises, particularly in Syria and Yemen. At the same time, addressing regional security must go beyond the purely local dimension to include the regional and international dimensions. All these factors intersect and interrelate. It is therefore necessary to address them through a comprehensive approach that spans the sphere of security, politics and economics, and takes into account regional particularities and the priorities, interests and concerns of the various parties involved. That would help to find common ground for constructive dialogue to minimize tensions, build trust, ease concerns, manage crises, prevent the outbreak of new conflicts and avoid fuelling those that already exist. The tension and sectarian polarization rampant in the region only serve to undermine the settlement of existing crises and conflicts and exacerbate the many cross-border challenges and threats faced by the countries of the region, including terrorism, piracy, threats to maritime navigation and energy supplies, and the coronavirus disease pandemic, all of which demand a reformulation of cooperation and collective action. Tunisia remains committed to international legitimacy and the Charter of the United Nations, and wishes only to serve the interests of international peace and security. It therefore stresses the need to promote collective security and constructive cooperation, and calls for the resolution of conflicts by means of dialogue and peaceful means, while avoiding escalation. We must focus on factors conducive to security and stability. That means resolving existing conflicts, standing up to terrorist organizations, preventing the development or use of weapons of mass destruction, respecting the sovereignty of States, refraining from intervention in their internal affairs, eschewing the threat or use of force, and building a consensus that enshrines peaceful coexistence, mutual respect, good-neighbourliness, compliance with international law and the implementation of United Nations resolutions. Reaching that stage and achieving those goals demands first and foremost that we promote a climate of trust and preventive diplomacy. All parties at the regional and international levels must shoulder their responsibilities and fulfil their commitments, especially when it comes to resolving ongoing issues and conflicts and eliminating causes of tension and threats to security and stability.
