Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): My delegation has
carefully examined the draft resolution before us today
concerning the establishment of an export/import
mechanism to monitor and verify Iraq's undertaking not
to re-establish weapons capabilities proscribed under
Security Council resolutions. We therefore deem this
mechanism, developed pursuant to resolution 715 (1991),
to be critical for gathering pertinent information to
determine whether Iraq's commitments to refrain from
reconstituting its proscribed weapons programmes are
consistent with its deeds. In this vein, we consider
unconditional implementation of and compliance with this
mechanism to be fundamental prerequisites for any
decision by the Security Council to reduce or lift
sanctions on items covered by the relevant resolutions and
plans.

The Indonesian delegation attaches great significance
to adopting a resolution that clearly specifies the functions
of the export/import mechanism and the manner in which
it will be enforced. In this regard, therefore, my
delegation wishes to reiterate that the purpose of
establishing this mechanism is to establish a system for
gathering timely information from States in which are
located companies that are contemplating sales or supplies
to Iraq of items covered by the mechanism.

We support the notion that this export/import
mechanism is not a regime for international licensing, nor
should it undermine Iraq's legitimate right to import or
export, for non-proscribed purposes, items and technology
necessary for the promotion of its economic and social
development. In this connection, we also wish to stress
that every effort should be made to ensure that the
provisions of the mechanism are systematically applied
without prejudice to the operation of existing or future
non-proliferation agreements or regimes on the
international or regional level.

My delegation strongly believes that the ultimate
success of the draft resolution will be profoundly
conditioned by the determined efforts of the parties
concerned to comply with the mechanism's obligations
and responsibilities. We therefore urgently call on all
parties to refrain from any activities that may circumvent
the functioning of the export/import mechanism. For this
to be achieved, my delegation believes that a cooperative
attitude must prevail between all States, international
organizations, the Special Commission, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the Committee established
under resolution 661 (1990).

 

We further believe that the export/import mechanism
should be flexible enough to accommodate changing
circumstances. In this connection, we stress the important
task given to the Council, as reflected in paragraph 9 of the
draft resolution, to review the mechanism in light of
changing conditions and to amend it if necessary after
appropriate consultations with interested States. To assist in
this important task, we call on the Secretary-General and on
the Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency to provide the Council with a consolidated progress
report at six-month intervals.

On the whole, my delegation supports the provisions
of the draft resolution concerning the implementation of
procedures to monitor Iraq's compliance with the
export/import mechanism. My delegation deems the
procedures established under the mechanism to be fair and
well balanced. Also, we are confident that the draft
resolution accurately identifies and addresses the major
issues and concerns associated with this complex question.

In light of these observations, my delegation will vote
in favour of the draft resolution. We believe that it will not
only fortify the existing system of verification, but will also
serve to strengthen the Council's capacity to monitor Iraq's
compliance, particularly in respect of proscribed weapons
programmes. Consequently, my delegation believes that the
Council will indeed be in a more advantageous position to
assess the full extent of Iraq's resolve to carry out the
actions mandated by the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

My delegation strongly feels that, should it be
determined that Iraq is in fact in compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution
687 (1991), it is most important that the Council should,
without delay, commence a full review of the sanctions
imposed on Iraq by the Council, so that the harsh suffering
inflicted on its people may finally come to an end.

