Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I welcome
the presence of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Jan Kubis in the Chamber and I thank him for
his briefing and his work at the head of United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Through
the Special Representative, I would like to commend
the efforts of the international and local Mission staff,
who work in complex conditions and, unfortunately,
sometimes even sacrifice their own lives. I wouldalso
like to welcome the Ambassador of Afghanistan,
Mr. Tanin, and thank him for his intervention.

I associate myself in advance with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union.

Afghanistan has entered a period marked by
profound changes: two transitions, a security transition
and a political transition are under way. The year
2014 will see the end of the military presence of the
international coalition in the form that we have known so
far. A new mission of advice, training and support will
take over from the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF), in accordance with the commitments
entered into at the NATO Summit in Chicago in 2012
to support the Afghan security forces over the long run.
Similarly, Afghanistan has already been preparing
for many months for the presidential election, the first
round of which is scheduled for 5 April. That election
will clearly show that democracy has taken root in the
country. The peaceful and lawful transfer ofpresidential
authority is a sufficiently rare event to celebrate. A new
President, the second since the fall of the Taliban, will
take over the stewardship of the country, and we will be
there to support him in fulfilling his mission.

We have just adopted resolution 2145 (2014).
UNAMA's mandate has been extended for one year
without major changes because of the election of the
new Afghan Government in 2014 and because of other
uncertainties that still have an impact on the shape
of the future security arrangement. In that context,
we believe that UNAMA, which is the centre of the
international community's action in Afghanistan and
which has proved itself over the course of 10 years,
must be able to act next year based on a solid mandate.

The international community's efforts should
adapt to the changes in the situation on the ground. In
particular, the model of development, which is based
on a counter-insurgency strategy, should be revised.
However, we will not abandon the values we fought
for alongside Afghans for 10 years. I have in mind
in particular the role and rights of women in Afghan
society.

We have less than 12 months ahead of us to evaluate
and determine how the international community will
be able to support Afghanistan in the long term. The
mandate of UNAMA that we will adopt a year from
now will have to be different, refocused on the priorities
of the international community.

Put in a more visible and more central position,
but also more complex, UNAMA's political role must
be strengthened. The Mission, including the Special
Representative, will have to provide its good offices
to facilitate the implementation of the Afghan political
process, especially in the areas of reconciliation and
the strengthening of the rule of law, and support the
efforts aimed at strengthening regional cooperation.
UNAMA must also have additional capacity in the
protection and promotion of human rights, an area in
which it provides real expertise and an added value. It
will have to play the role of coordinator of the United
Nations funds, programmes and specialized agencies to
promote a model of development that meets the needs
of an economy weakened by the decline in international
aid and the emergence of an illicit economy that fuels
instability. To that end, we believe that it is important to
simplify the mandate. However, we remain committed,
as far as possible, to maintaining UNAMA's presence
throughout the Afghan territory, which is essential for a
clear and comprehensive view of the situation.

As others have said before, we are also concerned
about the resurgence of drug trafficking. Unfortunately,
the year 2013 saw a new record in opium production.
Furthermore, Afghanistan has become the world's
largest producer of cannabis resin. There are now even
amphetamine production centres in the country.

We know about the efforts of Afghans to address that
challenge. We know that taking up the challenge requires
the commitment of everyone, especially Afghanistan's
regional partners. We will stand alongside the Afghans
in that task. But today I would like to address the entire
international community. As the Secretary- General
underscored in his report (S/2014/l63), the risk of the
emergence ofa narco-State exists and it is serious. We
have to consider actions today that will make it possible
to shield Afghanistan tomorrow from the deleterious
effects of drug trafficking, which are corruption and
violence.

We know, as experience has shown, that drug
trafficking often goes hand in hand with insurrection
and a challenge to a central authority. We must do
everything to avoid the worst: to leave Afghanistan to
its own devices with an insurrection that is certainly
weakened but not totally reduced; with the Afghan
security forces, who have shown that they are robust
and effective, but are concerned about the international
community's withdrawal; and with a socioeconomic
and institutional fabric that has been rewoven but is
still very fragile.

In that respect, the role that the fight against
drug trafficking plays in UNAMA's mandate must
be strengthened. Clearly, we do not want to make
UNAMA a counter-narcotics agency. However, all
possible synergies between the activities of UNAMA
and the the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
in Afghanistan should been strengthened. UNAMA
must also support regional cooperation in that area by
supporting the development of the law enforcement,
judiciary and health capacities of the Afghan State.

The Afghanistan after 11 September is now a
chapter in the history books, but if we want to help
Afghans to write a truly different chapter in the future
we have to act now.

