Like others, I would like to start by extending a warm welcome to the Colombian Foreign Minister, Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi. It is an honour to have her participate in this virtual meeting. It is also a pleasure to welcome a representative of the Colombian youth, Mr. David Santiago Cano Salazar. I also express my country's sincere appreciation to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his briefing and for the work of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia and the United Nations system as a whole in the country. The first preliminary comment I would like to make is that France believes that cooperation between the United Nations and the Colombian authorities, including in the promotion of human rights and in the fight against drugs and crime, is essential. We hope that this cooperation with all United Nations agencies will continue and will be strengthened in the coming months. As elsewhere, and as eloquently highlighted by previous speakers, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic constitutes a serious challenge in Colombia. It is a quadruple challenge at least: a health challenge, a humanitarian challenge, a socioeconomic challenge as well as a challenge to the implementation of the peace process. In this regard, I would like to express the solidarity of France with Colombia in the fight against the pandemic and commend the Colombian authorities for reaffirming their commitment to peace in this difficult context. The positive attitude of the recently elected local and regional authorities towards the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace is also an important and positive signal. We welcome their efforts to incorporate peace implementation in their governing agendas. Like all other members of the Council, France fully supports the call of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire. In Colombia, too, it can contribute to renewing the momentum for long-lasting peace. The one-month ceasefire announced by the Ejercito de Liberacien Nacional must be fully implemented and prolonged. We call on all other armed groups in Colombia to follow this path. What we have highlighted many times in previous meetings remains true: achieving the full implementation of the agreement as a set of interconnected provisions is critical to the long-term success of peace. As the Secretary-General says in his observations, the focus must shift towards the sustainability and comprehensive nature of the process. In this regard, I would like to recognize the positive steps observed in recent months in the field of reintegration, for instance with the agreement among parties of the reintegration road map, which sets out the long-term framework for the socioeconomic reintegration process. These joint efforts must now continue, with a specific focus on former combatants who reside outside the former territorial areas for training and reintegration. It is important to overcome the long-standing issue of access to land. The progress accomplished through the development programmes with a territorial focus is also important and should continue with a view to fully implementing the comprehensive rural reform set out in the peace accord. Another area where further progress is expected is the illicit crop substitution programme, which represents a huge hope for thousands of families. It is crucial that this programme receive the resources necessary to operate, in particular to finance the alternative productive projects that are a prerequisite for its long-term success. In this area, we wish to commend the work of the United Nations in Colombia. A third topic that deserves praise and support is the work of the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparations and Non-Repetition. A fourth issue, which is a matter of serious concern that is highlighted in the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/239), is the tragic killings of social leaders, human rights defenders and former combatants. This trend remains of great concern. No efforts must be spared in putting an end to these killings, in a context of even greater isolation owing to the COVID 19 crisis, and in bringing those responsible to justice. Making full use of the tools provided for in the peace agreement remains the best way to make progress. Special attention should be given to the rights and protection of women, children, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex individuals and persons belonging to minorities. France counts on the Colombian authorities to strengthen efforts to ensure the State's presence, civilian as well as military, throughout the country, including in the most remote areas, in consultation with civil society. I would like to conclude with the hope of furthering peace, including in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. The support of France for the Colombian Government and people on the demanding road to peace remains unwavering.
