Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): Let me begin by
expressing the appreciation of my delegation to Jordan
for convening this open debate. We also recognize
the presence of His Royal Highness Crown Prince Al
Hussein bin Abdullah II, who was here to preside over
the debate this morning.

My delegation fully agrees that there is a need to
address with urgency the rise of radicalization and
violent extremism among youth. Young people make
up a large share of the world population. In various
ways, they shape our political, social, cultural and
economic development. It has been said quite correctly
that young people are our future. Today's young people,
however, are confronted by many obstacles to realizing
their aspirations. These include discrimination,
marginalization, unemployment and lack of access
to education, which severely limit their potential.
We share the view that such situations can provoke
disillusionment among young people and raise the
possibility of their being lured into embracing extreme
Views.

It is therefore quite obvious that, in the projection
of our long-term programme to counter extremism,
we must find ways to empower young people as a
critical component of our preventive measures in the
fight against terrorism. It must be noted, however, that
extremism is a complex phenomenon, involving not
only physical acts but also ideas. Addressing the social
and economic conditions of youth must therefore be
followed by a comprehensive programme to fight the
philosophies of hatred and intolerance that lead people,
including youth, to extremism.

On that account, Indonesia's efforts in countering
extremism have consistently followed two different
but mutually reinforcing approaches: a hard approach
and a soft approach. The hard approach entails law
enforcement measures, while the soft approach seeks
to influence the hearts and minds of people. From our
own experience in countering extremism, there are at
least three lessons that my delegation wishes to share
with the Council.
The first is the need to prioritize the building of
a resilient community, which is a community that is
outward-looking and receptive to new ideas, and seeks
the good of all. A resilient community is our first line
of defence against the spread of the ideas of hatred
and intolerance. To help in building and strengthening
community resiliency, my Government aligns itself with
the moderates, including religious groups and leaders,
youth organizations and the mass media. Together,
we have been persistent in our message of peace and
mutual respect. This method, we believe, strengthens
communal ownership and responsibility. Extremism
and terrorism are a global threat, but the fight against
them must take advantage of local characteristics and
potential.

Second is the need to foster dialogue, which
contributes not only to reducing suspicion and
intolerance, but also to enhancing understanding.
Engagement with youth through dialogue and education
provides an appropriate platform to directly counter
the narrative of extremism and to instil in youth the
importance of diversity and respect. As an example
of this programme, my Government has enlisted
the support of various Islamic organizations, youth
institutions and academicians to educate young people
on the danger of the ideology of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, and its appeal to become a foreign
terrorist fighter.

Third is the need to strengthen the network of
dialogue to spread the culture of peace and tolerance at
all levels, regional and global. This is vital because, in the
era of globalization, young people are extremely well-
connected. We must also bear in mind that extremism
is increasingly being felt worldwide. No country is
immune to its dangers, and the responsibility to combat
it rests on the shoulders of all, both individually and
collectively.

In this context, Indonesia believes that we should
strengthen the existing frameworks within the United
Nations to mobilize international cooperation in
combating the spread of extremism among youth. Such
frameworks include the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations, which works to intensify the activities
under its youth pillar. It is encouraging to note that at
the most recent Global Forum of the Alliance, which
Indonesia hosted last year, young people insisted on the
importance of including cross-cultural understanding
and peacebuilding in education.

To conclude, allow me to underline that countering
extremism among youth must also address its pull
factors, that is, those conditions by which terrorist groups
continue to justify their activities. In this context, I wish
to reiterate that prolonged and unresolved conflicts are
capable of creating situations that are conducive to the
spread of extreme and radical Views. History shows
that terrorists groups have exploited such situations to
recruit and groom new converts, as we have seen in
current events in the Middle East and Africa.

That fact only underlines the urgent need for the
Council to resolve conflicts throughout the world,
and help bring peace and prosperity. The Council
should be part of the systematic response of the whole
United Nations system that we are now developing, to
strengthen our common efforts to prevent and address
youth involvement in violent extremism. We also believe
that the Council should align its works in this regard
with the United Nations development framework, which
places emphasis on inclusive development for countries
emerging from conflict.

