The President: I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Indonesia. I would like to thank Mr. Swan, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia, for their insightful briefings. I would also like to welcome Ambassador Abukar Osman, Permanent Representative of Somalia, to this meeting. As the Secretary-General has summed up, Somalia is at a critical juncture. It is therefore crucial for all Somali stakeholders, supported by the international partners, to work together constructively. In that regard, I would like to highlight three points. First, we welcome the discussions between federal and state leaders in Dhuusamarreeb in July. The Security Council has repeatedly highlighted the need for Somalia's federal and state leaders to come together in a spirit of unity and compromise. We would like to stress that only through dialogue can Somali stakeholders move forward with the reform agenda that it has committed to undertaking. We are hopeful that a consensus on the electoral modalities that enjoys the support of all stakeholders, particularly the Somali population, can be reached. It is also important to advance the implementation of national priorities and State-building efforts. Secondly, we remain concerned over the security situation. We once again condemn all recent attacks by Al-Shabaab, including the attack on the Elite Hotel in Mogadishu last Sunday, as well as the mortar attack targeting the United Nations compound. In that regard, let me join others in extending our condolences to the people and the Government of Somalia, in particular the families of the victims. We would ask that the perpetrators be brought to justice. We would like to reiterate that any attack on United Nations personnel is unacceptable and that all perpetrators must be brought to justice. We are concerned that, despite the continued operations against Al-Shabaab and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, Al-Shabaab remains capable of conducting larger, more complex high- profile attacks. It is therefore important to continue to build the capacity of the Somali National Army (SNA) and to equip it with the necessary training, including in countering improvised explosive devices. We commend the continued operations by the SNA and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to recover areas under Al-Shabaab's control, as well as to disrupt its capacity to conduct terror attacks. In our view, it is important to accelerate force generation efforts so as to hold the recovered areas and pave the way for further stabilization activities. Thirdly, Somalia is facing the triple challenge of COVID-19, flooding and desert locusts. Increased support from international partners is needed now more than ever, particularly in support of the humanitarian response plan. Sustained support is also necessary to alleviate the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic in order to ensure the long-term recovery and resilience of the people of Somalia. We would also like to reiterate the importance of ensuring unimpeded humanitarian assistance and relief. I reaffirm Indonesia's respect for Somalia's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and I convey our utmost tribute to the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the United Nations Support Office in Somalia, AMISOM and all actors working to ensure lasting peace and stability in Somalia. What happens in the next few months will determine the future of Somalia. We hope that all Somali stakeholders will remain committed in their pursuit of dialogue and reconciliation to ensure peace and prosperity in the country. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I give the floor to the Permanent Representative of Somalia.
