Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me also join others in
thanking you, Sir, for convening today's debate on
such a vital issue. We appreciate the insightful remarks
by the Secretary-General earlier today, and thank
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and the Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
for their briefings.

We align ourselves with the statement made earlier
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Trafficking in persons is an abomination, a
modern-day equivalent of slavery. Sadly, it is a global
phenomenon that violates the principles of morality,
human rights and human dignity. It undermines our
efforts to achieve sustainable development. Like others,
we are outraged by recent reports that African migrants
in Libya have been exposed to the indignity of slavery.
We joined the Secretary-General in his condemnation
of such egregious actions, which have no place in our
world. The international community must unite in
fighting this scourge.

The increasing numbers of conflicts, growing
economic inequality and a widening gap between rich
and poor provide fertile ground to those who exploit
human suffering. Human trafficking as a consequence
of conflict, and its increasingly worrisome links to
terrorist groups, are a global concern. On the other hand,
human trafficking has also become a cause of friction
among States. Human traffickers typically work with
organized crime networks and underworld mafias.

The unprecedented ease of communication and
transportation in an increasingly globalized world
enables human traffickers and terrorist networks to
permeate societies. According to the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/939), raging conflicts and
humanitarian crises have resulted in record levels
of displacement, with 24.2 million people newly
displaced, the majority of whom are women and
children. Those harrowing numbers, the countless
stories behind each of the victims and the spreading
patterns of exploitation by terrorist groups compel us
to redouble our efforts to combat this scourge and to
call for united and collective action by the international
community. The transnational nature of this complex
crime demands enhanced international cooperation
among the countries of origin, transit and destination.

The United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, together with its Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, provides
the blueprint for concentrating and focusing our efforts
on preventing, protecting and prosecuting. The adoption
of resolution 2331 (2016) by the Security Council last
December was another positive step that acknowledged
the connection between trafficking in persons,
sexual violence, terrorist groups and transnational
organized crime.

Let me also take this opportunity underscore my
country's commitment to fighting the egregious crime
of trafficking in persons.

First, Pakistan is a party to the various relevant
international instruments, including the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
the International Convention for the Suppression of the
Traffic in Women and Children, and the Convention
concerning the Abolition of Forced Labour. Secondly,
we have implemented a comprehensive policy, the
National Action Plan for Combating Human Trafficking.
Thirdly, we are implementing our National Strategic
Framework 2016-2022 on trafficking in persons and
human smuggling, under which, inter alia, a number
of victims have been provided shelter. Fourthly,
provincial Governments are strengthening trafficking-
related legislation, with more focus on investigation,
prosecution and convicting traffickers.

Given the vulnerabilities of men, women and
children to numerous forms of exploitation, including
sale and trafficking in the context of conflict and
humanitarian crisis, a comprehensive and rights-
based response is needed. The global compact for safe,
orderly and regular migration will provide us with
an opportunity to correct some of the past mistakes
and protect people on the move from trafficking and
other forms of exploitation. We earnestly hope that its
adoption will help strengthen the existing global legal
framework. Increasing States' capacities with long-
term politicaland financial commitment holds the key.

Additionally and above all, the Security Council,
as the primary body tasked with maintaining peace and
security, also needs to address the root causes of conflict
to remove the grounds where such crimes breed. Unless
we deal decisively with those breeding grounds, the
rest of our efforts, however well intentioned and well
focused, might just be in vain. They are necessary but
may not be sufficient until we really address the root
causes of conflicts.

