Mr. Pleuger (Germany): The Secretary-General's
report on the rule of law and transitional justice in
conflict and post-conflict societies (S/2004/6l6) is, in
our view, a landmark document. It represents a
significant step forward in conceptualizing the rule of
law and transitional justice and in explaining their
relevance to the work of the United Nations.

I would like to associate myself with the
statement to be made later today by the representative
of the Netherlands, on behalf of the European Union.
At the same time, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General and the many members of the Secretariat who
were involved in drafting the report for an outstanding
job.

Germany wholeheartedly welcomes this report
and pledges to work with the United Nations to
translate its vision into concrete action. We will do that
as a Security Council member, as a member of the
General Assembly and of other relevant bodies of the
United Nations system, as a State party to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court and as a
donor country that is now already devoting a
significant part of its assistance programmes to the
promotion of judicial and non-judicial governance
structures.

But let us be clear on one important point: the
Secretary-General's report, as thorough and thoughtful
as it may be, is only the beginning of a long-term
agenda. Important and often difficult questions remain
unresolved. Here, I am referring to policy questions
such as the proper sequencing and timing of measures
to promote peace, justice and reconciliation; to
institutional questions such as the cooperation between
the United Nations - notably the Security Council -
and the International Criminal Court (ICC); and to
resource questions. With regard to the latter, action by
the United Nations must be complemented by
assistance that States make available to each other if a
State is in need of certain capacities, materials or
expertise. The Council will urge Member States that
are able to do so to contribute national expertise and
materials.

In that context, I would like to draw the attention
of members to the Justice Rapid Response Initiative, an
initiative that a number of countries from all parts of
the world - including Germany - have launched over
the past few months. The starting point of that
initiative was the realization that in post-conflict
situations, it is likely that a State may be willing, but
not entirely able, to take the necessary steps to
investigate and prosecute some of the worst crimes -
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide -
owing to a lack of expertise and resources. The
response to that dilemma may be that States possessing
the required expertise or resources coordinate to
provide, on short notice, cost-effective expertise and
resources as necessary. Such expertise and resources
could be used either to enhance the capabilities of
States not fully able but willing to prosecute such
crimes or to augment the capacities of international
justice institutions, notably the ICC. Under either
scenario, such Justice Rapid Response capabilities
would be deployed only upon request.

The Governments and civil society experts who
have worked together over the past few months to
elaborate the Justice Rapid Response Initiative are
convinced that offering effective assistance to States
possessing plenty of political will but limited resources
would be an important element to give true meaning to
the idea of local ownership. The Justice Rapid
Response Initiative is still a work in progress. States
that may be interested in participating in the further
refinement of the initiative are welcome to join it.

Allow me to devote the conclusion of my
statement to one specific issue and to make this part of
my statement on behalf also of Finland and the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. That issue concerns the
institutional structures necessary to implement the
report's extensive to-do lists.

Indeed, while the report explains the challenges
and the future agenda for United Nations action in the
field of the rule of law and post-conflict transitional
justice, it does not directly address the question of
which institutional changes would be necessary to
enable the United Nations to better cope with the
strengthening of justice and the rule of law. The report
merely entrusts the Executive Committee on Peace and
Security to make proposals for enhancing the United
Nations system arrangements for supporting the rule of
law and transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies.

Currently, the work of the United Nations in the
field of the rule of law and transitional justice is
divided among eleven departments and agencies within
the system. Cooperation between the various actors is
maintained through a Focal-Point Network, with a
largely coordinating role. No office dedicated to the
issue has yet been established. The current arrangement
does not support the development of common policies
and comprehensive strategies, nor does it allow for the
accumulation of institutional memory, best practices
and lessons learned.

Finland, Jordan and Germany believe that there is
a need to create a new entity within the United Nations
Secretariat, to enable the United Nations to operate
more effectively in this cross-cutting area. Therefore,
Finland, Germany and Jordan have elaborated a non-
paper outlining possible models for the future
organization of the rule of law and transitional justice
activities within the United Nations system. We hope it
will provide a starting point for discussions in the
Executive Committee on Peace and Security on this
issue. We remitted our non-paper to the Secretariat in a
high-level demarche on 29 September. On 1 October,
we sent the non-paper to all permanent missions, for
your information.

Common to the models contained in the non-
paper is the assumption that effective mainstreaming of
any theme requires some institutional centre of gravity
within the United Nations system. Mainstreaming
cannot simply rely on occasional or periodic meetings
or exchange of information.

The non-paper seeks to promote an entity
responsible for all the policy work carried out by the
United Nations in the area of the rule of law and
transitional justice. From the beginning, it would have
for its consideration and action numerous tasks
highlighted in the report, such as reviewing best
practices, developing proposals and overall policies for
United Nations action; helping plan comprehensive
national strategies; coordinating the efforts with actors
from outside the United Nations system; updating and
supplementing related United Nations material such as
guidelines and manuals; directing the setting up of
databases and web-based resources; creating and
maintaining up-to-date rosters of experts; planning
comprehensive training programmes for United
Nations staff and other matters.

The non-paper also argues that core operations of
the new entity should be funded from the regular
budget, whereas operational activities would continue
to be financed from the budgets of the implementing
department and agencies.

We would like to emphasize that our non-paper
does not intend to present ready-made solutions.
Rather, it wishes to assist the Executive Committee on
Peace and Security in its task to come forward with
proposals of its own. We would be grateful if you, Mr.
President, would see our distribution of the non-paper
to permanent missions as an effort to draw your
attention to a matter that in our view, needs urgent
attention, and as an attempt to set out possible ways to
approach the matter.

