Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation, too,
wishes to express its appreciation to the Chairmen of
the three subsidiary bodies for their concise but
detailed briefings today. We thank Ambassadors
Verbeke, Arias and Burian for the work that they have
done for the Committees.

With regard to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), my delegation acknowledges the leadership that
Ambassador Ricardo Arias has provided since taking
up the chairmanship of that subsidiary body. South
Africa notes that the Committee and its subcommittees
have considered a large number of Preliminary
Implementation Assessments (PIAs). In that context,
South Africa considers the following guiding principles
to be relevant.

The sovereignty and national priorities of
Member States must be respected. It is essential that
consultation with the relevant Member State on the
content of the PIA take place prior to its consideration
by the CTC and its subcommittees.

In the identification of shortfalls by Member
States, due consideration should be given to the unique
nature of the threat of terrorism as faced by individual
Member States, as well as to their respective capacities
and resources to address it. There should not be a one-
size-fits-all approach. Committee members should also
be given sufficient time to examine the PIAs, which are
complex and lengthy documents, given the serious and
far-reaching nature of the recommendations that they
contain.

Technical assistance is an outcome of the PIAs
and the provision of such assistance should, from the
very start, be carried out with the full consent of the
recipient State and be tailored to its unique
requirements. Technical assistance should not be
imposed on Member States.
07-35274

The CTC and its experts should not digress from

their mandate by pronouncing on other issues that are
not directly relevant to terrorism.

We encourage the CTC to continue its interaction
with international and regional organizations to
improve coordination and the sharing of best practices
at the subregional and regional levels. We wish to
thank Mr. Ruperez and his team for the work that they
have done in that very important area.

I now turn to the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions
Committee and thank Ambassador Johan Verbeke for
his briefing. South Africa notes progress with regard to
the improvement of the Committee's Consolidated List
and guidelines, as well as the establishment of a focal
point in the Secretariat for delisting. We encourage the
Committee to build on those initiatives with a view to
promoting due process and transparency.

My delegation would like to make the following
specific remarks.

The Committee should apply a high evidentiary
standard when considering requests by Member States
for the addition of individuals and entities to the
Consolidated List, given the serious consequences of
such listing. There should be a substantive nexus
between an individual or entity and Osama bin Laden,
Al-Qaida or the Taliban.

The Committee's efforts to improve the
Consolidated List are greatly appreciated. The
Committee should conduct regular and comprehensive
reviews of its List to delist persons and entities that are
no longer associated with Al-Qaida or the Taliban,
those incorrectly listed and persons who may be
deceased.

It is essential that the Committee consult the
wider United Nations membership when considering
recommendations by the Monitoring Team to
strengthen the sanctions. Proposals to, inter alia,
criminalize the misuse of the Internet, involve the
private sector in sanctions implementation and assess
compliance would have significant implications for
Member States.

Turning to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), I would like to thank
Ambassador Peter Burian for his work as Chair and for
his briefing. South Africa supports efforts to develop
global capacity and to raise international standards for
implementing resolution 1540 (2004) on the basis of

best practices and the provision of technical assistance,
upon request, to a willing recipient in a manner that
respects the national priorities of the recipient. South
Africa therefore welcomes the work that has been done
to assist with the provision of technical assistance to
those requiring it. We also believe that developing
countries should be asked to complete simplified
questionnaires on measures taken to implement
resolution 1540 (2004), as compared with the
questionnaires required of countries that possess, or are
capable of possessing, weapons of mass destruction
(WMD).

The Committee's current focus on technical
assistance and non-reporting by developing countries
notwithstanding, a primary threat of weapons of mass
destruction and related technologies, materials,
financing and delivery systems falling into the hands of
non-State terrorist actors originates from States that
possess or are capable of possessing WMD. The weak
link is therefore the very existence of weapons of mass
destruction, and the question arises as to whether the
Security Council can continue to ignore disarmament
and approach proliferation in a selective and often
politicized manner.

South Africa is cautious regarding proposals
currently before the 1540 Committee that would allow
donors to direct the work of the Committee or
empower select groupings of States to manage its
outreach programmes and visits and to provide the
information that would be used to develop sets of
lessons learned, good practices and benchmarks for
compliance.

It seems to us that the clearing-house approach of
the Committee with respect to technical assistance
remains the most appropriate one.

It is important that the Security Council respect
the mandates of independent functional and technical
multilateral bodies and regimes. There is a danger of
duplicating work that has already been done elsewhere,
or of imposing the Security Council's priorities on
bodies that were designed for specific tasks. For
example, the Financial Action Task Force does not
have the expertise or the mandate to address the issue
of so-called proliferation financing. It is a specialized
body with limited membership that is designed, inter
alia, to address the financing of terrorism and money-
laundering.
It is necessary to address the issue of
coordination between the three subsidiary bodies,
which was raised both in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome and in the CTC review of December 2006.
The 2005 World Summit called on the Security Council
to consolidate its anti-terrorism activities and reporting
requirements. In that regard, I would like to conclude
by making a practical suggestion to improve the
transparency and accountability of the CTC, the 1267
Committee and the 1540 Committee Vis-a-Vis the wider
United Nations membership.

I propose that all future reports and briefings by
the Chairpersons of those three Committees provide a
full disclosure of the financial expenditure and human
resources from the Secretariat utilized during the
reporting period. That approach could also be followed
by all other subsidiary bodies of the Security Council.
We owe that to the membership of the United Nations.
We believe it should be normal practice.

