Mr. Mendoza-Garcia (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We congratulate the Spanish delegation on
assuming the presidency for the month of October. We
thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his
briefing and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Spain,
Mr. Jose Manuel Garcia Margallo, for his statement.

Costa Rica has decided to participate in this
open debate because of the importance it attaches to
the situation in the Middle East. As a peace-loving
country that has not had a standing army by its own
volition for more than 65 years, Costa Rica is a firm
believer in the peaceful settlement of conflicts between
peoples and States in the context of international law
and multilateral diplomacy. As stated by His Holiness
Pope Francis, war brings destruction and multiplies the
sufferings of peoples.

My delegation is deeply concerned about the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, and especially the escalation
of violence in recent months, which we vigorously
condemn and in which civilians, including women
and children, continue to pay a high price. During the
emergency meeting convened by the Security Council
on 16 October (see S/PV.7536), it became clear that
it was necessary for the international community to
take action because it can no longer stand by and bear
witness without doing anything about this conflict. As
the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun, warned, we should ponder
the serious consequences of turning this conflict into
one of a religious nature. He also underscored that the
Israeli occupation and the dwindling prospects for a
Palestinian State have contributed to worsening the
situation.

My country will never cease to urge that parties
resume negotiations on the core issues of the conflict
that still exist, based on the obligations already acquired
and the agreements previously agreed among the parties
and supported by international law and the decisions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly.

For Costa Rica, it is crucial to bring an end to the
armed conflict in Syria and to seek an early political
solution, especially with regard to the humanitarian
crisis. We hope that it will be possible to explore the real
and tangible options, as was recently stated by the United
States, to achieve a political transition in Syria, whose
civil war has intensified with Russia's intervention on
30 September in support of the Damascus Government
against the insurgents. The extension and deepening
of the conflict is causing unprecedented humanitarian
effects. Every day that tensions increase, there is an
exponential increase in the violations of rights and the
suffering of the Syrian people.
We are pleased that, due to the ceasefire agreements,
the United Nations system, together with its partners
the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, has managed to deliver
medical supplies in several cities in Syria. However,
many people in need are still trapped without access
to humanitarian assistance. That is why we urge that
assistance be allowed to reach its destination and that
humanitarian issues remain outside of conflicts.

One might think that at this point, and given the
developments in the conflict, it would be resolved by
one or two Powers. On the contrary, we believe that the
Security Council is called upon to play a role in order to
diversify the conversations and bring about interactions
and dialogues that are different from those that have
occurred around the crisis in recent weeks.

With regard to the current situation in Yemen, my
delegation looks favourably on the statements made by
the officials of the Yemeni Government expressing the
willingness to participate in peace talks. We welcome
the work Special Envoy Cheikh Ahmed has planned
with Government representatives and with the Houthis
and their allies to complete the preparations for the
negotiations, the aim of which is to lay the foundations
for a lasting peace that will benefit the Yemeni people.

For all these reasons, we hope the Security
Council can fully carry out its mandate in the Middle
East to maintain international peace and security and
fulfil its duty to promote the full implementation of
international justice and the rule of law. As reaffirmed
by the President of the Republic of Costa Rica, Mr. Luis
Guillermo Solis Rivera, in his statement in the general
debate (see A/70/PV.19) at the opening of the seventieth
session of the General Assembly, to strengthen the
United Nations at the epicentre of global governance,
the Security Council must assume its responsibilities
in the maintenance of international peace and security,
take into account human rights considerations in its
operations and improve its work on conflict prevention.

