Mr. Moungara-Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): Allow me, in my turn, to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in
Afghanistan, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, whom it is my
pleasure to see and hear again as he outlines the
situation in Afghanistan. Having recently seen him at
work on the ground, I appreciate the relevance of his
views and analysis. I also welcome His Excellency
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Foreign Minister of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan, and thank him for his
statement.

Like those who have taken the floor before me, I
welcome the successful holding of parliamentary
elections on 18 September. The holding of the
elections, despite serious terrorist threats, was ample
proof of the Afghan people's courage and
determination to turn a dark page in their history and to
live within an organized society in a climate of peace.
We deplore, however, that alongside this commitment
of the Afghan people and Government to working
towards peace, the insurgents continue to find new
ways to create havoc, harassing the Afghan security
forces, international forces and the civilian population
throughout the country.

However, the various international conferences
and forums that have been held point to an
improvement in the situation in Afghanistan. The
Government has, in fact, made praiseworthy efforts in
the areas of good governance, human rights and the
rule of law. Moreover, they have done everything in
their power to promote national reconciliation,
particularly by extending a hand to marginalized
groups willing to engage in dialogue and become part
of the peace and reconstruction process.

For its part, the international community,
including the United Nations, has made efforts in the
form of electoral assistance, security sector reform and
in training and equipping of Afghan security and
defence forces. With regard to electoral aid in
particular, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has come into its own in its
support for various election processes, particularly the
recent parliamentary elections. It is my delegation's
hope that the election results will be published
following the examination of complaints submitted by
various parties.

Furthermore, as Mr. De Mistura has stated,
inclusive elections were held that included, inter alia,
the overwhelming participation of women. The United
Nations agencies, for their part, have worked hard to
assist needy populations and to relocate refugees
re-entering the country who wished to return to their
places of origin.

But these efforts seem to have been cancelled out
by the unprecedented ruthlessness of terrorists seeking
to impose their will. Clearly, the current unstable
security situation is significantly undermining the
Government's stabilization efforts and threatens, in the
long term, to discredit it in the eyes of the population.
That is why we call for increased coordination between
the international stakeholders, whether bilateral or
multilateral, and the Afghan authorities. In addition, it
is important to strengthen the logistics and financial
support provided to the Afghan security and defence
forces in order to build their operational capacities.

As members will recall, during its latest mission
to Afghanistan - a mission that you yourself, Sir, so
ably led - the Council noted the complex nature of the
security challenges in the country. Indeed, several
small groups are fighting for dominance in arms and
drugs trafficking. As a result of all of these marginal
activities, peace and the security of civilians, security
forces and international staff, including that of
UNAMA, are under constant threat.
We therefore underline the need to strengthen
regional cooperation in order to better face the
challenges to peace and security in the region. It would
indeed be unrealistic to ignore the implications and
regional dimension of the situation in Afghanistan.

Furthermore, we call for enhanced
implementation of the decisions taken at the various
conferences on Afghanistan, including the London and
Kabul Conferences. This means, inter alia, that Afghan
priorities must be taken into account regarding long-
term security and development in that country. Indeed,
the combination of the military, economic, social and
political efforts being undertaken seems, from our
point of view, to be the most appropriate approach to
achieving the goals of peace and stabilization in the
country. In that respect, we support the development
plan of the Afghan Government. We invite the donor
community to provide financial support to that plan.

Before concluding, I reiterate Gabon's support for
the role of UNAMA and to welcome the tenacity and
professionalism of its personnel under the leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. De Mistura. I must recall here the leadership of
Turkey on the issue of Afghanistan and the significant
contributions of your country, Sir, aimed at
re-establishing peace in Afghanistan.

