Ms. Loj (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The countries
of Central and Eastern Europe associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia - and the Associated Countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey align themselves with this
statement.

Allow me to congratulate the presidency of the
Council on convening this open session in the Security
Council on the strengthening of cooperation between
the United Nations system and Central Africa in the
maintenance of peace and security. I would also like to
thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity
to speak on behalf of the European Union.

The European Union supports the view that there
is a need for a closer look at the opportunities for
strengthening regional integration and cooperation in
the Central African region. Regional integration and
cooperation would contribute to the integration of the
Central African countries into the world economy and
play a decisive role in consolidating peace and
preventing conflict. This would enable the countries
involved to face cross-border challenges, in particular
in the field of the environment and the use and
management of natural resources.

The subregional organizations in the Central
African region could be important building blocks for
regional political and economic integration, and they
could contribute in securing peace and prosperity. But
an important prerequisite for consolidating regional
peace, democracy and economic stability is the
existence of a genuine political will among the Central
African States to cooperate. In this regard the EU is
happy to note that there is evidence of an increasing
feeling of collective responsibility for securing peace
and stability in the Central African region.

At the regional level the recent establishment of
the African Union and the adoption of the New
Partnership for Africa's Development are positive steps
towards building Africa's capacity to prevent and
manage all aspects of conflicts through the
strengthening of existing regional and subregional
initiatives. If this growing sense of regional
responsibility and ownership continues to grow and is
expressed in a genuine political will for cooperation,
then other countries and the United Nations should
help to enhance the institutional capacities of the
region and cooperate closely with them. The European
Union is fully committed to working closely and at all
levels with the United Nations and the region.

In the Cotonou Agreement, the European Union
has established long-term contractual partnerships with
the countries in the Central African region. One of the
priority areas of the Agreement is that of supporting
regional integration and cooperation. Among other
things, we have entered into negotiations for regional
economic partnership agreements. These will
strengthen the relations between the European Union
and the Central African States in full conformity with
World Trade Organization rules and will foster regional
integration.

Apart from the Cotonou Agreement, it should
also be noted that the European Union has launched or
contributed to a number of other initiatives in the area
of conflict prevention and management in Africa.
Furthermore, the EU member countries have
contributed to peacekeeping in Africa both financially
and through participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

Let me just add that the European Union follows
the developments in the Great Lakes region closely and
is studying the possibility of organizing an
international conference on peace, security, democracy
and development in the region.

Allow me to conclude by reaffirming the
commitment of the European Union to help strengthen
the regional capacities in Central Africa in order to
secure peace, democracy and economic stability. The
EU is ready to cooperate fully in this endeavour with
the United Nations system and Central Africa.

