Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
update on recent developments in the Middle East.

We also thank the Permanent Representative of
Israel, Her Excellency Ms. Gabriela Shalev, and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine, His Excellency
Mr. Riyad Mansour, for their presence and their
contributions to our debate.

Bosnia and Herzegovina remains deeply
concerned by the extremely worrying impasse that
persists in the peace process in the Middle East. The
pattern of events in the region in recent months is a
strong reminder that the situation on the ground
continues to be a source of great concern. Recent
events further demonstrated that the counterproductive
and unacceptable blockade of Gaza represents a grave
obstacle to security, prosperity and opportunity for the
Palestinians and the Israelis, and for all nations in the
region.

In this regard, we welcome the Israeli
Government's recent announcement, which, once fully
and effectively implemented, will be a significant step
forward in the review of Israeli policy on Gaza.
However, we strongly believe that this is not enough
and that more needs to be done. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is of the view that only the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1860
(2009) can meet the basic needs of the 1.5 million
Palestinian residents in the Gaza Strip. Hence, we
reiterate our call upon Israel to allow the immediate,
sustained and unconditional opening of the crossings
for the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial goods
and persons to and from Gaza, in accordance with
resolution 1860 (2009) and the 2005 Agreement on
Movement and Access.

Time and again, we have to reiterate that
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
can be achieved only on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the
Road Map, the agreements previously reached by the
parties and the Arab Peace Initiative. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is and will remain committed to the two-
State solution, with the State of Israel and an
independent, democratic, contiguous and viable State
of Palestine living side by side in peace and security.

In order to overcome the current peace process
impasse, the parties have to fulfil their obligations and
make a tangible contribution towards creating
conditions conducive to negotiations. Settlements, the
separation barrier built on occupied land, the
demolition of homes and evictions are illegal under
international law and contrary to Israel's obligations
under the Road Map. We believe that these activities
constitute a major obstacle on the road to
comprehensive peace because they prejudge the
outcome of final status negotiations and threaten to
make a two-State solution impossible. It is therefore
essential that Israel put an end to all settlement
activities, including natural growth, in East Jerusalem
and the rest of the West Bank, and dismantle all
outposts erected since March 2001.

Our concerns also include the latest developments
in East Jerusalem and continuing tensions in the city.
Bosnia and Herzegovina does not recognize the
annexation of East Jerusalem and underlines that the
status of Jerusalem is a permanent status issue that
must be resolved through negotiations between
the parties. Jerusalem - the holy city of the three
great monotheistic religions: Christianity, Judaism and
Islam - should be the symbol of peace, freedom of
religious expression and human rights.

Israel's security concerns, including a complete
stop to all violence and arms smuggling into Gaza,
must also be addressed. Bosnia and Herzegovina
condemns the latest attack on the children's
recreational facility in Gaza. We call upon Hamas to
unconditionally allow the International Committee of
the Red Cross access and to end its interference with
the operations of non-governmental organizations and
United Nations agencies in Gaza.

Regarding the recent tragic incident involving the
humanitarian aid flotilla, we reiterate our call for a
prompt, impartial, credible and transparent
investigation conforming to international standards, in
accordance with the statement of the President of the
Security Council S/PRST/2010/9. At the same time, we
support Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's proposal for
an international inquiry to investigate the Gaza flotilla
incident.

Before concluding, allow me, once again to
emphasize that only direct negotiations between the
Israelis and the Palestinians can bring about a lasting
resolution to the conflict and ensure peace, stability
and progress in the Middle East.

