Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Chad would
like to join previous speakers in welcoming the signing
in Vienna on 14 July by the Islamic Republic of Iran,
the P5+1 countries and the European Union of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear
programme. Chad takes note of the parties' joint
statement aimed at promoting transparency and creating
an atmosphere conducive to the implementation of the
Plan of Action. Chad encourages them to implement
their commitments fully and in good faith.

It is important to recall that the Plan of Action,
which the Security Council has just endorsed in
resolution 2231 (2015), is the outcome ofa long process.
The text of the agreement is voluminous, with more
than 100 pages and five annexes. The complexity and
length of the negotiations clearly demonstrate that the
parties were open-minded and persevered to overcome
doubts and difficulties throughout the process. Chad
would like to congratulate all the leaders, politicians,
diplomats and experts from all parties for the courage,
determination, tact and wisdom that they demonstrated
in reaching a negotiated solution to the Iranian nuclear
programme. We share their satisfaction in having
managed to reach an agreement that had not, in past
negotiations, been reached for more than 12 years.
We support future efforts to implement the agreement
reached on 14 July. Chad is convinced of the virtues of
dialogue and peace, which is why we voted in favour
of the resolution just adopted. Its unanimous adoption
clearly symbolizes the triumph of diplomacy and
the noble principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations that call for the peaceful resolution of
differences without the use of threats or force.

Within the framework of that approach, we pay
tribute to the leadership of the United States and its
leaders' fresh approach that focuses on dialogue,
peace and stability around the world. In that regard,
we completely agree with what President Obama said
when receiving the Nobel Peace Prize, on 10 December
2009 in Oslo:

"sanctions without outreach - condemnation
without discussion - can carry forward only a
crippling status quo.

Chad expects that the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) will monitor respect for the agreements
on guarantees and the implementation of the cooperation
framework agreed with Iran on 11 November 2013, as
well as the road map for clarification of the past and
current outstanding issues. With that in mind, Chad
encourages the IAEA and Iran to cooperate fully to
ensure the comprehensive, successful implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. We also
hope that the sanctions and measures implemented
pursuant to the relevant provisions of the various
Council resolutions adopted between 2006 and 2015
pertaining to Iran will be completely lifted after the
Security Council receives an IAEA report that confirms
the adoption by that country of the implementation of
all measures outlined in the Plan of Action.

We would like to reiterate that, like all the other
States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, Iran is entitled to develop, conduct
research and produce nuclear energy for civilian
purposes. We hope that the agreement signed on 14 July
will make it possible for Iran to join the community
of nations and ensure its contribution to the promotion
and strengthening of international cooperation. In a
world threatened by conflict, every contribution should
be welcomed in maintaining international peace and
security.

In conclusion, we should like to reiterate our
encouragement and support to all parties of the 14 July
Vienna agreement. We call on them to respect the
commitments undertaken and to continue to engage in
dialogue until the end of the implementation ofthe Plan
ofAction. Chad, which signed and ratified the Treaty of
Pelindaba, which makes Africa a nuclear-weapon-free
zone, dreams of a world rid of these weapons of mass
destruction, wherein the use of nuclear science and
technological research are done solely for peaceful
purposes. Therefore, we would like to note the very
pertinent and, unfortunately, very imperialist slogan
"Nuclear energy for all, nuclear weapons for no one".

