Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today's important meeting. I would like to
welcome Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, President of
the Federal Republic of Somalia; Mr. Te'te Antonio,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations; and Mr. Michael Keating, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia.

This year is of utmost importance for Somalia, as
we expect elections to be held at the end of August,
leading, for only the second time in 27 years, to
a peaceful transition of power in that brotherly
country. In this regard, my delegation commends the
efforts made by President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
and his Government to overcome all obstacles and
continuously work to reach out to all Somalis. This
has led to a comprehensive, integrated Somali-owned
political process that is supported by all international
and regional Powers.

We welcome the efforts made by all Somalis,
particularly the leaders of the various federal regions
through the Somali Leaders Forum held at the
beginning of this month, and the agreement reached on
all items related to the electoral process. My delegation
stresses its support for Somali national efforts in this
regard. We emphasize that the electoral process must
be completed within the set time frame and involve
the largest possible number of Somalis, including
women and young people. We call on the international
community to ensure that the funding necessary for the
electoral process and its security is in place.

Progress made on the political front would not have
been possible without progress on the security front.
This is allowed political leaders to work in freedom
as the strength of the terrorist group Al-Shabaab has
declined. Thanks to the successful security operations
led by both African Union Mission to Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Somali National Army, members
of Al-Shabaab have been expelled from more than 90
Somali cities. Their military capabilities have been
degraded to the lowest level in years. We commend
AMISOM. and the Somali National Army for the
sacrifices they have made in recent times.

My delegation stresses the need for the international
community to ensure that predictable and secure
material support is provided to AMISOM. forces. This
support is needed; the international community must
not abandon its commitment to the Mission. We call
on Member States to support the Somali Government's
efforts to retrain and rehabilitate its army and redraft
the national security strategy. Somali forces must be
appropriately armed in order to prosecute the necessary
military operations against Al-Shabaab. That would
ensure durable peace and security and allow for the
withdrawal of AMISOM. at the appropriate time.

These achievements must be protected by taking
practical steps to ensure peace and security for the
Somali people. We must work to coordinate international
efforts in support of the Somali Government and the
federal regions and provide essential services to areas
liberated from Al-Shabaab. This would be the best proof
of the international community's support for economic
revitalization in Somalia. We must also coordinate
humanitarian efforts, particularly in the health sector,
especially when it comes to maternal and child health.
Further, support for the rule of law must be provided in
those regions.

Accordingly, my delegation renews its call for
support for the friendly Somali people, which was
stressed during the visit to Somalia earlier this month
by the Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs, in which
he underscored the need to support the health and
education sectors, training of Somali medical cadres,
the rebuilding ofthe Somali military hospital, the return
of the Egyptian educational mission to Mogadishu
to set up two schools there, the training of cadres in
the field of agriculture, and reviewing the possibility
of setting up tripartite cooperation to train military
cadres, including the Coast Guard, in Somalia.

In Egypt, a study has been undertaken to provide
technical help to the Somali Parliament. Training is
being considered for the fields of investment, contract
drafting and natural-resource protection. We shall act
to coordinate Arab humanitarian and medical efforts in
order to meet the needs of the country. We also welcome
the Secretary-General's efforts in cooperation with the
Bretton Woods institutions in support of economic
growth in Somalia and the reduction of poverty.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the need to
coordinate international efforts in support of Somalia
in order to derive the greatest possible value from such
efforts. We stress our commitment to providing support
to the Somali people and Government in deed, and not
just in word, and to coordinating all efforts - bilateral,
regional and international - in this regard.

