Mr. Delattre (France) (Spoke in French): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General of Disarmament Affairs
for her clear and enlightening briefing.

It is no secret that this meeting is taking place
against an extremely worrying backdrop, in the light of
which I will make three series of observations regarding
the threat of a large-scale offensive in Idlib, potentially
involving the use of chemical weapons; the state of play
of the Syrian chemical file; and lastly, the urgenct need
a political solution and the priority that must be given
to the protection of civilians.

Let us get straight to the facts. Syria is once again
on the brink of an abyss. I would ask everyone here to
carefully consider what a major attack on Idlib would
mean. There are nearly 3 million inhabitants in the city,
more than half of whom are internally displaced. Such
an attack, in the context that I have just outlined, would
have disastrous humanitarian, migratory and security
consequences that would open a new chapter in the long
Syrian tragedy. Such an attack would indeed produce
an absolute humanitarian tragedy, with deadly attacks
on civilians, indiscriminate air raids and the use of
prohibited weapons, notably chemical weapons, by the
regime, while civilians would have nowhere to go. Such
an attack would also generate a major migration crisis
towards northern Syria, Turkey and potentially Europe
and beyond. Finally, such a major attack would pose a
serious threat to regional security, particularly through
the spread ofjihadist fighters, who are also in the area.

In the light of the threat of such a disaster, we are
fully mobilized and wholly determined. The priority of
our collective efforts must be to respect the ceasefire
in the area, and today, on behalf of France, I call on
Russia and Iran to use their influence on the Syrian
regime to achieve that. The supporters of Damascus
have the means to prevent such a crisis, because the
regime cannot act alone.

We also remain extremely vigilant in the light of
the risk of chemical weapons use. As we have said
on several occasions, notably alongside the United
Kingdom and the United States, any new and verified
use of such weapons by the Bashar Al-Assad regime
would not go unpunished. Our political leaders have
expressed themselves unambiguously on that point.

As I said, there is currently a particularly serious
and high risk of such activity. It is no secret that the
Syrian regime has not stopped using chemical weapons
since 2013, in violation ofits international commitments

and of the most essential principles, values and rules of
law. The regime has pursued its strategy of crushing any
opposition by resorting to the most terrifying weapons,
while conducting a cynical campaign of misinformation
that is propagated by its allies.

Hundreds of civilians paid the price for that in
Douma, in April, as well as in Khan Shaykhun, one
year earlier, in April 2017. I remind those who would
once again try to deny or qualify the reality of the
facts or to try and cause confusion that the regime of
Bashar Al-Assad has already been formally identified,
on several occasions, as having the capacity to use
sarin, chlorine and gas on civilians - capacity that it
has used.

Let there be no mistake - the Syrian chemical
weapons programme has not been dismantled. The
continued use of chemical weapons in Syria is an
irrefutable indication that stocks of both sarin and
chlorine exist. We have taken note of the reports of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) noting the destruction of all declared facilities
and the transmission of information by the Syrian
regime. However, I remind the Council that the regime
has never sincerely cooperated with the OPCW and that,
to date, it remains impossible to confirm if the regime
declared all of its inventories and capacities in 2013.

In that edifying context, we therefore call on
Syria's allies to take full responsibility for preventing
further escalation and banning the use of chemical
weapons. The meeting of the Astana Group countries
tomorrow must establish clear commitments on their
part to maintaining the ceasefire of which they are
guarantors; avoiding a military escalation, which would
be disastrous in humanitarian terms; and protecting
civilians in an area that, I recall, is supposed to be a
de-escalation zone.

Such action is imperative for Syria and for the
international community. The re-emergence of weapons
of terror poses a serious threat to the security of each
of our countries and to the entire non-proliferation
regime. We therefore have a collective moral, legal and
political responsibility to prevent and deter the use of
such weapons. The perpetrators of chemical atrocities
in Syria and elsewhere must know that they cannot act
with impunity and that they will be held accountable.
That is the goal of the international partnership against
impunity for the use of chemical weapons and the
mechanism for identifying those responsible being
established in The Hague t. It is also one of the reasons
for our support for the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, which
must be able to complete its work. There can be no
lasting peace withoutjustice.

In conclusion, I stress once again the particular
gravity of the current situation, the responsibility
incumbent upon us all to act, and the importance of
fully mobilizing the Council and, more broadly, the
international community to that end. The military
preparations under way in Idlib and the presence within
that enclave of a concentration of terrorist fighters and
several million civilians, including many displaced
persons, are creating conditions that could lead to a
humanitarian and security disaster that we must and can
prevent together if we pool our efforts. Such a scenario
would seriously undermine all the efforts under way to
find a political solution, under the auspices of United
Nations mediation and with the support of the Council,
and would represent a major setback.

The priority must be to respect the ceasefire, the
protection of civilians and full, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access. France therefore calls on the
Astana guarantors to maintain the de-escalation and
avoid the escalation of violence, with the primary
concern being to protect civilian populations. We are
at a crossroads. We can either once again plunge into
chaos or rally around United Nations mediation led
by Staffan de Mistura, which provides us with a way
out by promoting the establishment of a constitutional
committee in the coming weeks - the cornerstone ofa
lasting political solution that, if we are able to pool our
efforts, is within reach. Let us therefore not allow the
conflict to regress into violent escalation.

We will have an opportunity to rally together at the
upcoming session of the General Assembly. On behalf
of France, I call on everyone today to rise as one to the
occasion. It is in our and the Syrians' best interests.

