The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.

I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti for her briefing. I also welcome the
presence here today of His Excellency Ambassador
Denis Re'gis, Permanent Representative of Haiti.

I associate myself with the statements to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union and the
Group of Friends of Haiti.

It is always a pleasure to have Ms. Honore with
us to discuss the situation in Haiti. We commend
her outstanding work as Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), and we
reiterate our full support to her and her team.

We have carefully considered the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2015/ 157) on the work of
MINUSTAH six months after the renewal of its mandate
under resolution 2180 (2014). The report confirms the
pattern for MINUSTAH's evolution decided at the time.
We agree with the analysis of the security situation and
with the means to respond to it.

We believe that MINUSTAH's evolution is moving
in a direction in line with choosing a response and
mobilizing all available means on the basis of an overall
assessment ofthe situation. That decision was endorsed
by the Security Council, which also included a provision
to revisit its position. We have given ourselves time
to consider the issue, and the Council has visited the
country. We understand the concern of some. We take
particular note of the request by President Martelly to
the Council. It is clear that the situation in Haiti includes
risk factors. We continue to follow with the greatest
interest the evolution of the situation in Haiti. That is
our responsibility as a member of the Council and as
a friend of Haiti. But we have not heard any argument
to support maintaining the current arrangement, or for
scaling back at a different proportion or according to
some other schedule.

We believe it is now important to implement
what we decided in October. This is a matter of the
authority and credibility of the Council, which, let us
recall, voted unanimously on how MINUSTAH would
evolve. This is also about the confidence we have
in the vitality of Haiti's democracy as an element of
stability and development in the country. As we enter a
major chapter in Haitian history, replete with so much
promise, it is essential that MINUSTAH act without
fear or paralysis. Furthermore, the Council does not
overlook the security uncertainties. It is wrong to speak
about a reduction of MINUSTAH; we are talking about
a reconfiguration of its posture in accordance with the
evolution of the situation.

In the run-up to the upcoming elections, the police
force will be called upon to take a leading role, relying
as a last resort on a military component with increased
mobility.

It is also a matter of great conviction for France
that the country's future problems must be met with
solutions aimed at maintaing public order. As such, we
welcome the decision of MINUSTAH to increase the
number of its police component and make full use of
troops up to the ceiling authorized by the Council.

Moreover, as a vision for the future of MINUSTAH
finally emerges, we note the start of a reflection among

MINUSTAH, the country team and the Government
on how to conduct the transition of the international
presence in Haiti after 2016. That is a positive message
both for the Haitian authorities and the international
community: we can finally look to the horizon.

This horizon is emerging now. An electoral calendar
has been approved and published. Haitian voters have
been called to the polls. The electoral machinery has
been set into motion.

We welcome the establishment of the essential
framework for holding the long-delayed elections and
the renewal of democratic institutions. All stakeholders
must continue to work together to strengthen mutual
trust to allow for the holding of fair, transparent and
inclusive elections. We call on all stakeholders to
engage resolutely in defining a better future for Haiti
and all Haitians.

Much remains to be done. There must be more
efficiency, transparency and accessibility with regard
to the rule of law and institutions. In terms of human
rights, the determination of Haitian authorities has
been clearly demonstrated. But human rights violations
continue, and it is the responsibility of the State to turn
words into deeds in this area. In that regard, we have in
mind in particular the situation of prisoners, many of
whom are still awaiting a court decision.

Finally, humanitarian challenges remain. The news
looks good with regard to the cholera epidemic, but
some prevalence remains. We fully support the work
and commitment of the United Nations for the total
eradication of the disease.

On those remaining challenges, it is imperative
that the Haitian authorities take full ownership for the
assistance provided to them. The United Nations should
complement and support the work of the Haitian State,
but it cannot substitute for it.

In conclusion, Iwould like to recall that MINUSTAH
was deployed in 2004 in the context of acute crisis.
That crisis was compounded a few years later by a
tragic earthquake. Eleven years later, the situation has,
fortunately, changed considerably. MINUSTAH must
adapt to that favourable evolution, which is proof of its
success. We expect the Secretary-General to present
again in his next report recommendations for the next
phase of the reconfiguration of MINUSTAH launched
last October. We must go further, in the context of
seeking greater efficiency in peacekeeping. We must
start thinking today of a Haiti after MINUSTAH.
As such, we are eager to engage with our partners to
consider the role that the Peacebuilding Commission
could play to prepare for the future United Nations
presence in Haiti.

For France, Haiti continues to be a dear friend. We
will continue to stand resolutely by its side.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.

