The President: Before we adopt the agenda, let me
make a few remarks in my national capacity as President
of the Security Council for the month of April.

Let me start by picking up where we left off on
Friday when a colleague from the Dominican Republic
said that I should take the French presidency as an
example when leading the Council in April (see S/PV.8498). I will do that, but I would first like to thank
both Mr. Francois Delattre and Mrs. Anne Gueguen, as
well as their team, for the wonderful cooperation that
we had during the first leg of the German-French twin
presidencies for the months of March and April. I hope
Council members have seen that these are substantially
innovative bilateral presidencies. We very much
appreciate that France, during the first presidency,
actually did share a lot of things with Germany, and not
just in a pro forma way. In particular, France shared its
presidency when we went on the trip together to Africa,
so our trip to Burkina Faso and Mali was really a trip
with three presidencies. I think that was a good sign
of cooperation among the five permanent members and
the elected 10. I thank the French delegation very much
for that.

The presidency ofthe Security Council is something
very special for Germany because the Security Council
is at the core of multilateralism and of the United
Nations, which is at the top of the international rules-
based order. We started the month with the issue of
humanitarian law, which is very important to us. We
met with regard to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons yesterday (see S/PV.8500), again
together with our French friends. I am very happy that,
under the agenda that we are about to adopt today,
we will have as a briefer the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for her first-ever
meeting with the Security Council in that capacity.
Human rights are very important for us. We want this
to work. We will do everything possible to ensure that
the next weeks of the Security Council are successful.

We want to have an enlightened Security Council. I
am very grateful to the Secretariat that our intervention
to have the curtains opened was successful and
we now have natural light in the Council. But we
have another innovation in the Chamber, which we
announced through the Political Coordinator, namely,
this hourglass here. It was hand made in Thuringia. It
takes about five and a half minutes, after it is turned,
for the sand to drop down. That is a bit longer than the
recommendation for interventions in presidential note
S/2017/507, which is for five minutes, but we thought
we would give an extra 30 seconds. However, let me say
that - and I am looking a bit by chance at our friend
Jerry Matjila - there is an inalienable right to speak,
so nobody wants to cut you short, Jerry, or anybody
else. We will follow the proposal of our South African
friend and put forward a draft resolution about that.

As the President of the Security Council this
month, I would suggest that I thank the briefers and
United Nations officials for their interventions so that
participants do not need to repeat words of thanks.
However, of course, all members are free to do it
individually.

We would like meetings to really be interactive, so
participants should not hesitate to ask questions. Also,
please use the two-finger rule if you have a question
that you want to put to a speaker and, at the end, I
will ask all the briefers if they are ready to respond
to questions. Let us see how it works. We are not
doing this to annoy members, but because we believe
in the Security Council. We believe that this is a very
important body and that, at a time when there are many
difficult issues on the international agenda, we have to
meet the expectations of our citizens and make it work.

I thank everyone very much for giving me the
chance to say a few words at the beginning of the
routine agenda.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The question concerning Haiti

Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (S/2019/198)

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Canada and Haiti to
participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jean-
Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations; Ms. Veronica Michelle Bachelet Jeria,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights; and Ms. Loune Viaud, Executive Director of
Zanmi Lasante.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Joao
Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/20l9/l98, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti.

I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.


