Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We welcome and thank
the new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI), Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, for
her briefing. We look forward to working with her on
her assignment. We would also like to welcome our
colleague, the Permanent Representative of Iraq.

South Africa would like to highlight the following
three areas in our intervention today: the political
situation, the security situation and the role of the
region in assisting Iraq.

First, with regard to the political situation, South
Africa commends the Iraqi authorities on the progress
achieved in forming a national Government. We
encourage all stakeholders to work together to finalize
the Cabinet. All political forces should close ranks and
reach an agreement on the outstanding Cabinet posts
so that the Government is able to start delivering on
its promises to the public for better security and the
dignified return of internally displaced persons,
rehabilitated public services, a revitalized economy
and the implementation of reconstruction and
development projects.

Additionally, it is very important for the
Government of Iraq to promote the meaningful
inclusion of women in the political process and their
representation at all levels of political structures. We
welcome the announcement by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert of
the launch, on 24 January, of the Women's Advisory
Group on Reconciliation and Politics. That is a very
positive development indeed.

Secondly, with regard to the security situation, we

note with concern the assessment in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/101) that the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) remains a threat in Iraq. This
threat must be addressed, as the continued presence of
ISIL has ramifications not only for the instability of
Iraq, but also for the entire region. We support Iraqi
efforts to hold those accountable for crimes committed
in the country, in line with resolution 2379 (2017), which
established the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to support
domestic Iraqi efforts to that end.

Furthermore, South Africa reaffirms its support
for the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Iraq. We encourage all stakeholders to
continue to support and engage in the efforts initiated
by UNAMI in an effort to achieve effective post-
conflict reconstruction and sustainable peace in Iraq.
We are particularly concerned about the increase in
violence against women and children, as highlighted
in the Secretary-General's report. In this regard, we
support the efforts of UNAMI and UNICEF to address
this scourge.

Thirdly, with regard to the role of the region,
we welcome the increased involvement of regional
organizations in the political process and reaffirm
their role in assisting the Government of Iraq in the
reconstruction of the country. We also welcome the
renewed cooperation and talks between the central
Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional
Government, and encourage both parties to continue to
reach consensus on areas of concern. We also share the
views of regional actors that Government formation in
Iraq is an important step towards building a stronger
and more balanced relationship among the countries of
the Middle East region.

In conclusion, South Africa reiterates its support
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq, in
line with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and will continue to support UNAMI in
the implementation of its mandate. Furthermore, we
continue to support the work of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, as part of UNAMI's mandate, and
emphasize the importance of the independence and
impartiality of the mechanism, while working in line
with the principles of the United Nations Charter,
United Nations policies and best practices.

