Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union and its 28 member
States. The candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, as
well as Ukraine, align themselves with this statement.
A full version ofmy statement will be circulated. Allow
me to make a few remarks.

Recent events in Gaza are a stark reminder of
how volatile the situation on the ground can be in the
absence of a clear political horizon. That is why, in past
months, the European Union has consistently kept the
Middle East peace process high on the political agenda,
at a time when the region faces many other challenges.

Our overarching objective remains to restore a
political horizon and an appropriate framework for
political progress, together with our regional and
international partners, starting with the Middle East
Quartet. The European Union appreciates the United
Nations role in that regard, including in particular the
role played by the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Peace Process, Nikolay Mladenov.

The European Union remains fully committed
to its known positions on parameters for a two-State
solution, on the need to avoid any steps that are eroding
the viability of the two-State solution, as laid down in
the Quartet report of July 2016, including in particular
continued Israeli settlement activity, which is illegal
under international law and remains an obstacle to
peace, as reaffirmed by resolution 2334 (2016), as well
as incitement and violence.

The European Union has followed closely the
recent protests and violence at the Gaza border fence.
Over 30 Palestinians have been killed by Israeli live
fire, including minors andjournalists. Thousands have
been injured. That raises serious questions about the
proportionate use of force, which must be addressed
through independent and transparent investigations.
The European Union takes note of the fact-finding
assessment mechanism established by the Israel
Defence Forces to review its own actions and specific
incidents that have taken place on the Israeli-Gaza
border since 30 March. Facts must also be established
regarding reports about violent attacks against Israel
under the guise of the protests.

The most immediate priority for all sides must
be to prevent any further escalation and loss of life.
We call on all sides to act with utmost restraint and
responsibility, while respecting the rights of freedom
of expression and freedom of assembly. Israel must
respect the right to peaceful protests and ensure the use
of proportional measures when protecting its legitimate
security interests. Those leading the protests and the
de facto authorities in Gaza must avoid any incitement
to violence, ensure that the protests remain strictly
non-violent and not exploit them for other means. The
situation in Gaza could have significant consequences
for regional and international peace and security, as
demonstrated by three conflicts over the past decade.
Therefore, the Security Council must contribute to
de-escalation efforts, including through an appropriate
public expression.

The European Union has made important efforts,
together with its partners, in recent months to improve
the situation for the people in Gaza and support the
return of the single legitimate Palestinian Authority
to Gaza. The European Union co-chaired a donor
conference for the Gaza desalination plant, which
received pledges of €456 million, €77 million of which
came from the European Union. The plant, which will
address the human right to water in Gaza, will take
some years to build, but some of its components will
have an immediate positive impact.

The efforts of the international community in Gaza
can bear fruit only ifthere is also responsible leadership
on the ground. We expect all Palestinian factions to
work together to address the needs of the Palestinian
population. That will require a serious engagement in
good faith, under Egyptian auspices, to implement the
agreement of 12 October 2017, allowing the Palestinian
Authority to resume its full responsibilities in Gaza.
Gaza and the West Bank must be reunified under one
single and legitimate Palestinian Authority. That is an
important element for achieving the two-State solution
and a viable and sovereign Palestinian State. All parties
must take swift steps to produce a fundamental change
in the political, security and economic situation in the
Gaza Strip, in accordance with resolution 1860 (2009),
including the end of the closure and a full opening of
the crossing points, while addressing Israel's legitimate
security concerns.

The European Union remains deeply concerned
over recent significant reductions of funding to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which is facing its
most difficult financial situation since its inception in
1949. That will have serious security and humanitarian
consequences not only in Gaza, but also in the West
Bank and neighbouring countries. The extraordinary
Ministerial Conference held in Rome on 15 March,
at the initiative of Sweden, Jordan and Egypt, was
an important occasion to mobilize both political and
financial support for the Agency and find ways to
assure sustainable forms of financing for UNRWA.
Collectively, the European Union and its member States
are among the largest contributors to the Agency, and
that will continue. We call on all donors to continue
or increase their support and on those that have cut
funding to rethink their decision.

The European Union reiterates its support for
Israel's legitimate right to exist, as well as Palestine's
legitimate aspirations to statehood and sovereignty. In
view of the upcoming events in mid-May and the risks
of a flare up of tensions and violence on the ground,
the priority must be to avoid further escalation and loss
of life. We urge the parties to show restraint and avoid
provocative rhetoric and acts that would risk fuelling
further tensions. The European Union and its member
States will continue to respect the international
consensus on Jerusalem embodied in, inter alia,
resolution 478 (1980), including on the location of their
diplomatic representations, until the final status of
Jerusalem is resolved.

Allow me to turn briefly to Syria, where the
conflict has entered its eighth year.

We strongly condemn the repeated use of chemical
weapons in Syria and their continued and repeated use
by the regime, in violation of resolution 2118 (2013) and
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction, including the latest attack
on Douma, which was a grave breach of international
law and an affront to human decency. The EU fully
supports the ongoing investigation by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OCPW)
Fact-finding Mission into that devastating chemical
attack. The EU reiterates its strong commitment to
combatting the re-emergence of chemical weapons and
is supportive of all efforts aimed at the prevention of
the use of chemical weapons.

In that respect, the European Union deeply regrets
the multiple Russian vetoes of the renewal of the OPCW-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism mandate
in November 2017, and urges the Security Council
to rapidly re-establish an independent attribution
mechanism to ensure accountability for perpetrators
of chemical weapons' attacks. We support the current
efforts led by the Security Council to recreate dialogue
and move forward on all tracks of the Syrian conflict.

The European Union held the second Brussels
Conference on supporting the future of Syria and
the region, co-chaired with the United Nations. We
concluded on a strong message of broad international
support for relaunching the political process, under
United Nations auspices, in Geneva to solve the Syrian
crisis, in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2254 (2015), and the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). We reiterate
that the European Union will be ready to assist in the
reconstruction of Syria only when a comprehensive,
genuine and inclusive political transition, negotiated
by the Syrian parties in the conflict on the basis of
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique is
firmly under way.

At the Brussels Conference, $4.4 billion were
mobilized in support of operations to address both
the worsening humanitarian situation inside Syria and
the enormous needs of refugees and their hosts across
the region this year, as well as multi-year pledges of
$3.4 billion for the period 2019-2020.

In conclusion, the momentum of the current
situation should be used to reinvigorate the process to
find a political resolution to the Syrian conflict. The
European Union repeats that any sustainable solution
to the conflict requires a genuine political transition,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communique, negotiated by the Syrian parties within
the United Nations-led Geneva process, and we remain
committed to the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Syrian State. In that context, the
European Union commends the tireless efforts of the
United Nations Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, to facilitate the implementation of all relevant
resolutions. The European Union will spare no efforts
in support ofa peaceful solution to the Syrian conflict.

