Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like welcome you, Mr. Minister. We extend our
congratulations to the United Kingdom on assuming
the Council's presidency and thank the delegation of
Togo for its leadership of the Council last month. We
thank the Secretary-General for his statement this
morning and Special Representative Mahiga for his
briefing.

Somalia stands at a critical moment. The
international community has an important but limited
window of opportunity. The African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali forces have driven
Al-Shabaab out of Mogadishu and other areas. The
mandate of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG)
comes to an end in August. Somalia now has a blue
print for a State after 20 years without a functional
Government. At the same time, Somalia is emerging
from the worst humanitarian crisis in the world.

The TFG and the international community have
already taken important steps. The unanimous adoption
of resolution 2036 (2012) on 22 February, immediately
followed by the London conference on Somalia, shows
that the international community is united in its
commitment to Somalia's future. I would like to thank
the United Kingdom for hosting that important
conference, and commend members of the Council for
giving unanimous support to AMISOM's expansion.

The AMISOM. troop levels are now increasing
and its funding needs have been established. The
second Garowe Constitutional Conference showed the
way towards more inclusive governance with clear
benchmarks, and the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia has now been established in Mogadishu.
We have accomplished much, but this is no time to lose
momentum. A number of critical tasks lie ahead before
the road map's August deadline. We have six months,
and we need to use them wisely.

First, the most important achievement of the
London conference was to galvanize high-level and
public international support to continue to keep
pressure on Somali leaders to complete the road map
by August. The conference participants, including the
United States, concluded that the August deadline was
firm. There must be no extension of the Transitional
Federal Government's mandate beyond 20 August. The
signatories to the road map must fulfil their
commitments and complete the difficult work ahead to
bring stability to Somalia for the first time in many of
its people's lives.

The critical next steps are to complete the
drafting of the new constitution and to establish the
Constituent Assembly. Fundamental to that effort will
be developing a public information and outreach
process to win popular consent for the ongoing
process. The United States will support the sanctioning
of political spoilers and other individuals who threaten
the peace, stability and security of Somalia.

Secondly, for the political process to continue, we
must redouble our efforts to disrupt terrorism. Despite
the military successes of AMISOM, Al-Shabaab
remains dangerous. It continues to destroy the lives of
innocent Somalis. We welcome the Council's decision,
as requested by the TFG, to further degrade Al-Shabaab
by imposing an international ban on the import and
export of charcoal from Somalia. That decision targets
a primary revenue stream for Al-Shabaab. However,
sanctions work only when they are implemented. We
urge all Member States to take immediate steps to
comply with the obligation contained in resolution
2036 (2012) to ban the trade of Somali charcoal,
particularly by those most active in such trade.

We must also stop the movement of terrorists to
and from Somalia, further disrupt the flow of their
finances, and develop the capacity to conduct criminal
investigations and prosecutions, as well as to operate
secure detention facilities. The Security Council should
continue advancing international cooperation to
produce concrete results in those areas.

We also ask all Member States to build the
capacity of the Somali security sector to pave the way
for Somalis to take charge of their own security. We
urge new donors to assist the Somali national security
forces by providing training, equipment, salaries,
infrastructure and logistical support. The United States
has obligated more than $106 million to support that
effort, and we ask others to do their part.

Thirdly, to maximize the pressure on Al-Shabaab,
we must implement fully and swiftly the expansion
mandated in resolution 2036 (2012). The sacrifices
made by AMISOM. and the Somali national security
forces testify to their dedication to bringing peace and
stability in Somalia. We call on additional troop
contributors to respond quickly to enable AMISOM. to
be fully staffed.

We also urge Member States to increase the
voluntary support for AMISOM. troop-contributing
countries, particularly in the form of equipment and
funding for the United Nations Trust Fund in Support
of AMISOM. The United States has a long and strong
tradition of support for that. Now, the support of
AMISOM. must become a truly international effort.
Maritime assets will be critical to AMISOM's mission,
and we hope that providing sustainable and reliable
funding for the maritime component will be addressed
in the coming months.

As we continue to reinforce AMISOM's capacity
to root out Al-Shabaab and establish conditions for
effective and legitimate governance, we must also
ensure that timely and visible benefits accrue to
ordinary Somalis in recently liberated areas and
improve security, as well as access to food, water,
health care and livelihoods. Stabilization programming
in those areas must be expanded swiftly to cement
military gains and to lay a foundation for long-term
reconstruction and economic development.

Fourthly, as we continue to press for political
progress and diminish the threat of terrorism, we must
sustain our humanitarian response to Somalia. All
parties to the conflict must allow unrestricted
humanitarian access. The United States is deeply
concerned about displaced people pouring into
Mogadishu. There is a widespread housing shortage, a
lack of clean water and sanitation and a serious threat
of disease.

We remain particular concerned about the plight
of Somali women and children, many of whom are
vulnerable to increased levels of sexual and gender-
based violence. We urge the international community
to continue to provide life-saving assistance to those
populations and others in need in Somalia and its
neighbours. Secretary of State Clinton announced at
the London conference that the United States would
increase our humanitarian assistance to the Horn of
Africa by $64 million, bringing our total emergency
assistance to the region since 2011 up to more than
$934 million. That amount includes more than
$211 million for life-saving programmes in Somalia.
We urge all Member States to strongly support the
$1.5-billion United Nations consolidated appeal for
Somalia, which is currently funded at only
$165 million, or 11 per cent.

Let me reiterate our strong support for AMISOM
and our continued commitment to working with the
international community in seeking solutions to the
challenges faced by the people of Somalia, who have
suffered for too long. In the six-month period, we have
a unique opportunity, and we must do everything that
we can to seize it.

