Mr. Ebner (Austria): Austria fully associates
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Slovenia on behalf of the European Union (EU). I
would therefore like to make just the following brief
comments.

The availability of and the easy access to small
arms and light weapons have terrible consequences,
such as crime, terrorism, the destabilization of State
structures and societies and national and international
conflict. We encounter human rights violations, as well
as long-term displacement and poverty. Small arms
contribute to undermining the attempts of millions of
people to enjoy development opportunities in peace
and security.

Together with its EU partners and individually,
Austria strives to support the fight against the illicit
accumulation of and trafficking in small arms and light
weapons. Despite a lack of tangible progress in global
efforts against illicit small arms and light weapons in
recent years, there have been significant advances at
the regional level. We have therefore focused our
support on these regional initiatives.

In Africa - the continent most affected by the
uncontrolled spread of small arms - Austria supports
the strengthening of national and regional legal
regimes and capacity-building, as well as practical
disarmament measures. We provide funding, totalling
more than half a million euros, to a number of critical
projects implemented by the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa. One such
project seeks to curb the illicit brokering of small arms,
through the establishment of a regional register of
authorized arms dealers in the States that participate in
the Small Arms Transparency and Control Regime in
Africa. Another project envisages the establishment of
a new legal instrument to control the trafficking of
small arms and light weapons among Central African
States. Yet another project is aimed at supporting the
implementation of the Convention on Small Arms of
the Economic Community of West African States.
Austria has made a long-term commitment to those
multi-year projects.

In the Asian and Pacific region, Austria focuses
its support on capacity-building as well as on
strengthening the rule of law by supporting a project to
curb the illicit brokering of small arms and light
weapons. That project will be implemented by the
United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific, in Kathmandu,
Nepal.

In our immediate neighbourhood of Eastern
Europe and Central Asia, Austria supports the
destruction of stockpiles and ammunition, in line with
the recommendation, made by the Secretary-General in
his recent report (S/2008/258), that the destruction of
surplus ammunition stockpiles be made a priority.

We view our financial support for all of these
projects as concrete contributions that assist States in
implementing the United Nations Programme of
Action, as recommended by the Secretary-General in
his recent report.

Before concluding, let me briefly mention the
valuable contribution of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Its contributions
to standard-setting are well recognized and comprise,
inter alia, a landmark document: the Handbook of Best
Practices on Small Arms and Light Weapons. Besides
norm-setting, the OSCE places priority on assistance to
affected States and on weapons destruction.

Austria supports continued attention by the
Security Council to the overarching problem of illicit
small arms and light weapons. Furthermore, we look
forward to the third Biennial Meeting to consider the
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action, to be held in July. We welcome the
determination that exists at the regional level to move
forward in the fight against small arms and light
weapons. At the same time, the continuation of a small
arms and light weapons process at the global level
remains indispensable. After all, in our interconnected
world, the human security of all of us depends on it.

