Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for giving me
this opportunity to speak about the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). At the outset,
allow me to extend my Government's sincere
appreciation to Ambassador Greenstock for his
initiative, his dynamic approach and his wisdom in
guiding the Counter-Terrorism Committee. Members of
the United Nations are indebted to the United Kingdom
in general and to Ambassador Greenstock in particular
for having taken this very energetic action. The interest
in this debate today clearly shows the international
community's determination to combat terrorism. We
should also highlight the need for agreed action on
several fronts.

Terrorism requires a 100 per cent commitment on
the part of 100 per cent of the United Nations
membership for 100 per cent of the time. Canada today
reiterates its full commitment to the struggle against
terrorism.

(spoke in English)

I am pleased to inform the Council that on 24
December 2001, Canada strengthened its anti-terrorism
legislation, as outlined in our report to the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. We believe that this legislation
recognizes the need to enhance security and to protect
human rights. In the very near future, we will ratify the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism and the International
Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings,
and with that we will have ratified and implemented all
12 United Nations anti-terrorism conventions.

At the beginning of 2002 - that is to say, this
month - Canada assumed the rotating chairmanship of
the G-8. This summer we will be hosting the G-8
Summit in Kananaskis, Canada. Three policy priorities
will shape our work in the coming months: first,
strengthening the global economic growth; secondly,
building a new partnership with Africa in support of
the New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD); and, thirdly, fighting international terrorism.
Each goal is important, and each one is relevant to the
others.

Cooperation within the G-8 forum has been
instrumental in developing agreements in other forums,
including in the United Nations, on issues such as
transportation, security and the exchange of
information on the movement of terrorists, their
support networks and their activities. Work of the G-8
has focused on improvement in national legislation and
on international cooperation in combating illegal arms
trafficking and the movement of terrorists. Further, the
G-8 summit process has proven useful in testing ideas
and subsequently in developing guidelines for
countering terrorism.

The G-8's work is not limited to the G-8 summit
process itself. We work together on the broader
international scene with international organizations,
especially the United Nations, and regional
organizations as well.

At the Halifax Summit in 1995, the G-8
undertook to promote specific measures to deter,
prevent, investigate and counter terrorist acts. These
measures include the universal ratification of the
international conventions on terrorism, the
enhancement of the sharing of intelligence and open
source information and the prevention of terrorist
access to weapons of mass destruction. We also took
steps to inhibit the mobility of terrorists, to prevent the
falsification of documents and to deprive terrorists of
funds.

At the Lyon Summit in 1996, G-8 leaders
declared that the fight against terrorism is a priority
and urged all States to deny support to terrorists.

At a ministerial conference held in Paris the same
year, ministers agreed at that time to 25 measures to
increase efficiency and coherence in the fight against
terrorism.

Subsequently, we have continued to develop
practical measures for countering terrorism. Looking
ahead to Kananaskis, G-8 experts are now working
jointly to develop new measures against terrorism in a
number of areas, including judicial cooperation,
computer crime and border security. We will also
continue to ensure that our efforts feed into other
established processes, particularly the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, because no one has resources for
competition or overlap.

As Chairman of the G-8, we will follow Italy's
example and meet periodically with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, with a view to promoting mutual
understanding and close cooperation.

The United Nations brings together the political,
diplomatic, legal, economic, humanitarian and security
dimensions of the counter-terrorism agenda. Resolution
1373 (2001) provides a sound framework for national,
regional and international actions. It is the foundation
for all of our collective efforts in fighting terrorism.

I should like just to go on record to say that the
root cause of terrorism is terrorists. There is no
circumstance in which terrorism is justified.

We all agree that the United Nations has a unique
role to play. Canada believes that international
cooperation is the key to ensuring the implementation
of this resolution, and we recognize that many States
do not at present have the resources, funds and
experienced people readily at hand to undertake the
wide-ranging measures required of them in resolution
1373 (2001). Without some assistance to build that
capacity, those States will be left vulnerable to
exploitation by terrorists and terrorist networks, and if
they are vulnerable, each of us around this table is
vulnerable.

Capacity-building assistance is directly related to
the security of each and every one of us. It is therefore
essential that we all coordinate our approaches to
setting priorities and our responses to the needs of
States in the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

We are pleased to see that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee has asked States to identify their needs as
well as their capacity to provide assistance to others in
the implementation of the resolution. Canada will do
its part for those that need help.

