Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
would like to welcome Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haq to the Council and to thank her
for her briefing. The United States congratulates her on
assuming that position and looks forward to working

10-2486]
with her. I would also like to extend a warm welcome
to His Excellency Jose Luis Guterres, Deputy Prime
Minister of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste,
and to thank him very much for his remarks.

We applaud the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste for the progress they have made and for
their deep commitment to establishing a strong and
sustainable democracy. We are encouraged by that
progress, but, as the Secretary-General's report makes
clear (S/2010/85), Government institutions remain
fragile. The briefings we have heard this morning
provide us with valuable insight into the situation on
the ground. The technical assessment mission
organized by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has provided us with helpful
recommendations on the way forward.

This morning, I would like to address the four
priority areas outlined in the Secretary-General's
report. First, let me say a few words on security and
stability.

The successful local elections on 9 October were
a positive sign that the security situation remains
stable. The upcoming municipal and national elections
will be a further test of the Government's political
stability and of the capacity of the Timorese national
police. The continued transfer of primary policing
responsibilities from the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) to the national police
is another positive development. In that regard, we
commend the efforts of Timor-Leste, UNMIT and
dedicated bilateral donors, particularly Australia and
New Zealand. We support the Government's desire to
accelerate the timeline for the transfer of the remaining
policing districts, but we note the importance of
adequate training and sufficient capacity before
transfers take place. We also reiterate the need to
remain diligent in delineating responsibility between
the police and the military.

The United States supports the Secretary-
General's recommendations to gradually decrease
international police personnel and to continue high-
quality specialized training of the national police,
including through the addition of civilian experts. We
are pleased to continue to facilitate that strengthening
of Timor-Leste's security sector through our multi-
stakeholder national security workshops hosted by the
Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies in Honolulu.

On the matters of the rule of law, justice and
human rights, we commend the Government of Timor-
Leste for its achievements in strengthening the
judiciary and in passing key legislation to support the
rule of law, including the adoption of the criminal
code. We are, however, concerned about the need to
address impunity. In that regard, we welcome very
much the comments of the Deputy Prime Minister this
morning. Those individuals who committed offences
during the 2006 crisis should be held accountable in
accordance with the recommendations of the Special
Commission of Inquiry. We also encourage Timor-
Leste to support the recommendations of the
Commission for Truth and Reconciliation.

With regard to democratic governance, Timor-
Leste has made advances in establishing the Civil
Service Commission and more effective parliamentary
oversight of Government activities. Timorese officials
have now turned their attention to combating
corruption. The United States is considering ways that
our Millennium Challenge Corporation might assist
Timorese efforts in that area.

Finally, the United States recognizes the clear
link between security and development. In that context,
we remain concerned about the most vulnerable in
Timor-Leste: the poor and the displaced. We support
Timor-Leste's continued efforts to address
malnutrition, increase employment and improve access
to education and child protection, especially in rural
areas. For our part, the United States continues to
provide technical support through $24 million in
annual assistance programming. Timor-Leste has
deemed one of our rural development projects - the
Greenhouse Project 4 as a best practice. We
appreciate that the Government is now making its own
investment to replicate the model throughout the
country.

The people of Timor-Leste have made great
strides towards achieving peace and stability. But they
need and deserve the continued support of the United
Nations and international partners. For that reason, the
United States supports the extension of UNMIT's
mandate as proposed by the Secretary-General.

