Ms. D'Achon (France) (spoke in French):
I would like, on behalf of the French delegation, to
thank you personally, Mr. President, and to
congratulate you and Mali's entire team, for the
exemplary manner in which you have presided over the
Council this month. As other speakers have said, you
have focused on African issues and, in holding a debate
on West Africa, you demonstrated the Council's great
interest in the continent.

This is a time for saying an revoir - though
certainly not adieu - to the five non-permanent
members that are leaving the Council; of course we
will continue to work with them outside the Security
Council. For the past two years, they have given us
their particular views, assessments and expertise, from
which the Council has greatly benefited. The views that
they have expressed today - which you,
Mr. President, enabled them to express by organizing
this meeting - about their experience will be
extremely useful in the future, and we have noted in
particular the improvements that could be made in the
working methods of the Council.

I will be very brief, as our Norwegian colleague
has encouraged us to be. In trying to decide - as the
Ambassador of Singapore has often encouraged us to
do - whether the balance sheet for December is
positive or negative, I would just like to note three
points related to issues other than Africa, which I have
mentioned.
On one issue - Afghanistan - the Council
reaffirmed its unanimity and its ability to take speedy
and effective action, adopting a second resolution on
the issue. The Council lived up to its commitments in
that respect, and it will no doubt continue to do so in
January by adopting a third text, after the submission
of Mr. Brahimi's report.

The second item on which the Council reacted to
tragic events and showed that it could deal once again
with a sensitive conflict - even though it was not able
to reach an agreement -is the situation in the Middle
East. As Ambassador Greenstock said earlier, ideas
were put forward on how we might continue to make
progress on that issue, one that we will certainly
continue to work on in the months to come.

Finally, I would like to mention the public
meeting on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which showed, once again, how useful a direct, open
dialogue with the United Nations Members involved in
a conflict can be in assisting the Council in its
reflections and actions.

