Mr. Holmberg: I would like to start by
congratulating the Indonesian presidency for
organizing this open debate on training and capacity
to improve the safety, security and performance of
United Nations peacekeepers. Furthermore, I would
like to commend today's important presidential
statement S/PRST/2019/4, which paves the way for our
work ahead.

I thank you, Madam President, for providing space
for the International Forum for the Challenges of Peace
Operations. The Challenges Forum is a partnership of
49 departments and organizations from all over the
globe - civilian, military and police. Seven out of
the Security Council's 15 members are also partners
of the Challenges Forum. For more than 20 years, the
Challenges Forum has used its convening power to
build bridges, generate innovative ideas and promote
results for more effective peace operations.

In 1989, when I entered the Peace and Conflict
Studies programme, the Berlin Wall came tumbling
down and the Cold War ended. Ten years later, I stood
outside the gates of the United Nations as a Junior
Professional Officer inspired and guided by the late
Secretary-General Kofi Annan's words and mantra
"Delivering as One", or "One United Nations", to
avoid stovepipes and work effectively together towards
common goals.

Once again, we have a unique opportunity to
benefit from the fruits of United Nations reforms, not
least regarding the shared commitments of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, which are aimed at refining
one of the United Nations and its Member States' most
important instruments for peace, security and reaching
the Sustainable Development Goals. This comes at a
time when the United Nations and other multilateral
institutions are needed more than they have been in
many years.

The purpose of this briefing is twofold: first, to
share the partners' recommendations relevant to today's
topics from our 2018 Annual Forum, which was hosted
by the Folke Bernadotte Academy and the Swedish
armed forces in Stockholm in November; and, secondly,
to share recommendations from Challenges Forum's
updated guidance for senior mission leaders of United
Nations peace operations, a process which was initiated
by the Indonesian Ministry for Foreign Affairs in 2016
and furthered by the Center for Strategic Research of
the Turkish Ministry for Foreign Affairs at our Annual
Forum in Istanbul 2017. The Challenges Forum's report
entitled Considerations for Mission Leadership in
United Nations Peacekeeping has been a key guidance
in United Nations training of mission leaders since
2010. Starting with the Challenges Annual Forum 2018,
I would like to share four recommendations for safety,
security and performance.

First, the United Nations Secretariat could,
in cooperation with Member States, develop an
interactive electronic archive of different complex and
challenging scenarios. Those could be used for field
training and generic training exercises. That should be
complemented with mission-specific training on the
operational environment shortly prior to deployment
and combined with an effective e-roster of troop- and
police-contributing countries to ensure just-in-time
training. That would allow for a better understanding
of the context they will be deploying to and entrench
the necessary mindset.

Secondly, in addition to learning from our mistakes,
it is perhaps equally important to build on good
practices on safety, security and performance. Based
on the risk premium award process, the Secretariat
and field missions could identify and share examples
and case studies of instances where peacekeepers have
performed exceptionally in the field for use as part of
training exercises.

Thirdly, Member States, the Secretariat and field
missions can use the Elsie Initiative on Women in Peace
Operations for improving operational effectiveness,
for example, by deploying women in operational and
outward-facing roles, such as female engagement
teams and female investigation teams, but also in
combat-related roles, thereby broadening the spectrum
of deployment. Moreover, the Elsie Initiative could
be used to identify mechanisms and incentives to
encourage troop- and police-contributing countries
to increase women deploying to the field, especially
in identifying and including a critical mass of female
mid-management officers, in addition to the present
efforts for positions at the senior level.

Fourthly, it is essential to clearly communicate
information on the priority of different training gaps
and needs so that Member States can concentrate their
support. The use of a light coordination mechanism,
highlighted in the shared commitments of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative and implemented by the
Department of Peace Operations, could also be used
for that.

Furthermore, to improve training, online surveys
can be used as part ofmonitoring and evaluation systems
to determine whether training was effective and/or can
be improved. Finally, all uniformed personnel should
have completed the online training, entitled "Basic
and advanced security in the field", provided by the
United Nations Department of Safety and Security,
before deployment.

With regard to this topic and with the memory
still fresh of yesterday's service for peacekeepers
who fell serving the cause of peace in 2018, the
Challenges Forum also recommends that all
peacekeeping stakeholders - both Member States
and the Secretariat - ensure that they fulfil their
responsibility of care for returning military, police and
civilian peacekeeping personnel.

Turning to the second area of the briefing - the
partnership's work on senior-mission leadership - it
has been led by eight co-Chairs from the United Service
Institution of India; the Center for Conflict Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding of Egypt; the Civil-
Military Centre of Australia; the Folke Bernadotte
Academy of Sweden; the Peacekeeping and Stability
Operations Institute of the United States of America;
the National Defence University of Pakistan; the
Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces of
Switzerland; and the Institute for Security Studies of
South Africa, all in consultations with the Secretariat.

Three generic recommendations can be extracted
for improving safety, security and performance. The
report prepared by Lieutenant General (Retired) Carlos
Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled "Improving Security
of United Nations Peacekeepers", also highlights that
effective leadership is a key condition for security.

First, it is important to strengthen training of
leaders on team-based leadership to function effectively
as a mission leadership team, but also to apply modern
management tools and approaches, that is, to have tools
to convert Vision and political strategies into action
and mission results for peace. The initiative of the
Secretariat and the Department of Peace Operations on
the comprehensive performance assessment system is
an important step in that direction.

Secondly, in addition to predeployment training,
it is also important to provide in-mission, scenario-
based training for senior- and middle-management
teams. That is especially important to civilian leaders,
as they usually have had less exposure to scenario-
based training than uniformed personnel. Training
together builds the cohesion of teams and increases
preparedness, effectiveness and the capability to
manage mission security.

Thirdly, we must ensure sustainability and expand
on the initiative to provide mentors for women and men
serving as senior mission leaders. Leadership is a harsh
task, many times without simple decisions, but balancing
between polarities, such as host-country consent, on
the one hand, and the protection of civilians, on the
other. Mentors can play an important role in helping
senior mission leaders cope with and manage difficult
considerations. In 2020, the Challenges Forum aims to
launch a web- and application-based leadership e-tool
for in-mission support, in cooperation with the United
Nations, together with interactive artificial intelligence
and tailor-made support for leaders in specific posts,
example cases and videos with guidance from former
leaders, both for online and offline use so it can be used
in mission settings.

One of Challenges Forum's strategic objectives
is to support the effective development and reform of
peace operations, and another is to help strengthen
mission leadership. From 9 to 11 June, Challenges
Forum partner the Government of Canada will
host our 2019 Annual Forum, looking at both those
examples, especially in connection with the "how" and
"who" aspects of the implementation of the action for
peacekeeping initiative from a field perspective. The
participants will review similar themes discussed by
the Security Council at last week's Security Council
retreat, namely, the primacy of politics, strengthening
peacebuilding in peace operations, and effective
transitions. Furthermore, we will also look at coherent
and effective mission leadership and management. We
hope to be able to brief the Security Council on the
outcomes and recommendations at a future meeting.

Finally, the Challenges Forum partnership will
continue to work closely with the Secretariat, the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research
and Member States on training and capacity-building.
We will also continue to seek complementarities and
synergies with the Effectiveness of Peace Operations
Network, which provides essential and evidence-based
insights, the International Association of Peacekeeping
Training Centres and important Action for Peacekeeping
initiatives, such as the Egyptian Government's
Cairo Roadmap.

Twenty years ago, I stood by the East River as a
young United Nations junior professional officer. Now
with some grey in my beard, I still feel quite inspired
and see opportunities to work for One United Nations
and increase the effectiveness of peace operations. To
that end, all of us must keep walking the walk, convert
words into action and turn Action for Peacekeeping
commitments into real results on the ground. The
Challenges Forum partnership is committed and
prepared to accompany the Security Council on this
imperative journey ahead, which is paved not only by
challenges, but also by opportunities.

