Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for giving my delegation this opportunity to participate
in the Security Council's consideration of the agenda
item on the situation in Timor-Leste. Our
congratulations go to you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. My
delegation would also like to express its gratitude to
the Secretary-General for his report contained in
document S/2004/669 of 13 August 2004, which was
introduced today by Mr. Hedi Annabi.

As members of the Council will recall, Indonesia
has been consistent in its support for the work of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). In that regard, we are glad that the report
notes the various steps taken by the Timorese
Government towards self-sufficiency. It has always
been the hope of Indonesia that UNMISET would
assist Timor-Leste to attain that objective as soon as

possible.
Indonesia places great value on its relationship
with Timor-Leste. Indeed - as noted by my dear

colleague, Ambassador Jose Guterres - last month the
Government of the Republic of Indonesia upgraded the
status of its diplomatic representation in Dili to the
ambassadorial level by the enactment of presidential
decree number 60, of 26 July 2004. Our ambassador to
Timor-Leste presented his credentials to President
Xanana Gusmao this month. I share the hope of my
colleague Jose that this development will further
enhance our growing relationship with Timor-Leste.

Similarly, on 30 June 2004, the Foreign Ministers
of the two countries held a meeting in Bali to discuss
efforts to further enhance bilateral cooperation, with
particular reference to the boundary issue. Members of
the Council may well be aware that the Technical
Subcommittee on Border Demarcation and Regulation,
comprising border experts from both countries, held 11
meetings during the period 2001-2004. The
Subcommittee has achieved significant progress,
identifying 907 geographical international boundary
points in the border areas between the two countries.
This is important because those geographical points
cover approximately 90 per cent of the land boundary
shared by the two countries. The implication of that
achievement is that only about 10 per cent of the
boundary remains to be covered.

I am pleased to inform the members of the
Security Council that, at their meeting, the Ministers
agreed on the content of the provisional agreement
between the Government of the Republic of Indonesia
and the Government of the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste on the land boundary, and that they will
submit it to their heads of Government for
consideration. I note that this development has been
welcomed in the course of today's meeting. The draft
of the provisional agreement underlines the robust
efforts of both States to facilitate the conclusion of the
first-ever boundary agreement between the two nations
and paves the way for a full boundary agreement. In
that connection, we are pleased to note that the report
of the Secretary-General acknowledges the progress
made at the June meeting of the Joint Border
Commission and at the subsequent meeting of the
Foreign Ministers.

Furthermore, I would like to draw the attention of
the Council to a recent statement by the Foreign
Minister of Timor-Leste on the subject of Batek
island- to which the Secretary-General's report of
13 February 2004 (S/2004/117) referred - regarding
its ownership between Indonesia and Timor-Leste. In a
comment to the press at the end of a meeting between
the Foreign Ministers of Indonesia and Timor-Leste on
15 August 2004, Mr. Ramos Horta stated that Batek
island was under the sovereignty of Indonesia, adding
that he was grateful that Indonesia would grant rights
to the Timorese in Oekusi to visit the island for rituals
or traditional purposes.

Before I conclude, I would like to refer to the
17 June 2004 decision of the Office of the United
Nations Security Coordinator to change the security
status for the West Timor area from phase V to phase
IV. Although that development has come rather late,
the decision is a demonstration of the improving
security situation in the border area. We hope that
continued improvement in the security situation will be
taken into account, with a View to reducing the security
phase to normal.

Both Indonesia and Timor-Leste are determined
to embrace conciliatory and forward-looking policies
in the interest of the people and their development.
Both nations have chosen to enhance their cooperation
on the basis of mutually beneficial policies. In that
context, it is important for UNMISET and the
international community to remain supportive of the
cordial and growing bilateral ties between Indonesia
and Timor-Leste.

