Judge Mose: The International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) greatly appreciates the positive
remarks made by members of the Security Council
concerning our work. They will certainly serve as an
inspiration and will be carried home to Arusha, where
they will provide extra impetus to maintaining our
level of work and, to the extent possible, increase it
further.

More specifically, I have noted that members of
the Security Council have stressed States' obligations
to cooperate with the ICTR in order to transfer
fugitives to Arusha. Those are very welcome
statements. As regards the specific statement by the
representative of Romania concerning Kabuga and the
prospects for his arrest, I shall leave that to the
Prosecutor of the ICTR. I have also noted with
pleasure members' statements of the necessity for
States to pay their contributions to the ICTR budget.

Thirdly, I note with satisfaction the Rwandan
Government's pledge to continue its support to ensure
the smooth running of our proceedings. Let me more
generally assure each and every member of the
Security Council that we will certainly continue to
streamline our working methods.
When it comes to transfer, I think it is important
to make a distinction between the transfer of files, on
the one hand, and the transfer of indicted persons on
the other. When it comes to the transfer of files, that
depends on the decision of the Prosecutor, and the 15
that have already been transferred to Rwanda and the
10 that are in the pipeline - as explained by the
Prosecutor - fall into that group.

Turning now to the transfer of indicted persons,
who may be at large or detained. Those are matters that
have to be decided by the Trial Chambers, and that
depends on decisions following requests by the
Prosecutor to the Trial Chambers under rule 11 bis.
That provision was amended during our plenary a few
weeks ago in order to make it explicit that we will not
transfer anyone to a State where there is the risk of the
death penalty's being imposed in relation to that
particular person. The provision still guarantees that
such persons can be transferred only if there are fair
trial proceedings in the State concerned.

In particular with respect to the possibility of
transfer to Rwanda, which would then be a decision for
the Trial Chambers, I note the comments by the
Rwandan representative concerning the country's
position in relation to the death penality.

Taking up the point raised by the representative
of Tanzania that there may be a double standard with
respect, on the one hand, to persons have been
transferred from the ICTR, who will then not risk the
death penalty, and to others, I can only note that the
Tribunal can in now way, of course, reduce its
standards. It has to stick to that position, which is in
conformity with United Nations policy.

As to the perception of the Tribunal in the region,
as mentioned by the Japanese representative, it is my
firm conviction that we are well perceived in the
region. I base that on the numerous visits received
from State representatives, non-governmental
organizations and civil society, who form a stream of
visitors to Arusha, and on their reactions and
expressions of appreciation for our work.

I have waited to the end to respond to the
questions raised by the President on the issue of
witness protection. That is a very important question
and was addressed primarily to the Prosecutors of the
two Tribunals. I still wish to stress, however, that we
take it extremely seriously in the judicial branch of the
Tribunal and whenever any of the witnesses express
any kind of concern about their protection, orders are
immediately given by each Trial Chamber to the
Registry to look into the matter and to investigate the
issues further. Written reports are then submitted back
to the Trial Chambers in order to assess whether any
further action is called for.

Those were the questions, I think, addressed to
the President of the ICTR. I thank you again, Madam,
for this meeting of the Security Council and all
members for their valuable comments and questions.

