Mr. Sterk (Bulgaria): Allow me to start by thanking
Peru for organizing today's open debate.

I would first like to underscore that Bulgaria fully
aligns itself with the statement made earlier on behalf
of the European Union (EU).

The Government of Bulgaria has identified
youth engagement in peace and security as one of the
key priorities of the political agenda of the current
Bulgarian presidency of the Council of the European
Union under the broader topic of the future of Europe
and young people. Last week, Bulgaria hosted a major
European youth conference, which provided a platform
for a valuable exchange of ideas between Governments
and young people with the aim of developing the
new EU Youth Strategy through a participatory and
inclusive process.

Bulgaria has a long tradition of actively involving
young people in the development and implementation
of policies and programmes that impact their lives,
and of ensuring the meaningful participation of young
people in all spheres of political and public life through
broad and inclusive consultations. Youth empowerment
and youth participation in decision-making are key
priorities of the Government of Bulgaria, and my
country continues to strongly advocate for the more
substantial involvement of young women and men in
global affairs as well, including through the United
Nations Youth Delegate Programme, which Bulgaria
has been successfully implementing over more than 10
years, thereby ensuring that young people have a say
in global processes and that their voices are heard and
taken into consideration.

For the first time in the history ofhumankind, young
people represent a quarter of the world's population.
They are therefore a tremendous peace and security
dividend and a major human resource for development
that should be mobilized to consolidate peace and
prosperity across the globe. I should like to reiterate
Bulgaria's full commitment to resolution 2250 (2015),
which established the role of young people as partners
for peace. Bulgaria welcomes the independent progress
study on youth and peace and security (see S/2018/86)
and the recommendations contained therein, especially
the proposals for ensuring youth participation in
decision-making and accountability processes at
the United Nations and for annual reporting by the
Secretary-General to the Security Council within the
framework of annual open debates.

Bulgaria highly values the crucial role of civil
society, especially youth and youth-led organizations
and young volunteers, in amplifying the contributions
of young people to peace and security, economic
development and social cohesion, as highlighted also in
the Study. In Bulgaria, we have many positive examples
of young volunteers engaged in social initiatives,
including those related to refugee integration, social
entrepreneurship for persons with disabilities, human
rights campaigns, sustainable development projects,
etc.
Bulgaria believes that children and young people
can be key agents of positive social change and actively
promotes their human rights and their empowerment
through education, which is crucial to building peaceful
and inclusive societies. Young people have an important
role to play in creating the foundation for peace in
their communities and beyond. In that regard, I would
like to highlight the importance of the continuation of
education during armed conflict. Investing in young
people by strengthening their educational opportunities
and economic inclusion is instrumental in achieving the
youth, peace and security agenda. Bulgaria supports
these efforts both politically and through targeted
funding. The largest part ofBulgaria's humanitarian and
development assistance is aimed at providing support
to children and young people in conflict-affected areas
and ensuring the right to education in emergencies. In
2017, Bulgaria contributed €100,000 to the Education
Cannot Wait global fund.

Bulgaria remains fully committed to the youth and
peace and security agenda and supports an enhanced
United Nations engagement with young people as equal
and essential partners for peace. That will further
strengthen young people's role and contribution to
peace and security, thereby guaranteeing the durability
of peace through generations.

