Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam, for
convening this meeting. I also thank Ambassador Gary
Quinlan of Australia for the 90-day update report and
to commend him on a job well done in leading the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), which is not an easy task. We appreciate in
particular his transparency as Chair of the Committee,
as demonstrated by the holding of an open briefing for
the broader United Nations membership on 17 June to
explain the work of the Committee and discuss how to
effectively implement Security Council resolutions on
Iran.

Rwanda takes note of the latest report of the Panel
of Experts. We hope that it will continue to assist the
1737 Committee in the implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council on Iran. We
welcome the outreach activities that the Panel has been
carrying out, and encourage it to continue its work in
compliance with relevant Security Council resolutions
in an independent, objective, transparent and impartial
manner.

We would like to reiterate our belief in the application
of the three pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons: non-proliferation, disarmament
and the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. It
is therefore our view that every country has the right
to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. In
that respect, it is critical that Iran take all necessary
measures to show the international community the
peaceful nature of its nuclear programme. Such a
confidence-building approach is the only way to ensure
that the United Nations and the broader international
community lift the economic sanctions that continue to
harm the Iranian people.

We regret that Iran has stated that it does not
recognize the 1737 (2006) Committee and has thus
declined to collaborate with it. We believe that at this
time it would be prudent for the Committee to refrain
from taking any further action against Iran, and we
call on the Council to engage with the new Iranian
leadership as the new President has promised to pursue
a more peaceful policy and to show greater transparency
regarding the nuclear programme.

Let me conclude by reiterating our belief that a
diplomatic and political solution to the Iranian nuclear
crisis can be reached through dialogue and negotiations,
including with the five permanent members of the
Security Council and Germany. We call on both parties
to resume talks, which could be the only way to defuse
the growing tension in the region.

