Ms. DiCarlo: Exactly a month ago, I briefed the
Security Council on the protracted crisis in Venezuela,
including its political, economic, human rights and
humanitarian dimensions (see S/PV.8452). Since then,
we have witnessed an alarming escalation of tensions.
As I reported in my previous briefing to the Council,
on 23 January the President of the National Assembly,
Juan Guaido, invoked provisions of the Constitution to
declare himself interim President of Venezuela during
an opposition-led protest. The application of those
constitutional provisions was strongly contested by
the Government.

As part of the actions he has taken since then,
Mr. Guaido announced that food and medical supplies
would be transported to Venezuela. In response, the
United States and other countries stockpiled food
and medical supplies at the Colombian and Brazilian
borders, as well as in Curacao. Separately, the Russian
Federation and China delivered supplies to Venezuela
in coordination with the Venezuelan Government, to be
distributed to those in need.

On 22 February, the Venezuelan Government
temporarily closed several international bridges at
the border with Colombia, as well as border crossings
with Brazil. It also increased its security presence in
those areas. On 23 February, Mr. Guaido led efforts
by volunteers and lawmakers to transport food and
medicine that had been stocked in Brazil and Colombia
across the border to Venezuela. Violent incidents
occurred at different points along the borders with
Brazil and Colombia, as the Venezuelan security forces
blocked the aid supplies coming into Venezuela. At
the Colombia border, two trucks were burned as they
attempted to cross the border, with the Government
and opposition accusing each other of burning them.
According to Colombian migration authorities, at least
285 individuals were injured on the Colombian side.
It is our understanding that no aid from this site was
allowed in.

Along the Brazilian border, indigenous groups
supporting the opposition attempted to deliver aid
stockpiled in Brazil and met resistance. According to
the Office ofthe High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR), between 22 and 23 February four deaths
were confirmed near the Brazilian border, and another
64 individuals were injured, most of them by gunshot.
The OHCHR also received several reports pointing to
the involvement of pro-Government armed elements in
the violent attacks on protesters.

In a statement on 23 February, the Secretary-General
stated his shock and sadness at the recent violence and
loss of life that brought additional suffering to the
Venezuelan people. He reiterated the appeal he had
made to Venezuelan Foreign Minister Jorge Arreaza
on 22 February that lethal force not be used by anyone
under any circumstances. The Secretary-General also
called for calm and urged all actors to lower tensions
and pursue every effort to prevent further escalation.

United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights Michelle Bachelet condemned the violent scenes
that took place at various points along Venezuela's
borders with Brazil and Colombia. She condemned
the excessive use of force by the Venezuelan security
forces and said the Government must stop its forces
from using it. She also urged the Government to rein in
its proxy groups and arrest those among them who have
used force against protesters.

The Secretary-General is concerned by the serious
humanitarian problems facing the country and their
impact on vulnerable populations. While the lack of
official data is a serious challenge in assessing the
situation, available information depicts a grim reality,
with the economy continuing to deteriorate and with
people dying of preventable causes and leaving the
country in search of assistance. Civil society groups
report that maternal mortality has increased by over
50 per cent since 2017, as has the number of infant
deaths. Dialysis patients among other groups of people
that suffer from chronic conditions have taken to the
streets to protest the lack of medicines and services
they require to stay alive. Data used by the Pan
American Health Organization indicates that measles
is under control, but 80 per cent of hospitals lack the
required medicines, and 30 to 40 per cent of medical
personnel have left the country. New estimates by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the International Organization for Migration place at
3.4 million the number of Venezuelans who have left
the country.

In Venezuela, the United Nations system is working
in cooperation with relevant State institutions and other
actors to support efforts to address these challenges.
Seven resident agencies, funds and programmes and a
non-resident agency have moved from policy-oriented
support to a strengthened, prioritized and coordinated
United Nations effort that delivers assistance closest
to people in need. Since 2018, the United Nations has
been implementing a scaled-up effort that consists of
three pillars of action: life-saving, economic recovery
and conflict prevention and human rights. The scale-up
was developed in the context of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for Venezuela.
Delivery of assistance is guided by General Assembly
resolution 46/182 and the principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence. Such
assistance must be free from political objectives and
delivered on the basis of need.

Much more remains to be done to address the
extremely urgent needs of the Venezuelan people. The
United Nations is ready to continue expanding these
efforts. We will continue to act in accordance with
humanitarian principles working with Venezuelan
institutions to assist people in need. The Secretary-
General has stressed repeatedly the importance of these
guiding principles and has called on all stakeholders
and Member States to respect them.

As he has repeatedly stated, the Secretary-General
is ready to exercise his good offices if the parties avail
themselves of this option. Venezuelan actors across the
entire political spectrum have the responsibility to put
the interests of the Venezuelan people at the centre of
their actions at this most critical time.

