Mr. Lelong (Haiti) (interpretation from French): First
of all, I would like to pay tribute to the expertise you have
demonstrated in guiding the work of the Security Council
during the month of November while serving as President
of this important body. I should like to take this opportunity
also to congratulate your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, who guided the
deliberations of the Council in an outstanding manner
during the month of October.

The resolution which the Council has just adopted is
of considerable importance for the consolidation of the
democratic process in Haiti. By authorizing the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Civilian Police Mission
in Haiti (MIPONUH), the Council not only will allow our
young police force to continue to benefit from assistance
from the international community for its professionalization,
but will also contribute to preserving the progress made up
to now in the building of democracy and the state of law in
Haiti.

On behalf of the Government and people of Haiti, I
would like to extend our warm gratitude to the Secretary-
General for his understanding and leadership on the issue
of Haiti. To the Members of the Security Council - all
of them - and to the group of Friends of the Secretary-
General for Haiti, I would like to voice our gratitude for
their tireless efforts.

As was emphasized by Mr. Rene Preval, President
of the Republic of Haiti, in his letter dated 22 October
1998 addressed to the Secretary-General, the Haitian
National Police has made outstanding progress, thanks to
the support which it has received from United Nations
missions in Haiti; however, essential steps still remain
ahead which require the continuing assistance of the
international community. This is, in particular, the case
regarding judicial reform, which has not yet achieved a
satisfactory degree of implementation.

Thanks to this resolution, Haiti knows that it can
continue to count on such support of the international
community. In particular, the assistance of international
financial institutions and other United Nations bodies
should promote a concrete and lasting development
designed to strengthen political stability in the primacy of
law and respect for fundamental freedoms.

Haiti is at present facing a continuing institutional
crisis which is testing the political will of all the
protagonists. We are aware of the frustrating nature of
this situation, both for the Haitians and for the
international community. But the rule of democracy
requires that we not force a solution which in fact could
be the origin of serious problems in the future. Serious
negotiations are under way. The Haitian parliament has
had a special session to debate this question and to find
a solution within the framework of our constitution.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti, the
personnel of MIPONUH and the contributing countries
for their support to the process of the consolidation of
democracy in Haiti.

