Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to warmly congratulate the sisterly
Republic of Equatorial Guinea on its outstanding
presidency of the Security Council during this month
of February and for its extremely positive contributions
to the work of the Council. That you are presiding over
this meeting, Mr. Minister, is a powerful testimony
of the importance that Equatorial Guinea attaches to
peace and security in Africa. I am particularly grateful
to the presidency of the Council for having organized
this open debate on a topic that is important to Morocco
and the entire African continent, namely, the African
Union (AU) initiative of Silencing the Guns by 2020. I
would like to congratulate the delegation of Equatorial
Guinea and the three African members of the Security
Council for the unanimous adoption of resolution 2457
(2019), which Morocco co-sponsored. Finally, I wish to
especially thank the briefers for their substantial and
valuable contributions to our debate today.

Our continent, Africa, has experienced many
conflicts but has managed to make great strides on the
path to peace, led by strong African determination,
which is in line with the principle of the pre-eminence
of politics, necessarily implies unremitting efforts,
involving compromise and gestures towards peace,
unwavering commitment in good faith and strong
support from all stakeholders. The success of the African
initiative of Silencing the Guns by 2020 also requires
stronger financial support from the international
community for AU peace support operations as well as
for multinational stabilization forces such as that of the
Group of Five for the Sahel.

In the same vein, the African Union Military
Observer Mission in Somalia and the Multinational
Joint Task Force in the Lake Chad basin play major
roles in maintaining regional peace and stability.
Those operations, which are better adapted to
their environments and therefore less burdensome,
also represent effective means of countering new
asymmetrical threats. Unfortunately, they still do
not receive predictable or sustainable funding. That
is why Morocco reiterates its strong support for the
legitimate African demands for the funding of African
peace operations that have been mandated by our
Organization, through mandatory United Nations
contributions. It is in that spirit that my country
co-sponsored the resolution submitted by the three
African members of the Security Council on this issue.

An Africa at peace is a strategic goal for the entire
international community. We believe that goal is fully
achievable. To that end, we must all further engage in
strengthening and implementing the United Nations-
AU strategic partnership. With that in mind, we
welcome the signing and implementation of the strategic
partnership agreement between the two organizations
in 2017, the positive effects of which are already being
felt on our continent.

Among the obstacles to the success of the initiative of
Silencing the Guns by 2020, the issue of small arms and
light weapons is a major one. Our collective awareness
of the scale of the impact of the scourge caused by the
circulation of small arms and light weapons demands
new impetus to our actions and those of the United
Nations and the African Union, given that it is now less

than two years until the December 2020 deadline. The
deterioration of the global security environment and
the emergence of new, more violent and deadly threats,
such as terrorism and transnational organized crime,
serve to highlight the relevance of the African Union
initiative of Silence the Guns by 2020, calling on us to
further bolster regional and subregional cooperation in
the area of cross-border security. In that connection,
Morocco hosted in November 2013 a ministerial
conference of the Community of Sahelo-Saharan States
for the strengthening of cross-border security between
the Sahel countries and the Arab Maghreb Union. Our
noble goal also includes full ownership of the African
Union's Master Road Map of Practical Steps for
Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020.

The promotion of peace and security in Africa
as well as the socioeconomic and environmental
development of our continent constitute absolute
priorities for Morocco under high instructions of
His Majesty King Mohamed VI. My country is fully
aware of the interrelationships and challenges linked
to peace and security, climate change and economic
and sustainable development. As an active member of
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union,
Morocco underscores the triad of security, development
and regional integration, convinced of the fact that
those three tracks are essential for lasting peace
throughout the continent, which is perfectly in line with
the philosophy promoted by the initiative of Silencing
the Guns by 2020.

By the same token, Morocco's multidimensional
commitment to peace on the continent goes back a
long way in history, as evidenced by its continuous
participation in United Nations peace operations
in Africa since the 1960s. More recently, Morocco
has strengthened its commitment to the Central
African Republic and has been the largest troop
contributor to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. Morocco has also been chairing the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission for five years, having visited the
country two weeks ago to mobilize the efforts of the
international community, particularly in the light of
the signing of the peace agreement on 6 February.
My country maintains its multifaceted support to the
authorities and people of the Central African Republic,
both in terms of capacity-building and training and the
financing of structural projects.

Furthermore, Morocco pays particular attention to
mediation and conflict prevention, as evidenced by the
many initiatives carried out by the Kingdom of Morocco
across the continent, such as the Mano River Union,
which enabled confidence-building measures among
the countries ofthe Union and initiated a peace process.
My country also hosted the intra-Libyan dialogue that
led to the adoption of the Skhirat Agreement, which
remains the reference framework for the resolution of
the situation in Libya.

While fully aware of the negative impact of
climate change on stability and development in Africa,
Morocco organized - at the initiative of His Majesty
King Mohammed VI, on the margins of the twenty-
second Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change held in
Marrakech in November 2016 i the Africa Action
Summit. The Summit brought together approximately
50 Heads of State and Government as well as other
representatives of African countries, establishing three
commissions to address climate challenges across the
continent, namely, the Congo River Basin Commission,
which was operationalized in February 2018, the Island
States Commission and the Climate Commission for
the Sahel. The latter held its first conference at the
level of Heads of State and Government two days ago in
Niamey. In his address to that conference, His Majesty
King Mohammed VI announced that the Kingdom of
Morocco undertakes to take charge of the feasibility
studies in order to finalize a climate investment plan for
the Sahel region. Morocco also prioritizes cooperation
with African countries to help meet the economic and
social challenges on our continent. Moreover, Morocco
is bound by no fewer than 1,192 agreements with a large
number of African countries, within the framework
of mutually beneficial South-South cooperation and
contributing to the sustainability and consolidation of
peace on our continent.

I would like to conclude by reiterating Morocco's
unwavering commitment to promoting peace, security
and sustainable development in Africa in order to
achieve our common goal of permanently silencing the
guns on our continent.

