Mr. Cooney (Ireland): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for calling this open meeting today.
Ireland associates itself fully with everything in the
statement which will be delivered by Ambassador
Schori of Sweden, as representative of the presidency
of the European Union. I would like to take the
opportunity of this meeting to highlight a number of
issues which Ireland, as an incoming member of the
Security Council, considers to be of particular
significance.

Ireland acknowledges the combined efforts of the
international community in relation to Kosovo. The
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) has been working closely with the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the European
Union, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the
International Organization for Migration (IOM), and
other organizations to achieve the objectives laid out in
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). Ireland is
pleased that it has been able to contribute personnel to
these important missions, and we salute all those who
have served in Kosovo in the name of peace.

It is perhaps not inappropriate on this occasion to
pay tribute to the personal contribution of Ambassador
Holbrooke to the efforts of the international community
in the western Balkans. Like him, Ireland looks
forward to the peoples ofthis region joining us in what
he described earlier today as a united Europe, whole
and free.

We have studied with great interest the most
recent report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo, and we have listened with
interest to the comprehensive briefing Mr. Guehenno
gave this morning, for which we would like to thank
him. We welcome the progress made in Kosovo in the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). With the
help of the Mission, an interim administration has been
successfully established, municipal elections have been
held in a democratic and peaceful manner, and
substantial reconstruction is under way. While certain
objectives remain to be achieved, such as the UNMIK
mine programme, aspects of the emergency
humanitarian assistance programme and
implementation of the recommendations of the UNMIK
Department of Justice, Ireland is pleased with the
general progress made to date.

However, while the overall security situation has
improved, we, like our partners in the European Union,
are concerned about the ongoing ethnically and
politically motivated violence in the Presevo Valley
area of southern Serbia, and particularly in the ground
safety zone. We strongly condemn the use of violence
by armed groups, which endangers the overall security
of the region. Ireland supports the efforts of UNMIK
and KFOR in addressing the situation, including the
recent arrest of presumed terrorists. Like the United
Kingdom, we commend the sensible restraint shown by
the Serbian and Yugoslav regular forces in the face of
this situation, as well as the commitment of the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
respect the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999) and
the Military-Technical Agreement. We believe that full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) must remain
the aim of the international community in Kosovo.

Ireland continues to be greatly concerned with the
humanitarian situation in the region. It is essential that
progress be made towards facilitating the return by
Kosovo Serbs and others to their homes and reversing
the effects of the wide-scale devastation in the region.

We would like to take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Bernard Kouchner, who has just completed his
work as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of UNMIK. We are all grateful for
the energy and determination which Mr. Kouchner
brought to this extremely difficult job. We welcome
Mr. Hans Haekkerup, who has now taken up duty in
Kosovo, and offer him our full support.

Chief among Mr. Haekerrup's tasks will be
establishing the legal framework for Kosovo-wide
elections. While it is indeed desirable to proceed
rapidly, we must be careful to ensure that certain
objectives are met in advance: the results of the local
elections must be fully implemented, and preparations
must be completed in the areas of voter registration,
education and information. Ireland has no doubt that
Mr. Haekkerup will take account of these, and we
appreciate the caution and desire for consultation he
expressed when he was in New York last December.

I would, at this point, like to join our partners in
the European Union and others in this Chamber in
welcoming the programme of democratization in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia begun by President
Kostunica. We have already declared our support for
President Kostunica, following his victory in the
elections last September. The outcome of the Serbian
elections on 23 December last confirmed the choice of
the democratic option. We are now beginning to see
positive signs of the radical transformation initiated
and maintained by the Democratic Opposition of
Serbia. These combined changes have an effect not
only on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, but on the
stability and prosperity of the region as a whole. We
urge the Governments concerned to continue working
towards a peaceful settlement based on democratic
principles and full respect for human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the equality of all citizens
and national communities.

Of course, the resolution of the difficulties in
Kosovo entails a lengthy process of reconciliation and
rebuilding. It is important, therefore, that appropriate
legal channels be found for the speedy release of
Kosovar Albanian political prisoners, and that amnesty
be put in place for those detainees who did not bear
arms during the conflict in Kosovo.

I would like to mention the importance Ireland
attaches to full cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. It is
essential that all parties to the conflict be treated
equally and that indicted war criminals be brought to
justice in an even-handed and fair manner. Trials under
domestic law are important in coming to terms with the
past, but they cannot replace trials in an international
forum for certain specific offences.

I would like to thank Mr. Guehenno for the
information he gave us this morning in relation to
depleted uranium. We share the view that it is
important to establish the facts surrounding the use of
depleted uranium in munitions in Kosovo, and its
possible side-effects. It is essential that this issue be
handled in a transparent way and the information
emerging from the various surveys under way -
including those to be carried out by the World Health
Organization and UNMIK - be shared. This matter is
of significance to both the local population and the
international troops, observers and aid workers who
have served and are serving there.

In conclusion, it is our view that an international
presence will be necessary in Kosovo for some time.
We appreciate the excellent work being carried out by
UNMIK in very difficult circumstances. I take this
opportunity to assure the Council that Ireland will
remain, politically and in practice, fully supportive of
the efforts of the Secretary-General.

