The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

First of all, I express my gratitude to all those
who addressed words of sympathy to my country in
connection with the two simultaneous air crashes that
took dozens of lives: thank you all, colleagues.

I am pleased to welcome Mr. Jean Arnault,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, and to thank him for his detailed briefing
on the situation in that country. We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for his most recent report
(S/2004/634) on the situation in Afghanistan and on the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). We agree with the report's key
conclusion: that pride of place must continue to be
given to ensuring security in Afghanistan. Of special
concern is the fact that, with the date of the Afghan
presidential elections approaching, there has been an
increase in the wave of terrorist acts carried out by
extremists from the Taliban and other anti-Government
factions. There has been an increase in the number of
raids targeting national and international security
forces, staff of public institutions and humanitarian
personnel. There have been more attacks on polling
sites and more threats to voter registration teams. It is
obvious that the foes of normalization of the situation
are attempting, by any means possible, to undermine
the process of preparing for the presidential election.

We endorse the Secretary-General's View that
decisive measures must urgently be taken to correct the
situation. We must not underestimate the threat posed
in Afghanistan by the destabilizing activities of the
Taliban and Al Qaeda. We have repeatedly drawn
attention to the grave threat posed by a renewal of the
Taliban's military and political potential, by the
continuing infiltration of fighters into Afghanistan and
by the emergence of a neo-Taliban faction. We believe
that the notion of so-called moderate Taliban and
attempts to flirt with them can only lead to serious
consequences and will nullify everything that has been
achieved.

But it appears that the focus of recent efforts has
been shifting from a campaign against the Taliban and
the drug lords who support them to disarmament,
primarily of field commanders in the north, the
overwhelming majority of whom are loyal to the
current regime and are prepared to defend it.

Let there be no doubt of our concern at the scanty
progress made in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of Afghan factions. The explosive
security situation dictates the need urgently to
accelerate the process of weapons collection. But this
must be carried out not in isolated regions but
throughout the country.

Moscow has taken note of the recent decision of
the Joint Electoral Management Body to stagger the
presidential and parliamentary elections. But the
serious danger remains that as result of that decision -
which Violates the documents of the Bonn and Berlin
conferences - the country will face an explosive
situation fraught with new armed resistance and
internal fragmentation of power structures.

Success in the political process in Afghanistan is
intimately linked with maintaining the central
coordinating role of the United Nations in an Afghan
settlement. International institutions are currently
increasing the level of their activities in Afghanistan.
NATO, Eurocorps within the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF), coalition forces and many
non-governmental organizations are present. There has
been an increase in the number of provincial
reconstruction teams and more frequent proposals that
those teams and ISAF be merged under NATO
leadership. We proceed from the premise that the
parameters for the involvement of international
institutions, including NATO, must be unambiguously
regulated through a Security Council mandate. Only in
that way can we ensure the necessary legitimacy for
international efforts in the security sphere.

Effective solutions to the problem of Afghanistan
are intimately linked with stemming the growth of
illegal drug production and trafficking. The Afghan
Government's action in that regard has had little effect
to date. The danger that Afghanistan will become a
State whose economy is dominated by illegal drug
trafficking is increasingly coming to pass. The further
development of the situation in that direction would
threaten efforts to restore and rebuild the country, and
in the long term would threaten peace and stability
throughout the region.

In that context, Russia is convinced of the
importance of devising a comprehensive international
counter-narcotics strategy, including the establishment
of a security belt along the Afghan borders. We believe
that the key task of the Security Council at this stage is
to provide the Afghan authorities and the international
community with all possible assistance in
strengthening their action to prevent the further
destabilization of the situation in Afghanistan on the
eve of elections and to ensure the most favourable
conditions possible for the holding of those elections.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker is the representative of
Afghanistan, to whom I give the floor.

