Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his introductory
statement.

Our meeting today is, indeed, an event, as we are
preparing to adopt a draft resolution on the Israeli-
Palestinian question, something which has not
happened since May 2004. Throughout these past four-
and-a-half years of silence, France has continued to
urge the Security Council to play a more active role in
the Middle East.

For this reason, we welcome the fact that the
Council, which has the mandate to guarantee the
maintenance of peace and security, will be able to
express itself today. We would like to thank the
sponsors of the draft resolution, the last paragraph of
which reminds us that the Council will remain seized
of the matter, thus opening the way towards its playing
a stronger role.

The European Union (EU), of which France holds
the Presidency, has just outlined its vision of the peace
process in a declaration adopted by the European
Council meeting of 11 to 12 December. I quote:

"The Middle East peace process will remain a top
priority for the European Union in 2009. A just,
lasting and comprehensive peace is urgently
needed. The EU will do all it can both practically
and politically to drive the peace process forward
next year, working closely with our international
partners and in particular in the Quartet, to
promote a solution to the Israel/Palestine conflict
on the basis of two States, living in peace and
security. The EU will also support talks between
Israel and Syria and, if possible Lebanon. The
European Council welcomes efforts to
reinvigorate the Arab Peace Initiative, including
the Arab Foreign Ministers' letter to President-
elect Barak Obama, as part of a comprehensive
approach for a peace between Israel and the
whole region. We urge the United States, under
its new Administration, to join us in making the
Middle East Peace Process an immediate and
central priority."

In my national capacity, I would like to
underscore a number of points.

First of all, concerning our belief, as reflected in
the draft resolution, that the Israeli-Palestinian
negotiating process, launched since the Annapolis
conference, must be forcefully supported in order to
reach a comprehensive peace agreement as soon as
possible. This agreement should provide for the
establishment of a State of Palestine, including the
West Bank and Gaza which is viable, independent,
democratic and sovereign, living in peace and security,
side by side with Israel, with secure and recognized
borders, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States, as
the President of the French Republic stated in his
address to the Knesset on 23 June 2008.

In this regard, France urgently calls for
inter-Palestinian reconciliation. To this end, we support
the Egyptian mediation efforts and will support every
Government that respects the commitments made by
the Palestine Liberation Organization, resolutely
supports peace negotiations with Israel and whose
policies and actions reflect the principles of the
Quartet.

The second key element is that France, like its
partners in the European Union, subscribes to a
comprehensive approach towards resolving the Israeli-
Arab conflict, as reflected in the draft resolution before
us. In this regard, we welcome the Arab Peace
Initiative, which we feel provides a solid and relevant
basis for peace in the Middle East. It will also make it
possible to include the Syrian and Lebanese tracks in
our consideration, which strikes us as being essential.

We must now translate into action the opportunity
which that Initiative represents by making it
operational. To do so, we are ready to work with all
concerned actors on a phased approach in order to
attain the great objectives of the Initiative. One might
thus envisage the implementation by all parties of
confidence-building measures, which would make it
possible to launch a positive dynamic.

Trust is actually an essential element in this
process. Indeed, it has to do with the third element I
wish to underscore, which is that rapid and meaningful
change on the ground is necessary. The draft resolution
thus highlights the importance of respecting the
commitments made in the context of the Road Map. In
that regard, and while a great deal remains to be done
in order for terrorism and violence to cease, one can
only recognize and welcome the significant efforts
undertaken by the Palestinian Authority in the areas of
security, governance and the rule of law, especially in
Jenin and Nablus.

We believe that this progress calls for reciprocal
gestures from Israel, starting with the issue of land -
land for security, peace in exchange for land. As the
Council knows, that is one of the foundations of the
peace process. As the European Union has done on
numerous occasions, France wishes to remind Israel
that it is necessary and urgent to put an end to
settlement activities, including natural growth and
including in East Jerusalem. Any other policy would
tarnish the credibility of the negotiators and would
adversely affect the outcome of the negotiations, which
the draft resolution urges the parties not to do.

Of course, the parties are not alone in bearing
responsibilities. It is equally desirable for the
international community as a whole to mobilize in
support of the Palestinian Authority, as the draft
resolution invites it to. France will keep its

commitments on this point. It will closely monitor the
follow-up to the donors conference for the Palestinian
State held in Paris last December in order to enable the
Palestinian Authority to strengthen its institutional
capacities.

If ultimately there is a message that France
wishes to convey on every occasion - even if it is not
reflected in the draft resolution submitted to the
Council - it is the absolute need for respect for
humanitarian law. This unreservedly prohibits terrorist
acts that blindly strike civilian populations, such as the
attacks and the firing of rockets against Israel. As the
Council knows, it also prohibits any form of collective
punishment and calls on the parties to a conflict to
allow free access to humanitarian aid. These rules must
provide guidance in addressing the situation in Gaza.
Let us not forget that.

France will support the draft resolution being
considered today. We hope that it will allow us to make
progress on the difficult road towards peace. In this
perspective, we hope that the European Union will
stand alongside the parties, in particular through its
contribution to the Quartet. Finally, when the time has
come, France and the European Union will be ready to
contribute, along with the whole of the international
community, to the international arrangements from
which Israelis and Palestinians hope to benefit in order
to guarantee peace.

