Mr. Negroponte (United States): The United
States is deeply troubled by the recent events in the
Middle East. We are working intensively to have the
parties take a step back from confrontation and a step
towards the kind of cooperation that will ease the
suffering and establish the basis for a political solution.
There is no substitute for direct engagement. Over the
past few days, Secretary of State Colin Powell has
spoken with Chairman Arafat, Prime Minister Sharon,
Secretary-General Annan, European Union High
Representative Solana, Arab heads of State and the
Foreign Ministers of some of the countries represented
in this Chamber today.

There is little disagreement in this Chamber that
the present situation must be changed. The solution lies
in addressing all three aspects of the problem: political,
security and economic. We have a vision of where we
think the parties to this conflict should go, and we are
working to implement those steps that have the most
realistic chance of realizing this vision.

For my Government's part, the vision has been
stated at the highest level: a viable State of Palestine
living alongside the State of Israel in peace and
security. That is the goal at which United States
diplomatic efforts are aimed. I would note the positive
contribution of Saudi Crown Prince Abdullah's
comments make to the political horizon for the region:
real peace between Israel and all its Arab neighbours,
arising from a comprehensive peace based on Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and the
principle of land for peace.

The public support of several Arab States for
these ideas is also important. President Bush spoke
with Crown Prince Abdullah this morning and
conveyed our desire to work closely with the King of
Saudi Arabia in pursuit of Middle East peace. President
Bush praised the Crown Prince's ideas regarding full
Arab-Israeli normalization once a comprehensive peace
agreement is achieved.

How do we help the parties reach their goals?
Everyone who has tried to address this question has
come up with one conclusion: the road back to real
negotiations must start with security. Without effective
security cooperation, that horizon will remain just that:
something longed for but not achieved. But this road
cannot end with security. Just as progress towards the
political horizon cannot be made without effective
security cooperation, so, too, is sustained security
cooperation much more likely if there is a real prospect
for political progress.

The challenge before us is how to move the
parties from where they are now to the kind of
relationship that will lead to productive negotiations.
Extremists remain determined to sabotage peace in the
region. The Palestinian Authority must help eliminate
the danger they pose - not only to Israelis, but also to
the legitimate aspirations of its own people to a safe
and secure future.

Security is not a one-way street. Israel, too, must
meet its obligations. Chairman Arafat requires an
infrastructure to implement his orders. Actions by
Israel against the Palestinian security apparatus
charged with preventing violence and terror are
counterproductive. The United States is looking to both
parties to help create an environment for moving
forward.

But my Government is not simply calling for
action on the security front. We are bringing the parties
together - away from the limelight - to find practical
solutions to their differences. Last Friday's meeting
between the parties was positive, and these discussions
are continuing today.

My Government is intent on encouraging the
parties to implement the Mitchell Committee
recommendations. Mitchell is the means by which the
parties can restore calm and rebuild enough
confidence - in each other and in the process itself -
to restart a real political dialogue. The Mitchell
recommendations indeed contain a political context,
and they are designed to lead to a political outcome.
We hope that this outcome will reflect the vision
outlined by President Bush and Secretary Powell.
The third element of our approach - the
economic element - is no less important. My

S/PV.4478

 

Government is preoccupied by the deteriorating
economic situation of Palestinians. President Bush
highlighted this problem during Prime Minister
Sharon's Visit to Washington. In addition to our
longstanding assistance programmes, we are moving
ahead with a $130 million emergency response
programme that includes financing for health and job-
creation projects. We are also implementing over $200
million in long-term infrastructure projects to help
bring clean water to hundreds of thousands of
Palestinians. In addition, we are the largest single
donor to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
and will contribute $88 million to that organization this
yeah

I began my remarks by underscoring our concern
over the deteriorating situation between Palestinians
and Israelis. We are trying to find the best means to
reverse this deterioration. As a practical matter,
Security Council action at this time will not resolve the
problems between Palestinians and Israelis.

The Secretary-General has wisely said that while
the situation is bleak, the present course of events is
not irreversible. We agree. The United States is
committed to helping the parties move forward. We
want, and hope, to send General Zinni back to the
region as soon as conditions are appropriate. We ask
the Council to perform its task responsibly - in a way
that will further the cause of peace with due regard for
the interests of all parties concerned.

