Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I would like to
join the Secretary-General in welcoming here today
President-elect Xanana Gusmao and Chief Minister
Mari Alkatiri.

As Kofi Annan said, today is indeed an emotional
moment. Those of us - and there are lots around this
table today - who have been personally involved with
East Timor over the last three years can only watch
with admiration the progress that the people of East
Timor have made. I think we should also record with
admiration the assistance that has been given to them
by the international community in making that
progress. I am sure that Sir Jeremy Greenstock, who
participated in the first Security Council mission to
East Timor but who is in the United Kingdom today,
would want me to repeat those sentiments on his
behalf.

This meeting should not be an occasion for long
statements. In any case, I associate myself with the
statement that will be made by Spain later in the debate
on behalf of the European Union. But there are a few
points I would like to make.

First, it is vital that the international community
remain engaged in East Timor to support this fledgling
nation in the early stages of independence. This
support will be particularly vital in the defence,
security and justice sectors. The United Kingdom
strongly supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation to establish the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) for an
initial period of 12 months. We will shortly be
circulating a draft resolution to members of the Council

putting that - I hope - into effect soon.
We welcome the appointment of Mr. Roque
Rodrigues as the new Secretary of State for Defence.
We hope that this will pave the way for the early
signature of the status of forces agreement and
agreement as soon as possible on the command
authority arrangements which will exist after
independence. These should, of course, follow standard
United Nations practice. I was very heartened to hear
Chief Minister Alkatiri register his Government's
interest in seeing a very early conclusion to that
negotiation.

It is also imperative that quick decisions be made
to complete the process of financing and recruiting
personnel for the 100 core civilian posts for the follow-
on mission.

The Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation will play a vital role in independent East
Timor and will relieve pressure on the formal justice
system. We have already heard from Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi about those pressures. The
United Kingdom has committed more than $450,000.00
to the Commission, but we have serious concerns about
the lack of progress so far. It is vital that the work of
the Commission is speeded up.

United Kingdom support for East Timor will
continue after independence. We have committed £12
million, or about $18 million, to support the
implementation of a sound national development plan.
We look forward to receiving details of the national
development plan at the donor meeting in Dili on 14
and 15 May. United Kingdom funds will be provided as
budgetary support. Their release will be conditional on
the development of a mechanism to manage budgetary
support from donors.

The Secretary-General reminded us of the
importance of the newly independent East Timor
developing and maintaining good relations with its
neighbours. In this context, we welcome the
announcement that President Megawati Soekarnoputri
of Indonesia intends to visit East Timor for the
independence celebrations. This will be a symbolically
important step towards the development of a more
mature relationship between the two countries. For the
United Kingdom's part, Mr. Ben Bradshaw, the Foreign
Office Minister for Southeast Asia, will attend the
celebrations on 19 and 20 May. The United Kingdom
will also upgrade its mission in Dili to an embassy
after independence.

I should not conclude without a word of heartfelt
thanks to Sergio Vieira de Mello for all that he has
done as the Secretary-General's Special Representative
in East Timor over the last two years. It is very good
news that Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, who has
been a most distinguished member of the community of
Permanent Representatives here, has been appointed as
the new Special Representative for East Timor. We
hope that the post of Resident Coordinator, who will
double as Deputy Special Representative, will be filled
as soon as possible to allow for a smooth hand-over of
responsibilities from the old team to the new one.

