Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like to begin by
indicating that Poland aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the observer of the European Union.

I thank you, Mr. Prime Minister, for presiding over
today's important meeting. We very much appreciate
Sweden's work on resolution 2427 (2018), which the
Security Council just adopted. We also value Sweden's
strong leadership as Chair of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, and the Executive Director of
UNICEF, Ms. Henrietta Fore, for their important
briefings. We also deeply appreciate the moving and
inspirational testimony of Ms. Yenny Londofio. It is
significant for all of us to hear her voice, which speaks
for civil society.

We should all be disturbed by this year's report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2018/465). The report shows that in conflicts around
the world children are being killed and maimed, abducted
and attacked in schools and hospitals, recruited to fight,
sexually abused and denied humanitarian aid by State
and non-State actors alike. All parties to armed conflict
should share the obligation of protecting children from
violence, and yet all too often violations and abuses of
international law affecting children are widespread. As
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan, Poland is particularly concerned about the
growing number of violations being committed against
children in South Sudan by all parties to the conflict.

We believe that constructive and close engagement
with the national Governments concerned is
essential to establishing durable peace, security and
development. In that context we welcome the signing
by Mali, Nigeria and the Central African Republic of
new action plans with the United Nations aimed at
ending and preventing Violations against children in a
context of armed conflict. We note with satisfaction the
Sudan's completion of its action plan and would like to
congratulate Colombia on its achievements in the area
of the protection of children reached through the peace
process over the past year.

I would like to emphasize the responsibility of all
the parties listed the annexes to the Secretary-General's
report to enter into and fully implement concrete and
time-bound action plans with the United Nations to
end all violations immediately. We call on the parties
with existing action plans to take immediate steps to
ensure that they are more effectively implemented
and to report on their progress. We believe that the
international community should take all possible steps
to eradicate the underlying causes and the consequences
of children's engagement in armed conflicts. We must
be more effective and resolute in considering how to
prevent the recruitment of children, encourage their
reintegration into their societies and deal with the long-
term psychological and social implications for survivors.
Throughout that process, all children, girls and boys
alike, should be treated as victims, not as perpetrators.
The lack of reintegration options for demobilized
children increases their risk of re-recruitment.

We particularly want to stress the role of education
for children, including in times of crisis. During
emergencies, children in schools can be cared for,
accounted for and protected from abduction, recruitment
and sexual and economic exploitation. Education also
paves the way for their stronger integration into society.
If we are to ensure that the programmes have long-term
effects and prevent re-recruitment into armed groups
and armed forces, the international community must
continue to provide the necessary financial resources.
At their core, such efforts can ensure that children will
have a successful future for the global community as
for themselves. Lastly, Poland is a staunch advocate
of the effective protection and promotion of the rights
of the child through the adoption of internationally
recognized preventive measures. We proudly endorse
the Safe Schools Declaration, the Paris Principles and
guidelines and the Vancouver Principles, and we call on
other States to do the same.

We still have a lot to do in order to prevent and end
the violations and abuses that children face in conflict
situations. Poland will continue to stand behind the
important work being done by the United Nations to
protect children.

