Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
should like to begin by complimenting Ambassador
Arias on his stewardship of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) over the past six months. His hard
work, his direction and his unstinting efforts have been
much appreciated by my delegation. The United
Kingdom fully endorses the proposed programme of
work and the principles that guide it.

I should like to associate myself with the
statement to be made later by the representative of Italy
on behalf of the European Union.

I should like to make four specific points on the
CTC and its work. First, sadly, the threat from
terrorism has not diminished or eroded. If the
Committee is to maintain and increase its successes in
reinforcing the capacity of Member States to tackle and
overcome terrorism, it must be strengthened further
and given the expertise and the remit to do that
effectively. For that reason, I very much welcome the
Chairman's proposal to submit to the Committee and to
the Council a report on the problems and difficulties
and, I very much hope, containing proposed solutions.
The United Kingdom is prepared to assist the
Committee in whatever way we can to that end.

Secondly, Ambassador Arias has rightly
identified technical assistance as a priority; it is vital to
helping States implement the requirements of
resolution 1373 (2001). There are numerous examples
of excellent initiatives in this area; the Committee has
played a key role in the facilitation of assistance. But,
just as the Committee needs to adapt to maintain its
effectiveness, so, too, do the methods used to deliver
the assistance where it is needed most. Better
coordination, more contact with donors and recipient
States, and intensive follow-up action are all necessary
to ensure that assistance has been properly delivered
and will help achieve the objective: quite clearly, to
help States implement the measures called for in
resolution 1373 (2001). The CTC and its experts must
be given the support, the guidance and the resources
that will enable them to do that important work

properly.

Thirdly, much has been said about the value of
cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations in combating terrorism. The
CTC meeting in Washington last week, co-hosted by
the Organization of American States, demonstrated that
yet again. A global network is emerging to support and
underpin the work which individuals, States,
organizations and the CTC itself are doing in order to
develop counter-terrorism capacity. We should seek to
maintain, strengthen and focus that network in every
way possible. The meetings with subregional and
regional organizations are key to that, and the
Committee should continue its work to gain as much as
possible from this process.

Lastly, an important element in the fight against
terrorism is the ratification and implementation of the
12 universal conventions. Resolution 1373 (2001) calls
upon States to become parties to those conventions as
soon as possible. Much has been done to encourage
that, with some very good results. But we know, too,
that there are far too many gaps and that the efforts
need to be strengthened further. So the United
Kingdom very much welcomes the Committee's
proposal to examine the reasons for low levels of
ratification and, again, to come forward with concrete,
practical suggestions as to how we can improve that
situation.

The Security Council has many urgent and
important subjects on its agenda. But, as far as the
United Kingdom is concerned, none is more vital than
the need to challenge, to combat and to defeat the
scourge of terrorism. Therefore, our support for the
CTC remains total. Much good progress has been made
so far, but terrorism remains a serious and grave threat.
Our responsibility, as the Council, is to see how we can
build on the achievements in order to strengthen the
interventions that we need to make globally so that all
of us can better face the challenges which we confront.
The work programme that Ambassador Arias has set
out is a real contribution to that effort.

