Mr. Rivard (Canada): Canada is pleased to
participate in this debate. We thank Germany for
initiating this dialogue and look forward to engaging
further, as we have done in the past. We also thank the
Pacific small island developing States for bringing
forward this important issue. Canada strives to be an
accountable, effective and reliable partner of small
island developing States, including in those in the
Pacific and the Caribbean and here at the United
Nations. We have consistently supported effective
responses by the Security Council to new and emerging
security challenges.

Our support and sponsorship of the resolution on
climate change and security, brought forward by our
Pacific island partners, is a case in point. The
resolution was an affirmation of our collective
recognition of the possible security implications of
climate change. The existential threat facing small
island developing States and those confronting food
insecurity gives this issue an urgent and human
dimension.

Climate change has the potential to act as a
stressor in failed and fragile States.

Canada continues to be engaged in the
international negotiations aimed at developing a new,
fair and effective international post-2012 climate
change regime. We have joined our international
partners in adopting the Cancun Agreements. These are
a set of significant decisions that together represent a
concrete step forward in establishing the type of global
climate change regime necessary to achieve real
environmental results. The Cancun Agreements
acknowledge the global reality that all major emitters
need to take action if we are to succeed in effectively
addressing climate change.

Grave problems call for grave solutions. National
environmental programmes must be sustained by
international cooperation in a dynamic economy. As
part of our commitment to support mitigation and
adaptation efforts in developing countries, including
least developed countries, small island developing
States and Africa, Canada contributed $400 million in
new and additional climate financing for the 2010-2011
fiscal year alone, as part of our fast-start climate
change financing commitment. This is Canada's
largest-ever contribution to support international
efforts to address climate change, and focuses on
supporting developing countries' efforts to reduce

 

greenhouse gas emissions and adapt to the adverse
impacts of climate change in three priority areas,
namely, adaptation, clean energy and forests and
agriculture.

(spoke in French)

Today, there are approximately 1 billion hungry
people in the world. Another billion are getting enough
to eat but suffer from chronic malnutrition because
they do not have access to sufficiently nutritious foods.
The majority of these 2 billion people are women,
children and small-scale farmers living in rural areas.

Canada has played a leadership role in supporting
responses to food crises through its long-standing
commitment to increasing food security. At the Group
of Eight (G-8) summit in L'Aquila in 2009, we pledged
to more than double our investment in sustainable
agricultural development and to provide $600 million
in increased funding over three years, reaching
$1.18 billion in overall funding. Canada has met its
total L'Aquila commitment, and we are proud to be the
first G-8 country to do so.

Food security remained a high priority during
Canada's 2010 presidency of the G-8 and the Group of
20, and Canada has established food security as one of
its five international assistance priorities. Coupled with
our multilateral and bilateral funding to support long-
term responses, Canada also believes in the importance
of supporting research partnerships and multilateral
research initiatives that will increase our knowledge
base and allow us to better devise long-term climate
change adaptation solutions.

Such solutions can enhance resilience, build and
strengthen institutions and reduce the loss of life and
economic devastation, which in turn builds a strong
foundation for the maintenance of peace and security.
We welcome further thinking on how to deliver
adaptation support in a manner that takes into account
how existing tensions can be minimized and enables
the integration of long-term governance approaches
that reduce such tensions.

