Mr. Khare: I would like to begin by paying a
special tribute to Sergio Vieira de Mello. His efforts in
partnership with the people of Timor-Leste are an
inspiring example for all who have subsequently
served in Timor-Leste. On 10 May 2002, in his last
major speech in Timor-Leste, referring to the Popular
Consultation of 1999, Mr. Vieira de Mello said that
Timor-Leste

"paid a heavy price for that courageous gesture,
but her people have responded with resilience and
enthusiasm. [They] have been a brilliant example
to a world that too often is weighed with the
cynicism born of an excess of war, suffering, and
violence".

I repeat those words today because they ring as true
today as they did six years ago.

It is a pleasure for me to introduce to the Council
the fourth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT), covering the period from 8 January to 8 July
2008 (S/2008/501).

I would like to acknowledge the presence of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste, His
Excellency Mr. Zacarias Albano da Costa, and to avail
myself of this opportunity to formally congratulate the
Timorese authorities on their successful efforts to
maintain stability and security and, indeed, normalcy in
the functioning of state institutions, after the shocking
attacks on President Jose Ramos-Horta and Prime
Minister Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao on ll February.
Those efforts have justified increasing public
confidence in the State institutions that serve as the
guarantors of national unity.

The Government continues to make strides in
addressing some of the priority challenges which
emanated from the 2006 crisis. On 14 July, petitioners
started receiving their payments and returning to their
homes. As of 1 August, all petitioners have left the
Aitarak Laran camp in Dili, and there have been no
major incidents reported so far related to their return.
No petitioners opted to apply for re-recruitment into
the national army, or Falintil-Forcas de Defesa de
Timor-Leste (F-FDTL).
08-4651]
Progress also continues in the movement of
internally displaced persons from the camps. As of
today, 5,400 families in the camps have received the
recovery packages under the Government's National
Recovery Strategy, and 20 camps have been closed.
Although that is encouraging, the actual
implementation of all elements of the National
Recovery Strategy is needed sooner rather than later if
the physical movement of internally displaced persons
is not to be undermined in the long term.

Some progress has been made in the conduct of
the Timorese-led comprehensive review of the security
sector. Timor-Leste authorities have preliminarily
identified the need to address management and
leadership gaps in the civil service, police and army as
key priorities. I also agree with their observation that
national stakeholders, including the opposition, should
be allowed to proceed at their own reasonable pace
rather than sacrificing true national ownership at the
altar of speedy progress.

In response to the events of ll February, the
Government chose a military-police security model in
which a Joint Command temporarily took on internal
security responsibilities, particularly in specific areas
of the country where the fugitives were. That was
successful in contributing to their surrender, but there
have been some concerns about abuses by those forces,
particularly the military. The Government has been
responsive when those concerns were raised; however,
it is not clear how effectively Government concerns are
being institutionalized and articulated further down the
ranks. Furthermore, bilateral assistance from partners
is essential if the professionalization of the F-FDTL;
the definition of a meaningful role for the army in a
peacetime setting that does not encroach upon the
primary responsibility of the civilian administration or
the police; strengthened internal accountability, and
strong civilian oversight are to be achieved.

The Government has expressed its desire that the
resumption of policing responsibilities by the National
Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL) be completed
early next year. That desire needs to be accompanied
by concomitant efforts to ensure that logistics are in
place, necessary efforts are undertaken to facilitate the
work of the Evaluation Panel and there is commitment
to the criteria for resumption of responsibilities.
Therefore, in consultation with the Prime Minister, I
have decided to delay the commencement of the
process of resumption of responsibility for a few more
08-46511
months to provide adequate space to the Government
to address the pressing logistical needs. I strongly
believe that a flexible timeline for this process, coupled
with a comparatively inflexible application of mutually
determined criteria, will ensure long-term success.

Public confidence in the PNTL is essential for its
long-term success. As it takes on greater
responsibilities, newer cases of corruption and abuse of
authority by the PNTL need to be strongly pursued. I
have been distressed by reports that several senior
PNTL officers might be involved in alleged
misappropriation of funds provided for the activities of
the Joint Command. In this respect, I welcome the
decision of the Prime Minister on 18 August to
temporarily suspend eight PNTL officers and to allow
criminal investigations by the Prosecutor-General to
proceed where deemed appropriate.

Long-term strategies to ensure that a culture of
impunity is not established depend on an effective
judiciary, which in turn is part of the larger rule of law
system that guarantees stability. When parts of that
larger system, including the judiciary, are still weak,
the challenge before us is great. Establishment of the
rule of law is a wide-ranging effort; the integrated
mission model has proven itself to be a successful
approach for such a complex undertaking, and UNMIT
continues its efforts to support State institutions. I am
delighted to report that the third training course for

18 additional judicial officers - judges, public
prosecutors and public defenders - commenced on
29 July.

The serious crimes investigation team of UNMIT
has been proceeding with its mandated task of
completion of all pending investigations. As of today,
20 investigations have been concluded, another 11 are
in progress, and the 118 cases that were disallowed
from entering the Timor-Leste community
reconciliation agreement by the Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation Commission are being thoroughly
reviewed.

Effective protection of the human rights of
women and children is another important feature of a
democratic society. This month, the Government, with
the support of UNICEF, will initiate a programme led
by the Ministry of Justice to nationally disseminate
recommendations made by the Committee on the
Rights of the Child following Timor-Leste's first report
to that Committee. Rede Feto, a network of women's
3
non-governmental organizations, has completed its
district level consultations in preparation for the third
National Timorese Women's Congress, to be held from
10 to 12 September.

The signature of the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework for the period 2009-2013 by
Prime Minister Gusmao on 8 August, in the presence of
a large number of ministers, testifies both to the
partnership between the United Nations and Timor-
Leste and to real and effective integration in my
integrated mission. I must also particularly commend
the efforts of the United Nations country team,
including the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations and the World Food Programme, in
promoting effective responses to the food crisis, and of
UNICEF in organizing the visit of its goodwill
ambassador, Jackie Chan, which contributed to the
dissemination of the message of mutual respect, unity
and peace to the martial arts groups of the country.

Finally, permit me to express the debt of gratitude
that I owe to the Deputy Special Representative, Finn
Reske-Nielsen, and to all the women and men of
UNMIT and of the United Nations country team, who
have demonstrated dedication and commitment far
beyond the peacekeeper's high call of duty. I am also
deeply touched by the extremely gracious manner in
which the leaders and the people of Timor-Leste have
continued to receive me and all the United Nations
staff working in Timor-Leste.

