Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), Ambassador Zahir Tanin, for
his briefing and insightful analysis of the situation
prevailing in Kosovo. We welcome the participation in
today's meeting of Mr. Ivica Daeie, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. We
also welcome Ambassador Vlora Citaku to this debate.

I shall start by reiterating Angola's stand on the issue
of Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence.
For Angola, resolution 1244 (1999) continues to
be the applicable legal framework for reaching a
comprehensive solution for Kosovo through dialogue
and negotiation based on the principles and purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations and relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Regarding the situation in Kosovo, the report
of the Secretary-General on UNMIK (S/2016/901)
describes a less virtuous situation by comparison
to the previous three periods. Increasing tensions,
political violence and public protests are on the rise,
whether relating to the delineation of the border with
Montenegro, which remains the most contentious issue
in Kosovo's political debate; the law on the Trepca
mining complex, which has the potential to seriously
undermine relations between Belgrade and Pristina; or
the freeze of participation by Kosovo Serb members of
the Assembly and the Government in official activities.
Furthermore, the disruption of the work of the Kosovo
Assembly, due to the aggressive actions and disruptive
tactics of some parties, is a very negative development.
In short, a number of sensitive issues - including the
return of Serbs to their lands of origin - and political
tensions between the Government and the opposition
parties continue to undermine the normal functioning
of Kosovo's institutions.

We welcome the commitment of the new Serbian
Government, sworn in on 11 August, to proceeding with
and intensifying dialogue with Pristina and maintaining
its support for the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities, as well
as improved cooperation between the municipalities
of northern Kosovo and Pristina-based ministries. It is
our expectation that common ground will be reached
and that an agreement establishing the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities in northern
Kosovo will finally be implemented.

However, the report further highlights the slow
implementation of the agreements reached within
the dialogue facilitated by the European Union (EU),
despite signals of commitment on the part of the parties
to moving forward, including on the issues of free
movement, telecommunications and integration of the
Kosovo judiciary. The issues of returns, reconciliation,
the protection of cultural heritage and community
relations still have a long way to go. The reported
security incidents, physical assaults, verbal threats,
robberies targeting returnees and the vandalism of
property are matters of concern.

Against that tense backdrop, we warmly commend
the example set by the President of Kosovo, Mr. Hashim
Thaci, by paying his respects to past Serb victims of
sectarian violence in an effort to change attitudes and
to promote reconciliation. In that regard, we echo the
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia in expressing the expectation that this
visit will be transformed into a palpable, positive step
forward in the furtherance of security and respect for
the rights of non-Albanian communities.

In conclusion, we underline the fundamental role
played by the United Nations, through UNMIK, in
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights, as well as its cooperation with the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
and its engagement with Pristina and Belgrade. We
acknowledge the positive results achieved in tackling
organized crime and corruption in Kosovo, indictments
for terrorism-related offences, and the fight against
incitement to nationalistic, racial, religious or ethnic
hatred, discord and intolerance. We remain confident
that the political leaders of Belgrade and Pristina will
be able to fulfil their commitments and implement the
agreements reached under the EU-facilitated dialogue
process. We hope that the dialogue will proceed in good
faith and in a results-oriented manner aimed at building
a better future for all peoples in the Balkans.

