Mr. Odida (Uganda): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the States members of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), in
Uganda's capacity as Vice-Chair of the OIC Council
of Foreign Ministers. Before I do that, I wish, in my
national capacity, to extend my delegation's regards and
congratulations to you, Mr. President, on the manner in
which you are conducting the work of the Council in
this month of July. I also wish to extend our heartfelt
condolences to the Government of Japan for the passing
away of Mr. Yukiya Amano, the late Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency.

At the outset, the OIC believes it imperative to
highlight the illegal actions that took place yesterday,
22 July, when Israel, the occupying Power, forcibly
displaced Palestinians from their homes in occupied
East Jerusalem. Seventeen Palestinians, including
11 children, were displaced, while more than 350
others also face the threat of displacement. The Israeli
occupying forces began the demolition process of at
least 10 residential buildings, citing a lack of permits
and security concerns regarding the proximity of
those buildings to the illegal apartheid wall. In that
regard, we must reaffirm our position, as well as the
international consensus, and refer back to international
law in insisting that the wall is illegal, the settlements
are illegal and any action to advance either of those
is illegal.

The continuing destructive, colonial practice
of demolishing Palestinian property and forced
displacement of Palestinians must be put to an end. The
flouting of international law cannot be disregarded.
Israel is acting in full contempt of the Council and
making a mockery of our rules-based order. The
Security Council has a direct responsibility to put
an end to this culture of impunity and hold Israel
accountable for its crimes. Day by day, the two-State
solution is being eroded by those policies, and with that,
the hopes, dreams and fundamental rights of millions
of Palestinians living under a gruesome and belligerent
occupation are being denied.

Since the Security Council's previous open
debate on the question of Palestine (S/PV.8517),
developments have made for an even grimmer outlook
as Israel persists with its illegal policies and measures,
heightening tensions and the volatility of the situation
in Palestine. That has included, in particular, illegal,
provocative and destabilizing acts concerning the holy
sites in occupied East Jerusalem, including excavations
that are directly threatening the sanctity, stability
and status of Christian and Islamic holy sites such as
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, which houses the holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque. In that regard, we draw the Council's attention
to the OIC Executive Committee's extraordinary
open-ended meeting at the level of Foreign Ministers,
which convened on 17 July to consider the escalating
frequency and brutality of colonialist Israeli Violations.
The OIC Ministers stressed their grave concern over
all unlawful Israeli attempts to alter the historical,
political and legal status and demographic composition
of occupied East Jerusalem. Such illegal actions have
been ongoing for more than half a century, in violation
of international law and the Council's resolutions, and
must be halted.

The OIC Ministers also expressed particular concern
about recent events surrounding the inauguration of the
excavation of the so-called Pilgrims Road underneath
the Silwan neighbourhood towards Al-Aqsa Mosque.
Deplorably, that inauguration was attended by
representatives of the United States Administration,
in total disregard of international law and norms
and in blatant disrespect of Muslim sentiments. The
OIC cautions that such acts contribute to further
consecrating, entrenching and perpetuating the illegal
Israeli colonial occupation of Palestinian territory and
the acquisition of territory by force, further fuelling
tensions and violence, fomenting religious conflict and
constituting a threat to international peace and security.

We call on this organ to uphold its responsibilities
under the Charter of the United Nations with regard
to the Palestine question and the decades-long quest
to ensure a just, peaceful solution to the conflict
and security in the region. Under international law
and relevant United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016), there are clear obligations to
ensure Israel's full compliance, including in relation to
the question of Jerusalem - the occupied capital of the
State of Palestine - which has been enduring endless
Israeli attempts of isolation, Judaization, colonization
and subjugation. It is unfortunate that the Security
Council has so far failed to put an end to all measures,
decisions or statements by any party aimed at forcibly
and unlawfully altering the legal, historical, cultural
and political status of the occupied city of Jerusalem,
including attempts to relocate some diplomatic
missions thereto, which constitute blatant Violations of
international law and relevant United Nations provisions
and undermine the rule of international law, deepen the
current political impasse, erode the two-State solution
based on the 1967 borders and foreclose all prospects
for peace and stability.

The dire situation in Palestine is becoming even
more dangerous owing to the decision by the Israeli
authorities to forcibly withhold Palestinian tax
revenues. Such an illegal decision is an act ofpiracy and
collective punishment against the Palestinian people
and constitutes a violation of international law and of
Israel's commitments under signed agreements, thereby
exacerbating the financial, economic and humanitarian
crisis being encountered by the Palestinian people,
which is especially dire in the Gaza Strip - which
remains under an illegal Israeli blockade - and has
caused such poverty and devastation. The OIC once
again underscores that the lack of effective international
deterrent measures has only emboldened Israel to
pursue racist, destructive and illegal acts and practices
with total impunity. Only accountability, in line with
international legal obligations, can create the pressure
necessary to end the Israeli occupation and ensure the
legitimate and inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people - the cornerstone of peace and security in the
Middle East.

While the economic empowerment of the Palestinian
people is imperative, addressing the dire economic
situation in Palestine should not overshadow the core of
the Palestinian issue and the root cause of the plight of
the Palestinian people, which is essentially the Israeli
colonial occupation and its far-reaching consequences.
The underlying issues of this historic injustice must be
directly and fully addressed. In that regard, we affirm
that in order for justice to be established and for a
genuine, lasting peace to materialize, an internationally
sponsored political process based on United Nations
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative must be
launched, with a view to ending the Israeli occupation
and enabling the Palestinian people to fulfil their
legitimate and national rights to live in freedom and
dignity in their independent Palestinian State, on the
territory occupied since 1967, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, and to find ajust and lasting solution for the
Palestinian refugees, in line with resolution 194 (III).

