Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Darfur.

Six months after the adoption of resolution 2363
(2017) on the two-phase reconfiguration of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), I am honoured to bring to the attention of
Council members the joint assessment of the Secretary-
General and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission ofthe Mission's phase one reconfiguration,
as submitted in the joint report (S/2018/l2), in line with
paragraph 6 of the resolution. I shall also touch upon
recent development in Darfur in the context of the latest
60-day report of the Secretary-General on UNAMID
(S/2017/1113), issued on 27 December 2017.

In June last year, in acknowledgement of the overall
improvement of the security situation in Darfur, the
Security Council endorsed the recommendations of the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission in their special report of 18 May 2017
(S/2017/437) for a two-pronged approach, with a focus
on protection in the Jebel Marra area and on stabilizing
the situation in other areas of Darfur. In the same
context, the Security Council authorized a reduction
of the Mission's uniformed and civilian personnel in
two phases, including the handing-over of 11 UNAMID
team sites to the Government of the Sudan, while
requesting a written assessment by 1 January 2018 ofthe
first six months of the reconfiguration. The assessment
was conducted by a joint African Union-United Nations
team, with representation from the United Nations and
humanitarian country teams, which visited Khartoum
and Darfur from 7 to 17 November 2017.

Allow me to briefly introduce the main findings
of the assessment. The conflict trends indicated in the
special report of 18 May 2017 continue, since, following
the military victory against the rebel movements,
the Government of the Sudan is firmly consolidating
its control and State authority across Darfur, except
for the pockets in the Jebel Marra area controlled by
a fragmented and weakened Sudan Liberation Army/
Abdul Wahid, with the other rebel groups having
been engaged in mercenary and criminal activities in
neighbouring countries. In Darfur, the deployment of the
Rapid Support Forces and the execution ofthe weapons-
collection campaign have increased the Government's
capability to respond swiftly to security challenges.
The developments have also created new dynamics by
bringing the different groups under the authority of the
Rapid Support Forces, including, recently, the border
guards of Musa Hilal, and by gradually creating the
conditions for new political realities.

Without major incidents overall, the disarmament
campaign has been received with mixed reactions
and scepticism, particularly by the communities
of internally displaced persons (IDPs), while the
local authorities and tribal leaders believe that it has
increased security among the communities. UNAMID
is engaging the authorities on reported concerns over
non-respect for the rule of law and violations of human
rights associated with the campaign, while monitoring
its execution in the IDP camps, including the Kalma
camp. In the meantime, progress towards achieving
a negotiated political settlement to the conflict
remains elusive.

Thus far, the humanitarian indicators illustrate
a continuing emergency situation, with 2.7 million
people displaced, of whom 2.1 million across Darfur
are in need of assistance, and 1.6 million people living
in various camps and settlements. While no additional
displacements occurred during the assessment period
and some voluntary returns have taken place, including
the recent repatriation of Sudanese refugees from the
Central African Republic to South Darfur, the lack of
security, basic services and sustainable livelihoods in
the areas of return, as well as issues related to land
ownership, have become major impediments to return.

Phase one of the reconfiguration of UNAMID
was completed before the deadline of 31 December
2017, with 11 team sites closed and handed over to
the Darfur state government by the end of October.
The military component currently stands at 11,461,
against an authorized strength of 11,395 at the end of
phase one; the police component at 2,666, against an
authorized strength of2,888; and the number of civilian
staff positions has been reduced by 558 following the
conduct of a civilian staffing review. In the context of
the two-pronged approach of the Operation, the mission
recently formalized the concept of the Jebel Marra task
force, and will activate it in the second half of January,
while, on 7 January, the Government reported having
allocated land for the G010 team site, although details on
the actual establishment of the site are yet to be agreed.
The mission is currently working on the state-specific
stabilization plans in cooperation with the Darfur state
Government and the United Nations country team.

During phase one of the reconfiguration, the
Government of the Sudan has been very cooperative
in facilitating the repatriation of contingents and
the timely closure and handover of team sites. The
overall operating environment for the movement of
humanitarian personnel across Darfur has been reliable.
However, the Mission is facing some difficulties in
obtaining visas for international staff, in particular
those working on human rights.

The assessment in Darfur was undertaken within a
few weeks of the closure of team sites, which allowed
for only a preliminary analysis of the impact of the
UNAMID reconfiguration. While no serious adverse
impact was noted during the field mission and the
subsequent weeks, it is clear that it is too early to draw
a definite conclusion with regard to the consequences
of the closure of team sites for the population. In the
period ahead, we will continue to keep the Council
informed of any emerging issues.

The developments covered by the Secretary-
General's progress report reaffirmed the trends outlined
above. While the reporting period did not witness any
armed clashes between Government forces and the
Darfur armed movements, the initiation of the forceful
stage ofthe weapons collection campaign across Darfur
and its launching in the IDP camps constituted its key
features. In addition, the start of the migration season
continued to generate violence among communities,
although at a lower level than in previous years. No
tangible progress was noted in the Darfur political
process or in the implementation of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur.

In conclusion, I would like to bring two issues
to the attention of the Council. First, as the Mission
moves towards the implementation of phase two of
the reconfiguration, provided that the current trends
continue, I recommend, for the Council's deliberation,
that a review take place to consider a new mission
concept with adjusted priorities in the context of the
renewal of the UNAMID mandate in June. Secondly,
funding for the consolidation of peacebuilding efforts
in Darfur should be treated by Member States as a
political issue of high priority in order to protect the
investments made to date in peace and to avoid a relapse
into conflict.

