Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (Spoke in Spanish):
Since 1991, the work of the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) has
been essential, among other things, in fulfilment of
its mandate, maintaining the ceasefire agreed by the
parties. Spain therefore welcomes today's extension of
MINURSO's mandate based on the text put forward by
the Group of Friends of Western Sahara. We appreciate
the work of the United States in the course of drafting
the resolution.

MINURSO should continue its work because the
presence of the United Nations in Western Sahara and
the refugee camps is, as the Secretary-General says in
his report,

"relevant to ensur[ing] the parties' observation
of the ceasefire and as a visible representation of
the international community's commitment to
achieving a resolution to the conflict" (S/2015/246, para. 75).

As the resolutionjust adopted notes, it is important
that the parties

"cooperate fully with the operations of MINURSO,
including its free interaction with all interlocutors,
and to take the necessary steps to ensure the
security of as well as unhindered movement and
immediate access for the United Nations and
associated personnel in carrying out their mandate,
in conformity with existing agreements" (resolution 2218 (2015), para. 3).

Spain wishes to emphasize that, as a draft version
of the resolution stated before being strengthened for
the final text just adopted, the support of the Security
Council for the efforts of the Secretary-General's
Personal Envoy and his Special Representative is
unqualified, and that, as an innovation, Member
States are called on to continue making voluntary
contributions in support of the food programmes to
ensure that the humanitarian needs of the refugees
are adequately addressed. For Spain, the improvement
of the situation of refugees is a priority and we will
therefore do everything in our power to respond to
this appeal. We encourage others to do the same. This
reinforced support for the Personal Envoy should serve
to reaffirm the central role of the United Nations and
facilitate a renewed effort to push for a solution to the
conflict.

Spain believes that once the resolution has been
adopted, the priority is to advance the political process.
The efforts of the international community must focus
on helping the parties - Morocco and the Frente
Polisario - to agree on a political, just, lasting and
mutually acceptable political solution that provides
for the free determination of the people of Western
Sahara in the context of arrangements consistent to the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations. This solution, for which the political will of
the parties is necessary, would put an end to a conflict
that has lasted too many years and would contribute to
the stability of the region.

