Today I have the honour to brief the Security Council on the activities of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) about its activities conducted during the period of 30 January to 19 May, in accordance with paragraph 24 (e) the resolution. The Committee conducted its work using the silence procedure with the aim of facilitating the implementation of the sanctions measures. At the outset, I would like to recall that, on 11 February, the Security Council adopted resolution 2509 (2020), by which it extended the time-bound authorizations and measures aimed at preventing illicit exports of petroleum, including crude oil and refined petroleum products, from Libya to 30 April 2021. The arms embargo, the travel ban and the assets freeze are not time-bound and continue to apply. The resolution also extended the mandate of the Panel of Experts to 15 May 2021. Thereafter, on 10 March, the Secretary-General appointed six individuals to serve on the Panel. I would like to recall the privileges and immunities enjoyed by experts on mission under the 1946 Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations. Owing to the coronavirus disease pandemic, the newly appointed Panel of Experts was unable to travel to New York to present its work programme to the Committee. Instead, the Panel provided its programme in writing and subsequently, on 15 May, discussed it with the Committee members via videoconference. In my last report, I informed the Council that the Committee had agreed to take action on two recommendations addressed to it in the Panel's final report submitted pursuant to resolution 2441 (2018) (S/2019/914). Accordingly, the Committee updated identifiers on its sanctions list on 25 February and considered the Panel of Expert's second recommendation pertaining to the assets freeze, on 5 March. Furthermore, the Committee considered and approved a response letter to the Libyan Investment Authority, a designated entity, addressing questions raised with regard to the assets freeze measure and the applicability of various exemptions under the Libya sanctions regime. Since my last report, the Committee received seven written updates from the Panel of Experts, five of them focusing on aspects of the implementation of the arms embargo and two on events related to crude oil exports from Libya and the import of Jet A-1 aviation fuel to Libya. Upon recommendation of the Panel of Experts, the Committee decided to share two of the updates with concerned Member States for their information. As for the travel ban, the Committee considered and approved a request to amend the travel dates of Ms. Safia Farkash Al-Barassi, for travel already approved during the previous reporting period. The Committee also received, in the current reporting period, acommunication from its Libyan focal point pursuant to resolution 2146 (2014). I note that the primary responsibility to implement sanctions measures rests with Member States. The Committee is committed to facilitating the implementation of these measures and seeks to contribute to promoting peace and stability in Libya.
