Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank
the Lithuanian presidency of the Security Council for
convening this debate in an open format. Let me also
thank the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the President of the Cote d'Ivoire
chapter of the West Africa Action Network on Small
Arms for their briefings.

Brazil supports United Nations activities to combat
the risks associated with the uncontrolled spread of
small arms and light weapons and shares the concern
over the suffering and high number of casualties related
to those arms. In conflict and post-conflict situations,
small arms enhance insecurity and feed instability. The
illicit transfer, ready availability and misuse of small
arms and light weapons continue to pose a threat to
international peace and security in many parts of the
world. In discussing the issue in the Council, however,
we should be mindful that there are no international
parameters to determine what constitutes destabilizing
accumulation. Brazil is of the view that States have
a legitimate right to self-defence, as provided for by
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations, and to
produce, export, import and transfer small arms and
light weapons, while seeking to reduce overall military
spending and striving to prevent the illegal diversion
and re-export of small arms.

We should also clearly differentiate between the
problem of small arms and light weapons in conflict
and in non-conflict situations as a determinant of
whether a certain case falls within the purview of the
Security Council. We should not mix the concepts of
conflict and violence or blur the distinction between
threats to international peace and security and public
security issues. In the same vein, it is relevant not to
associate the negative impacts of small arms and light
weapons with poor or unstable regions of the world, as
they affect people throughout the world, in developing
and developed countries alike.

Questions related to the use of small arms and
light weapons, when not related to a specific conflict
situation, should be discussed in the General Assembly
and within the framework of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects. Challenges posed by small arms and
light weapons should be dealt with by taking into
account the specific nature of each situation. The
Council should first and foremost emphasize greater
coordination among existing initiatives on the ground
and strengthen the capacity of national authorities to
better fulfil their responsibilities.

Practical measures to promote confidence in the
field of conventional weapons, such as the United
Nations Register of Conventional Arms and the United
Nations Standardized Instrument for Reporting Military
Expenditures, play an important role in contributing
to the promotion of understanding, transparency and
cooperation among States and increased stability and
security. Also noteworthy is the recent entry into force
of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) on 24 December 2014,
as highlighted by many previous speakers.

The ATT fosters the basic principle that enacting,
enforcing and strengthening export control systems
of conventional arms, including small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition, parts and components,
are a shared responsibility of all States. We regret only
that the negotiations on the ATT could not result in
a clear prohibition on arms exports and transfers to
any non-State actor not authorized by the importing
State - a provision that would certainly contribute to
promoting the Council's goals. While we hope that this
gap can be duly addressed in the future, we encourage
those States that have yet not done so, in particular
major producers and exporters, to sign the Arms Trade
Treaty, which is in the process of ratification by my
country, Brazil.

The importance of cooperation at the regional
and international levels in preventing, combatting and
eliminating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition cannot be overstated.
At the regional level, particularly within the framework
of the Union of South American Nations, Brazil and its
neighbours are progressively building confidence and
enhancing transparency in defence policies, including
information on military expenditures and conventional
arms. At the subregional level, a working group of the
Southern Common Market and associated States has,
since 2001, been promoting greater harmonization
of national legislation and the exchange of States'
experiences and information on combatting the illicit
trafficking of firearms, ammunition, explosives and
other related material. In addition, in September 2014
the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States held in San Salvador the first meeting of the
working group on illicit trafficking of small arms and
light weapons.

Having chaired the Peacebuilding Commission
last year, Brazil is fully aware of the dangers that
insufficient small arms controls pose to States in
situations of fragility due to conflict and instability.
The uncontrolled spread of small arms increases the
risk of relapse into armed conflict and may hamper
development efforts, undermining prospects for
sustainable peace. The Council is right in placing a high
degree of importance on the processes of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security sector
reform. It is equally important that the Council take
a strong stance against the continued channelling of
weapons to zones of conflict, including those affected
by intense non-State activities. Nowhere are the tragic
effects of the flow of small arms and light weapons
more evident today than in Syria. Brazil renews its call
for the immediate halt in arms provision to all parties
in Syria.

While recognizing the immense toll that the
uncontrolled spread of small arms has exacted on peace
and security, Brazil regrets that the Council continues
to ignore the threat posed by the existence of a much
deadlier type of weapon, namely, nuclear weapons,
which are currently being discussed right next door to
us. Unfortunately, the Security Council has decided to
distance itself from any statement on the risks posed by
the lack of progress in nuclear disarmament, choosing
to concentrate only on non-proliferation. Reflection
by this body on the long-term, systemic impacts of the
failure to implement their disarmament commitments
on the part of the nuclear-weapon States is long overdue.
The Council's Charter responsibilities with regard to
global peace and security mean that it cannot escape
the fact that nuclear weapons represent the single most
dangerous threat to the existence of humankind.

