Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I would like to j oin other
speakers in thanking Special Representative Shearer
and Ambassador Ciss for their comprehensive briefings.

Kazakhstan's principled position is that there can
be no military solution to any conflict, including that
in South Sudan. My delegation supports the joint press
statement of 29 January by the African Union, the
United Nations and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), as well as IGAD's communique
of 25 March in that regard. In fact, only inclusive and
transparent dialogue, along with implementation of the
peace agreement, can result in genuine reconciliation
and thereby lay a foundation for the rule of law to
prevail. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) cannot be a substitute for a political process,
and the international community should therefore
give all possible support to the national dialogue in
South Sudan.

KazakhstanisconcernedaboutthefactthatUNMISS
regularly encounters obstructions, bureaucratic
impediments and restrictions on its operations and
freedom of movement while implementing its mandate.
To be effective, any peacekeeping mission needs its
host Government to comply with the obligations set
out in its status-of-forces agreement. We believe that
UNMISS's operations will be greatly enhanced by the
speedy deployment of a regional protection force, and
we welcome the fact that during his meeting on 26 and
27 March in Juba with Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chair of the African Union Commission, President
Kiir reaffirmed his consent to it. We commend the
Governments of Ethiopia and Rwanda for successfully
coordinating all aspects of the deployment of their
contingents to the regional protection force. We
also hope that as part of the ongoing negotiations
between the Government and some of the other troop-
contributing countries, the remaining procedural issues
will be finalized in a timely manner. We welcome the
Government of Kenya's decision to join the regional
protection force by June, which will bolster the
force's capabilities.
Given the gravity of the humanitarian crisis and
food insecurity in South Sudan, both the Government
and the non-State actors involved should ensure
unhindered humanitarian access to those in need,
especially in areas affected by famine. South Sudan has
become the most dangerous country in the world, with
an alarmingly high death rate among humanitarian
workers, and we urge the Government to ensure their
security and bring their killers to justice.

Children continue to be severely affected by
the unprecedented violence of the ongoing conflict.
Hundreds of them have been killed, maimed, raped,
abducted or recruited in the conflict, which has now
spread throughout the country. The United Nations
estimates that nearly 16,000 children have been
recruited since the conflict began in December 2013.
The Security Council must therefore provide its
full support to Special Representative Shearer and
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict in their efforts to get the Government and other
stakeholders to take serious steps to close security,
legal and logistical loopholes and end the inhumane
treatment of children.

In conclusion, we would like to commend Special
Representative Shearer and the UNMISS personnel
for the work they are doing in such a difficult
environment on the ground in support of the people
of South Sudan. We would also like to express our
appreciation to Ambassador Fode Seck, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan, for his exemplary
commitment to pursuing such a difficult assignment.

