Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank Ambassador Denisov for his briefing and
Mr. Ruperez for his contribution to today's debate.

Since 11 September 2001, the entire world has
accurately assessed the threat that terrorism poses to
international peace and security. It has become clear
that terrorism is a global threat that requires all States
to mobilize. I reiterate here Benin's firm commitment
to the international community's tireless anti-terrorism
efforts. Terrorism challenges States to be constantly
vigilant with a view to having some forewarning of its
horrendous deeds and to taking appropriate measures,
in cooperation with other States, to counter them and to
avoid incalculable damage to their vital interests.

The foremost example of the international
community's common response to that challenge was
the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), to be followed
up by the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). We
welcome the many diverse steps taken by the CTC in
that regard. In its three years of existence, the CTC has
demonstrated its genuine ability to orient the activities
of Member States towards the implementation of the
Security Council's resolutions. We must acknowledge,
however, that despite the efforts States have made to
date in the context of the collective security system
laid down by the Charter, terrorism remains active. It
has diversified its activities and mocks the vigilance of
States.

The CTC's consideration of ways to strengthen
States' capacity to act has allowed the Security Council
to adopt new measures to revitalize itself and to
reinforce the legitimacy of United Nations action in
that connection. In establishing the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate, the CTC has given itself an
efficient tool for effectively discharging the mission
entrusted to it.

With regard to the activities undertaken during
the previous quarter, we note that the CTC has
continued to be productive despite the constraints
inherent in the transitional phase in which it currently
finds itself. That was due to the dynamism of the
Russian delegation at the head of the Committee and to
the work of the new Executive Director and the
Committee's experts. With regard to the praiseworthy
progress made in establishing the Executive
Directorate, we have no doubt that that body will
become fully operational in the timeframe established
by resolution 1535 (2004).

My delegation welcomes the adoption of
important guidelines on such sensitive issues as
Committee visits to Member States and assessing the
assistance needs of countries in combating terrorism.
We believe that the improvement envisaged in the area
of identifying assistance needs is a good way of
ensuring that the needs of beneficiary States and the
assistance provided to them to combat terrorism will be
better aligned. We also believe that the guidelines will
also strengthen the worldwide consensus against
terrorism. As we emphasized at the time of the
adoption of resolution 1566 (2004), we believe that
that consensus can be maintained only if combating
terrorism takes place in the context of respect for the
sovereignty of States and observance of international
law, international humanitarian law and human rights.

My delegation welcomes the reiterated
commitment of the Committee to promote that
principle. It is on that basis that we encourage all
States to cooperate closely with the Committee and to
fully join the international framework for cooperation
that has been established by international conventions
to combat terrorism and organized crime. We also
encourage the Committee to strengthen cooperation
with other relevant international institutions, with a
view to creating synergy and tightening the net against
terrorism.
But the fact remains that the effectiveness of the
fight against terrorism cannot be guaranteed unless we
devote all the necessary attention to resolving
international problems and settling conflicts. It is the
continuation of such conflicts that generates despair
and rebellion, which provide fertile ground for
terrorism. Moreover, we must ensure that there is no
tendency towards antagonism between religions. The
culture of tolerance and dialogue among civilizations is
today as essential as tracking down terrorists. There is
a need for stronger commitment in that regard on the
part of the United Nations.

