Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the convening ofthis meeting and your presence here this
morning, Sir, to lead the work of the Security Council.
We thank Mr. Mladenov for his detailed briefing.
Peru notes with deep concern the continuing
deterioration of the political and humanitarian
conditions underlying the question of Palestine.
We must continue condemning the recurrence of
indiscriminate attacks against the civilian population
by Hamas and other radical Palestinian actors, the
disproportionate nature of Israeli responses and the
confrontational rhetoric of their respective authorities.
This dynamic, coupled with the inaction of the Security
Council and the inertia on the part of certain key actors,
has a negative impact on an already highly volatile
environment. Bringing this grave situation to an end is
a challenging but urgent undertaking.

Under the prevailing circumstances, we reaffirm
our commitment to the only solution we deem viable
and consistent with international law, namely, that of
two States with internationally recognized and secure
borders, to be negotiated directly between Israel and
Palestine, on the basis of the borders in place in 1967,
which must also lead to the determination of the final
status of Jerusalem.

We recognize the right of Israel to safeguard
its own security and existence through self-defence
measures exercised legitimately in accordance with the
principles of legality, proportionality and precaution.
In that regard, we must remember Israel's obligation
to comply with the resolutions adopted by the Security
Council. In particular, we view it as urgent to put an
end, in accordance with resolution 2334 (2016), to the
intensified settlement activities, property demolitions
and evictions in the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967. Such practices contravene international
law, seriously jeopardize the territorial integrity of
the Palestinian State and undermine the prospects for
reaching a solution based on the existence of two States.

We furthermore emphasize the urgent need to
continue efforts to address the serious humanitarian
crisis in the occupied Palestinian territory, which
has deteriorated following cuts in the financing of
aid programmes. In that regard, it is imperative to
provide continuity to United Nations infrastructure
and development projects in Gaza, make gains in the
intra-Palestinian reconciliation process and continue
mobilizing the support of the international community
to address the financial difficulties facing the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. We also wish to recognize
the willingness of the Israeli Government to agree
on a solution allowing for the release to Palestinian
authorities of previously withheld fiscal revenues.
Following the recent episodes of violence in
Lebanon, Peru underscores the need to respect the
country's territorial integrity and sovereignty, in line
with the provisions of international law and, specifically,
resolution 1701 (2006). We urge all the parties involved
to act as called for by the prevailing circumstances,
refrain from unilateral actions that could escalate
tensions and prioritize diplomatic channels.

In conclusion, I would like to note that Peru
looks forward to receiving the written report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) next month,
which will contribute to greater transparency and
deeper discussion within the Council.

