Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me, first, to congratulate you, Madam President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, as well as to thank you for
having convened this open debate on the situation in
the Middle East.

It is with deep concern and growing frustration
that we continue to endlessly address the situation in
the Middle East, particularly the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. Regrettably, the illegal policies and the
constant provocations and incitement by the Israeli
regime and its extremist settlers against the Palestinian
people, their land and their holy places continue to
exacerbate tensions and raise religious sensitivities,
risking further destabilization and tension on the
ground. An extremely worrying development in that
regard is the continuing illegal activity in the vicinity
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque and Qubbat Al-Sakhra, in
occupied Jerusalem, in which Israeli occupying forces
continue to storm the holy compound and to use force
against hundreds of Palestinian worshippers, in
particular during and after Friday prayer. According to
reports, Israeli occupying forces utilize tear gas, throw
grenades, deploy sound bombs and shoot rubber bullets
at the worshippers, causing fear and panic among them.

The Security Council and the world community
must pay heed to the escalation of tension and
confrontation in and around the Al-Aqsa Mosque, since
that holy place, along with other Muslim and Christian
holy sites in occupied Jerusalem and the rest of the
occupied Palestinian territory, continue to be subjected
to threats, incitement and desecration by extremist
settlers, as well as constant provocation by Zionist
officials. That has led to escalating concern - not only
among the Palestinian people but among Muslim
people around the world - with respect to the
potential for further crisis at that holy site.

Another source of extreme worry is the expansion
of illegal settlements, which continues to take place on
an unprecedented scale, with the number of housing
units being built in the West Bank having grown to
thousands during 2011 and the first quarter of 2012.
The eventual construction of thousands of housing
units will almost certainly change the geopolitical
reality on the ground. In addition to the unabated
expansion of settlements, Palestinian buildings and
residences in both the West Bank and East Jerusalem
are being demolished. Furthermore, the expansion of
settlements has been accompanied by a systematic
increase in settler violence against Palestinians and
their property. The result of those activities is the
continued suffering of the Palestinian people. While
morally wrong, the settlements are also illegal under
international law, as they violate article 49 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention and run contrary to the
obligations of the Israeli regime. In that connection,
the Islamic Republic of Iran supports the action taken
by the Non-Aligned Movement to request Switzerland,
in its capacity as depositary of the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, to convene, at the earliest
opportunity, a conference of the high contracting
parties to the Convention, for the purpose of upholding
the obligations and responsibilities incumbent upon the
high contracting parties in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. That is in
accordance with recommendations contained in
General Assembly resolutions 64/10 and 64/254.

The situation in Gaza is no better than that in the
West Bank. In the past couple of months, the Gaza
Strip has witnessed bombardment and attacks by the
Israeli regime. Many civilians, including women and
children, were targeted, and several houses were
destroyed. The deprivation of more than 1.5 million
Palestinians of the basic necessities, including fuel for
electricity, continues. Thus far, the calls of the world
community, including the United Nations, to stop the
illegal activities continue to fall on deaf ears, as the
Israeli regime continues with its systematic violation of
human rights.
The Israeli regime must be held accountable for
all those war crimes, acts of State terrorism and
systematic human rights violations committed against
the Palestinian people, and the perpetrators must be
brought to justice. There is no justification for the
Council to remain silent vis-a-vis the perpetrators of
those crimes. The international community has the
responsibility to act and to put an end to the deliberate
violation of human and humanitarian rights.

It is our earnest desire that the prolonged conflict
in the occupied lands of Palestine should give way to
lasting peace and prosperity. That, of course, requires
the concerted effort of the entire international
community for the restoration of peace and justice.

With respect to the situation in Syria, although
we are of the belief that the crisis in that country has
no relevance to the agenda at hand, since some
delegations have touched on the issue, I would like to
say that my country continues to follow closely
developments in Syria. We firmly believe that the
current crisis should be resolved only through a Syrian-
led political dialogue in a peaceful manner. About two
weeks ago, Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan visited
Iran and met Iranian high officials, who assured him of
Iran's support for his mission and expressed Iran's
deep concern over the regional consequences of any
violations of Syrian sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We are happy that the Syrian Government is
constructively and actively engaged with Mr. Annan's
mission and that it has taken positive steps in
compliance with his plan. On our part, we are also
interacting with some of the major players in the region
in the effort to ensure constructive and successful
United Nations involvement in defusing the tension
and restoring peace in Syria.

With regard to the baseless allegation levelled by
the representative of Israel against the peaceful nature
of our nuclear activities, it is not my intention to delve
into a detailed response to such allegations. However,
suffice it for me to say that the Israeli regime's
clandestine development and unlawful possession of
hundreds of nuclear warheads and a nuclear-weapons
arsenal is a threat to the region as well as to
international peace and security. The Israeli regime has
clearly defied the demand of the overwhelming
majority of the States Members of the United Nations,
which have time and again called on it to renounce
nuclear weapons and to accede to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Regrettably,
the inaction of the relevant United Nations organs in
dealing with such Israeli policies and practices has
emboldened that dangerous regime. The question
remains how to establish peace and stability in the
Middle East when the massive Israeli arsenal continues
to pose a threat in the region and beyond.

Finally, the representative of Saudi Arabia made
reference to the visit to Abu Musa of His Excellency
President Ahmadinejad of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
In that regard, I should say that the Iranian islands of
Abu Musa, Greater Tunb and Lesser Tunb are an
integral and eternal part of Iranian territory. We
categorically reject any claim to the contrary. Moreover,
the President's recent visit, and all other measures
taken by the Iranian authorities in those Iranian islands,
was based fully on Iran's sovereign rights and on the
principle of its territorial integrity as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and the provisions of
international law. We underline here the importance of
the brotherly and good neighbourly relations that exist
between the Islamic Republic of Iran and the
neighbouring countries in the Persian Gulf. The
countries of the region share a common interest in
security and long-term stability. Our continued
commitment to brotherly relations with our neighbours
and regional partners in the areas of security and
economic development has a regional perspective as
well. We believe that constructive negotiation between
Iran and the United Arab Emirates will lead to the
further expansion of relations in various fields and that
it will help to remove any misunderstanding on that
issue.

