At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of September. You can rest assured of the support of the Indonesian delegation for your presidency. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank all delegations for their full support and cooperation during our presidency last month. I thank Acting Special Representative of the Secretary- General and Ambassador Sautter for their presentations. We affirm our continuing support to the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We welcome her engagement with leaders in Libya, as well as international partners. We also take this opportunity to welcome the new Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya and reiterate our commitment to work together with the Committee and its Panel of Experts. We welcome the Committee's informal meeting in July 2020 together with Libya and the wider membership of the United Nations. Such interaction is indeed crucial to encourage dialogue and transparent working methods and to prevent what the Secretary-General calls "political hypocrisy in international relations". Allow me to focus on the following points. First, we support all efforts for peace in Libya. I join the Secretary-General in welcoming the recent Libyan calls for a ceasefire and hope these calls will be respected by all armed forces. We expect international efforts, such as the Berlin process, will also play their role to support these calls. And we expect both parties to resume dialogue immediately through the UNSMIL-facilitated intra-Libyan 5+5 Joint Military Commission talks. We also welcome the resumption of the political dialogue in Geneva last month. We must ensure the preparedness of Libya in carrying out the result of the dialogue, including the planned general election next year. UNSMIL - as the embodiment of the United Nations on the ground - needs to have sufficient resources to guard that process, including its mandate, funding and political presence. This is why we reiterate our call for all members of the Security Council to proceed with the nomination of a new Special Representative of the Secretary-General by the Secretary-General as soon as possible. We also reiterate our strong support to the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire, especially during the crisis of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Secondly, we need to focus our efforts on saving Libyan lives. This includes those who are particularly vulnerable - women, youth, children and migrants. Right now, deaths in Libya come not only from bullets and bombs, but also from the COVID-19 pandemic. The Libyans deserve to have access to adequate health facilities, and there should be ample space for humanitarian assistance. All parties need to fully respect international humanitarian law, take measures to protect all civilians and heed the call for a global ceasefire. Thirdly, with regard to the importance of regional actors for peace in Libya, efforts made by neighbouring countries, as well as regional organizations - such as the African Union and the League of Arab States - remain relevant and should be further encouraged. We realize that as neighbours, countries in the region havefelt the direct impact of the conflict. They should never be left out, as they provide a unique perspective for peace. Our term as an elected member of the Council is short, and what we do right now will be recorded in history. The people of Libya have grown tired of empty narratives that have zero impact on the ground. They want us, the international community, not to meddle but to find a political solution for lasting peace. At the end of the day, the ultimate question will be: Have we been successful in saving lives in Libya?
