Mr. Wais: I thank you, Madam President, for
inviting me to brief the Security Council today on
the status of the implementation of the High-level
Revitalization Forum on the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, led by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD).

The Council will recall that I was given the task of
supporting the IGAD Council of Ministers in order to
facilitate the process leading to the revitalization of the
2015 South Sudan Peace Agreement. The mandate of
the revitalization entails bringing together the parties
to the Agreement and estranged groups deliberating
and agreeing on the following parameters of the Peace
Agreement: first, concrete measures to restore the
permanent ceasefire; secondly, steps to restore the
peaceful and inclusive implementation of the Peace
Agreement, and, thirdly, a revised and realistic timeline
for its implementation leading to a democratic election
at the end of the transitional period.

Pursuant to this mandate, my briefing will focus
on progress made in the revitalization process since the
previous briefing I made to the Council (see S/PV.8192).
I will also highlight the outstanding issues in the
revitalization process, including the remedial actions
undertaken to address them, and I will conclude with
the way forward.

The Council will recall that the revitalization
has been conducted in phases. The first phase of the
Revitalization Forum was successfully facilitated by
the IGAD mediators and culminated in the Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement, on the protection of civilians and
humanitarian actors, signed by the parties in December
2017. That was followed by the second phase, convened
in February. In line with the first two objectives of
the revitalization, which I have just highlighted, the
second phase of the Forum was dedicated to discussing
ways of restoring a full and inclusive Government
and the permanent ceasefire and transitional security
arrangement during the transitional period. Efforts
during that phase ofthe talks were invested in reviewing
the relevant chapters of the 2015 South Sudan peace
agreement, which dealt primarily with governance and
security issues.

At the time of the adjournment of this phase of the
forum, we had made significant progress towards the
revitalization goals. Following structured deliberations
and intensive discussions, the parties and stakeholders
reached consensus on specific articles on governance
and security, and initialed those provisions. Despite that
progress, there remain some outstanding governance
and security issues. Cognizant of the wide gaps, the
South Sudanese parties and stakeholders at the talks
urged the IGAD Council of Ministers to intensify
its efforts to engage and assist them in making the
necessary compromises to resolve the outstanding
issues according to the IGAD Council of Ministers
decision during its sixty-first extraordinary session,
held on 26 March, in Addis Ababa to conduct shuttle
diplomacy between the parties in order to narrow the
existing gaps in their position and reach consensus.

Since 10 April, the IGAD Council and I have
engaged the South Sudanese parties and stakeholders,
including civil society and the South Sudanese
Opposition Alliance, the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement-in-Opposition, other political parties
and the Transitional Government of National Unity.
The Council also held a discussion with Salva Kiir,
President of the Republic of South Sudan. During the
shuttle diplomacy, the IGAD Council of Ministers
heard the views of the parties and stakeholders on the
outstanding issues and the entire revitalization process.
It believes that there remain significant differences on
outstanding issues.

In that regard, the Council of Ministers will
include to enhance its engagement with the parties to
bridge the outstanding gaps. As such, the Council of
Ministers has invited the parties to an intensive session
of deliberations aimed at identifying possible areas
of compromise ahead of the resumption of the talks.
That meeting will convene in Addis Ababa ahead of the
resumption of the Forum, which commences 17 May.

The other challenge that could potentially
undermine the credibility of the current peace
process is the persistent violation of the Cessation
of Hostilities Agreement by some parties. The
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism has been documenting and
reporting violations of the Cessation of Hostilities
Agreement. There is therefore a need to hold violators
and spoilers accountable in order to deter impunity.
Without consequences for violation of the Agreement,
it will be difficult to instil trust among the parties
and stakeholders participating in the peace process.
The credibility of the revitalization process would be
at risk, and adherence to outcomes of the revitalized
peace agreement would also be difficult to guarantee.

I commend the Security Council for its sustained
effort towards restoring peace and stability in the
Republic of South Sudan and its support for the
revitalization process. Finally, I urge the Council to
continue its support to IGAD and the region in pursuit of
sustainable peace and stability in the Republic of South
Sudan. It is also critical that the Council support IGAD
and the African Union whenever they take measures
against violators of the peace process.

