Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his report on the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in Kosovo and also to the head of
the Mission, Mr. Steiner, for his substantive briefing on
the situation in the region.

The assessments and analyses contained therein,
in addition to the observations and conclusions of the
most recent Security Council mission to Kosovo and
Belgrade, provide a good basis for a comprehensive
consideration of the situation in the region and around
it and allow us to summarize the first year of
Mr. Steiner's activities as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo.

We agree that today we can note with satisfaction
progress in the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and the normalization of life in
Kosovo, which have been advanced by, inter alia, the
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Steiner, and by his putting forward the
concept of "standards before status".

In the region, the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government have begun their work and have begun the
transfer to them of some of the competencies of the
Special Representative. The second round of municipal
elections has taken place. Gradually the new Kosovo
police forces are coming into their own. Progress has
been noted in the resolution of economic and social
issues and in the establishment of dialogue with the
leadership of the Serbian Return Coalition and the
Government in Belgrade; a clear result of this was a
solution to the problem of northern Mitrovica.

We note in this context that the situation in the
region remains extremely sensitive. It is important that
the international presences there act with the utmost
sense of responsibility, avoiding incautious actions that
could hamper progress towards the goals set.

We welcome the readiness of the Belgrade
leadership to continue constructive cooperation with
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo and also with Pristina.

This is key to a solution to many of the problems
that are hindering the full implementation of resolution
1244 (1999). All of these problems are well known and
will continue to require unflagging attention on the part
of the international community. These include the
absence of conditions ensuring equal security and
freedom of movement for all of the inhabitants of
Kosovo, first and foremost of the Serbian minority, and
the continuing wave of violence against the Serbs who
have remained in the region.

A highly disquieting new factor is the outburst of
violence * clearly politically motivated, moreover -
within the Kosovo Albanian community as well.

The optimistic figures as to the numbers of
minority refugees who have returned, which have
exceeded the outflow indicators, do not, in our view,
fully reflect the real state of affairs, since, in a number
of regions of Kosovo where the Serbs were living at
the time of the deployment of the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo and KFOR, today practically none
of them are left.

Also a source of serious concern today is the
continuation of the Kosovo Protection Corps as a
paramilitary organization - an heir to the KLA.
Moreover, we fail to understand the position of the
international presences, which have virtually
reconciled themselves to the Corps's status. As a result,
the Corps retains many characteristics of a paramilitary
structure, including personal side-arm weapons for the
commanding officers, the rank of generals and so on.
In addition, the number of Corps personnel has not
been reduced. The maintenance of the Kosovo
Protection Corps in such a form is a potential source of
destabilization in the region and could trigger a new
wave of inter-ethnic violence.

Particularly disquieting for us are the unceasing
attempts of the leaders of the Kosovo Albanians to harp
on the subject of independence. Very recently they
once again issued a challenge to the international
community, putting forward in the regional Assembly a
draft declaration on the independence of Kosovo,
which contravenes both resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Constitutional Framework on Provisional Self-
Government in the region.
Some leaders of the Kosovo Albanians have even
made statements to the effect that the international
presences allegedly are abusing the hospitality
rendered them, and are speaking in favour of their
withdrawal. Demands are also being made, despite
resolution 1244 (1999), for the speeding up of the
transfer of all competencies of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government. This is
taking place in conditions where, as indicated in the
report of the Secretary-General, the Kosovo Albanian
majority continues to shirk its responsibility for the
development of the situation in the region. This above
all affects the creation of dignified living conditions in
the region for all of its inhabitants, regardless of their
ethnic background. It is clear they are not doing
enough to involve ethnic minorities in the activities of
regional bodies of self-government at all levels.

We continue to see that, despite statements
regarding dedication to multi-ethnicity, the regional
institutions of self-government in fact very often ignore
the interests of the minorities. We believe that UNMIK
and its head, Mr. Steiner, regarding this issue, will
continue to take a consistent position to prevent
attempts by Albanian extremists to make use of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to achieve
their political goals and the transformation of Kosovo
into an independent, quasi-State entity.

We are also convinced that the United Nations
Mission must continue actively to work to affirm
legality in the region, as is required by resolution 1244
(1999). Attempts by the Kosovo institutions of self-
government to cast doubt on the actions of UNMIK are
inadmissible.

The Security Council must clearly reaffirm the
unfailing dedication of the international community to
the strict implementation of resolution 1244 (1999),
including that part which deals with the reaffirmation
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the new
State of Serbia and Montenegro, as a successor to the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

We also believe that there is a need to create a
favourable dynamic in the development of the situation
in the Balkans. Here we include constructive dialogue
with Serbia and Montenegro, gradual movement
towards a settlement in Macedonia, the further
normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Zagreb and other processes. Viewed on a broader level,
we believe that all of this confirms the relevance of the
Russian initiative to establish a legal basis for stability
in the Balkans through the conclusion by the countries
of the region of legally binding agreements on mutual
respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity and on
the inviolability of borders, all with appropriate
international guarantees. The implementation of such
an approach would favour the achievement of a
comprehensive settlement in Kosovo in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999).

