Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): At the outset, I would
like to express the heartfelt condolences of the people
and Government of Liechtenstein to all those affected
by the recent terrorist attacks committed by Daesh in
France, Lebanon, Iraq and elsewhere.

When adopting the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1)
in September, our Heads of State and Government
recognized that peace and security will be at risk
without sustainable development. We are grateful to the
presidency for organizing today's debate, which offers a
first opportunity to explore some of the relevant issues.

The concept paper (S/2015/845, annex) rightly
places strong emphasis on the need for prevention.
Conflict prevention and the promotion of peaceful
societies, as established in Sustainable Development
Goal 16, go hand in hand. Serious violations of human
rights are often a key indicator of conflict to come and
are thus a key aspect of prevention. Two key elements
must be in place for the Security Council to play its
rightful role in that regard. First, the Council must
have access to relevant information at an early stage.
Secondly, the Council must be willing to take decisive
action on the information before it. Concerning the first
aspect, the United Nations system has significantly
enhanced its early warning capacity over the past few
years. Generally speaking, the information necessary
for the Council to act in a preventive manner is available
within the United Nations system. That, however, will
have an effect only if such information is placed before
the Council in time. In that respect, the Human Rights
Up Front initiative should prove to be an important
advance.

The decisive aspect, however, is Council members'
resolve to take action when the relevant information
is before them, especially when a situation is about to
escalate and could result in atrocity crimes. The code
of conduct on Security Council action against atrocity
crimes, which 106 States support at the moment, gives
hope that the Council will become more effective at
prevention. Resolution 2248 (2015) on Burundi, which
was adopted by consensus last Friday, is certainly a
positive signal. We look forward to seeing more States
support the code of conduct and also to its consistent
application, especially by those Council members who
have already signed it. We also hope that it will serve
as an additional incentive for the Secretariat to be very
proactive in forwarding information to the Security
Council.

The Council can also play a much stronger role in
helping to create accountable institutions and ensuring
equal access to justice as a key ingredient of sustainable
peace. Such efforts should focus primarily on the
strengthening of national judiciaries, which is the best
way to ensure a lasting contribution to sustainable
development in the countries concerned. Capacity-
building and technical assistance can be made available,
and are already being made available, by different parts
of the United Nations system. If necessary, hybrid
models can be put in place, particularly in situations
of transition from armed conflict. There are also great
opportunities for the Peacebuilding Commission in that
regard. In most cases, justice efforts should be driven
by the countries concerned, but at the same time the
Council should consistently call on them to fulfil their
obligation to fight impunity for the most serious crimes
and should mandate international assistance where
needed. Where a country is clearly unwilling to provide
justice, with impunity impeding sustainable peace, the
Council should consider referring situations to the
International Criminal Court. However, given its track
record in that regard, the Council should reconsider
its referral modalities; in particular, it should ensure a
strategy for effective follow-up.

There are several specific aspects of the 2030
Agenda that merit separate discussion, but the issue
of human trafficking, in particular, is a challenge that
would be worthy of an open debate in the Security
Council. Human trafficking is not merely one of the
great human rights challenges and tragedies of our
time; it can also destabilize societies and pose a threat
to international peace and security. We hope that such
a debate could galvanize a coordinated approach to
human trafficking across the United Nations system.

