Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation congratulates Assistant Secretary General
Bintou Keita on her briefing on the security challenges
in Libya following the car-bomb attack in Benghazi
that today killed three workers from the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).

Cote d'Ivoire condemns unreservedly and in the
strongest terms this attack perpetrated in a commercial
area. It addresses its most heartfelt condolences to the
grieving families at the United Nations, as well as to
UNSMIL, to which our country renews its support for
its determined commitment to finding a solution to the
Libyan crisis. Finally, my delegation wishes a prompt
and full recovery to the wounded of this barbaric attack.

As it did following the bombing of the Tajoura
detention centre, which killed 53 emigrants on 3 July,
C6te d'Ivoire calls for the perpetrators of these heinous
attacks to be brought before the competent courts.
More than four months after the beginning ofhostilities
for the control of the capital, Tripoli, the Libyan crisis
is more than ever at an impasse, and today's attack on
UNSMIL personnel must challenge our Council on the
need to bring the belligerents to accept a ceasefire.
Like the other States members of the Council, cote
d'Ivoire has always expressed its deep concern about
the consequences of the fighting on the integrity of
UNSMIL personnel, on the security and humanitarian
situation, and on the political process for ending the
crisis in Libya.

Unfortunately, the confirmed deliveries of weapons
to the parties to the conflict, in flagrant violation of
the arms embargo, remain a source of deep concern,
especially as they fuel a conflict whose stalemate
makes it difficult to achieve a ceasefire and an
immediate resumption of the inter-Libyan dialogue. In
this context, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes General Khalifa
Haftar's announcement today of a truce on the eve of
the Muslim holiday of Bid Al-Adha. It also welcomes
the commitment of the Government of National Accord
to alleviate the suffering of the population and its
readiness to also accept a humanitarian ceasefire for
the celebration of Bid Al-Adha. My delegation therefore
calls on the belligerents to translate their commitments
into action and urges them to extend the truce in order
to relaunch the political process to end the crisis.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its support
for the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ghassan Salame, and for the UNSMIL staff, who
are working in a very delicate security environment.

