Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for organizing this interactive meeting with the
Force Commanders of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the United Nations Mission in Liberia and the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, Lieutenant
General Dos Santos Cruz, Major General Ngondi and
Major General Iqbal Asi. I also thank them for their
detailed and comprehensive briefings today.

In resolution 2086 (2013), adopted under Pakistan's
presidency recently, the Council noted that peacekeeping
today ranges from traditional missions, chiefly
monitoring ceasefires, to complex multidimensional
operations tasked with peacebuilding and mitigating
the deep-rooted causes of conflict. If they are to deal
with this broad panoply of missions, it is essential that
Force Commanders have professional staff with the
required capacity and the necessary resources. Military
staff must also be given pre-deployment training that is
specific and adapted to their missions. Thanks to such
training, we are able to mitigate risks and to improve
the safety and security of Blue Helmets, and put them
in a better position to discharge their increasingly

complex mandates and to increase the security of those
they are entrusted with protecting.

In order to assess if pre-deployment training
responds to needs, we need in-theatre assessments, as
noted by Major General Ngondi in his presentation.
We also note the suggestion in his presentation that an
assessment team be established at the level of chief of
staffthat could evaluate the training of Blue Helmets. In
that respect, we feel it important that such teams benefit
from the contribution of child protection advisers and
women's protection advisers within peacekeeping
missions. We also feel that it would be important to
strengthen capacities at United Nations Headquarters,
and we welcome the proposals for establishing an
evaluation unit and a general inspectorate in this area.

With respect to the use of modern technologies,
particularly surveillance drones, as was very well
pointed out by General Dos Santos Cruz, it is important
to improve our understanding of the situation in
peacekeeping operations because such knowledge is an
important part of risk-mitigation and helps to improve
the security and safety of troops. This being the case,
we feel that it is important that United Nations missions
have recourse to such technology in order to have a
greater understanding of the situation, enabling them
to take the measures necessary with regard to security
and protection.

In our view, by combining modern technologies
for information collection, transmission and analysis
with modern technology related to the use of non-lethal
force, United Nations missions will be able to more
effectively implement their mandates to protect
civilians. In regard to the protection of civilians, I
have a question for Lieutenant General Dos Santos
Cruz. Are studies or experiments under way to make
modern communication equipment available to local
communities in high-rish areas in order to give those
communities an early-warning system in case of an
attack by armed groups? I am thinking particularly
about the situation in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

I would now like to move on to inter-mission
cooperation. Luxembourg is very much in favour of
stepping up such cooperation to provide for a better
management of resources. We feel that the optimal use
of peacekeeping resources, be it through an ongoing
regular exchange of information to take the regional
dimension of a conflict into account, or through joint
temporary use ofresources deployed in a given region, is
most appropriate. However, it is clear that inter-mission
cooperation cannot substitute for the provision of the
resources necessary in fulfilling a mission's mandate.
Rather than reducing the cost of a mission, the sole
objective should be to increase its efficiency.

The example of UNMIL and UNOCI, as described
in detail by General Muhammad Iqbal Asi, shows that
inter-mission cooperation is useful, on a case-by-case
basis, in providing timely assistance, in terms of staff
and equipment, to missions that so require.
In that context, I have a specific question for
General Iqbal Asi with regard to cooperation between
UNOCI and UNMIL. The Panel of Experts of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1521 (2003), concerning Liberia, recently
recommended the establishment of an UNMIL border
control unit, aimed at strengthening cooperation with
UNOCI and based on a shared strategy between the
Governments of Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire on controlling
the border. I would ask the General if he considers that
recommendation appropriate, and whether it will be
implemented in the near future.

More generally, with regard to West Africa overall,
we welcome the efforts under way to strengthen
inter-mission cooperation, including in the context of the
establishment of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.

In conclusion, I would like to express the
heartfelt thanks of the Luxembourg delegation for the
commitment of all the Force Commanders of the various
United Nations missions, including the committed staff
who carry out crucial work to implement the Council's
mandates, often in trying circumstances.

