Ms. Plepyte (Lithuania): Lithuania aligns itself
with the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union and its member States earlier today.

We would like to express our gratitude to France and
its Foreign Minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, for convening
this open debate on preventing and combating the
financing of terrorism, as well as for their continuing
efforts to create opportunities to find responses to
this chameleon of an international threat. I would
also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir
Voronkov, Mr. Marshall Billingslea, President of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF), and Ms. Mercy
Buku, the anti-money-laundering expert, for their
valuable insights.

We are pleased to note the new impetus given to
the guidelines for countering terrorism financing by
today's resolution 2462 (2019), submitted by France, as
one of the most constructive outcomes to the high-level
International Conference on Combating the Financing
of Da'esh and Al-Qaida, held in Paris in April 2018 on
the theme "No money for terror".

The threat posed by terrorist financing in Lithuania
has been assessed as low, and only one terrorist
financing-related conviction has been recorded.
However, no State is immune to terrorist activity within
its borders, and the global nature of this threat requires
a comprehensive response at every level, national,
regional and international. Lithuania attaches great
importance to full compliance with and implementation
of the relevant security Council resolutions and
appropriate recommendations of the United Nations
bodies and FATF, as well the strengthened European
Union regulations. Our national legislative framework
has also been reinforced. In May 2015 our Parliament
adopted a public security development programme for
the period from 2015 to 2025. It focuses on security
policy and public security planning, including counter-
terrorism and terrorism financing. An inter-agency
working group was established as a result, bringing
together regulators, law-enforcement agencies and
other Government entities to jointly identify, assess
and mitigate key and emerging money-laundering and
terrorism financing risks.

In addition, in 2018 the Council of Europe's
Committee of Experts on the Evaluation of Anti-Money
Laundering Measures and the Financing of Terrorism
(MONEYVAL) completed its assessment of Lithuania's
compliance with the principal international standards
to counter money-laundering and the financing of
terrorism and the effectiveness of its implementation
of them. In its report, MONEYVAL concluded that
Lithuania had resilient coordination mechanisms in
place, including an anti-money-laundering coordination
group and numerous active agreements on the exchange
of information among authorities at the operational
level. The evaluation team also reported positive
feedback from the global network for combating money-
laundering and the financing of terrorism with regard
to the quality and relevance of Lithuania's assistance.

MONEYVAL also acknowledged that Lithuania had
a sound legal and procedural framework for exchanging
information with foreign partners in a comprehensive,
proactive and timely manner, both upon request and
spontaneously, and in line with its low-risk profile.
Lithuania actively seeks international cooperation with
other States, which has resulted in convictions and the
seizure and confiscation of proceeds of crimes. The
Bank of Lithuania has also rolled out a set of innovative
consultation tools for financial-market participants on
anti-money-laundering issues with a view to deepening
their understanding of the implementation of the
relevant supranational and national regulations.

It is clear that cryptocurrencies have the potential
to be used to finance terrorism and other forms of
online crime. Even though bitcoin and similar digital
assets were not used to fund any of the recent terrorist
attacks, there is a worrisome trend of attempts to use
them to finance online terrorist infrastructure. It is
crucial to deter terrorists from conducting fundraising
activities via social media, abusing pre-established
crowd-funding networks and web-based services. We
consider this an area of excellent opportunities for
public-private partnerships and initiatives.

The international community has countered
the financing of terrorism with broad cooperation
in tracking and cutting off funds through a range of
initiatives that limit access to legitimate financial
channels. However, it will remain essential to continue
monitoring and enforcing all of our commitments, and
it will continue to be vital to maintain political will,
particularly when dealing with non-State actors and
terrorists who are increasingly turning to new methods
of financial support that are ever more difficult
to curtail.

