Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
am deeply honoured to speak to the Security Council
on behalf of the 19 States members of the Rio Group,
in my capacity as the representative of Costa Rica, the
Pro Tempore Secretariat.

Last Friday, 12 April, the Presidents of the States
members of the Rio Group, meeting in San Jose, Costa
Rica, agreed on a declaration of principles in which
they reiterated their firm condemnation of terrorism.
The Presidents declared:

"We forcefully condemn and reject
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and
we support all regional and international
measures of cooperation and coordination to
suppress it, within the framework of strict
compliance with human rights and international
humanitarian law and other principles and norms
of international law, and in conformity with the
resolutions and instruments of the United Nations
and the inter-American system, as well as with
other relevant initiatives on this subject, in
particular through the creation of mechanisms for
the exchange of information and judicial
cooperation to facilitate the prevention and
suppression of acts of terrorism. The fight against
terrorism should also be based on the promotion
of a culture of peace, tolerance and solidarity. We
agree to promote the adoption of the Inter-
American Convention against terrorism during
the thirty-second session of the General
Assembly of the Organization of American
States, which will be held in Barbados."

I have requested that declaration to be circulated
as an official document of the Security Council.

As Mrs. Mary Robinson, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, has stressed,
terrorism is a threat to the most fundamental human
rights, the right to life. The formulation of a common
approach to counter-terrorism serves human rights.
With that spirit, the Rio Group fully supports the
content of resolution 1373 (2001) adopted on
28 September 2001, as well as the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee.
The fight against the scourge of terrorism
requires true universal cooperation with the view to
upholding the basic principles of peaceful coexistence
among all peoples and nations as well as guaranteeing
peace, security and development for all humanity. In
that context, the Counter-Terrorism Committee plays a
key role in the coordination of universal action against
this crime.

The Rio Group welcomes the excellent work of
the Committee in its analysis of national reports
submitted in conformity with resolution 1373 (2001). It
acknowledges the leadership of its Chairman,
Ambassador Sir Jeremy Greenstock, and of its Vice-
Chairmen. In particular, we are grateful for the
opportunity for constructive dialogue between the
Security Council and Member States that has been
provided by the submission of national reports. We
further note the Committee's intention to finalize the
consideration of the first reports by 31 May, an
enormous task considering the complexity and breadth
of the 143 documents that have been submitted.

The struggle against terrorism calls for the
creation of institutional and police procedures that will
effectively protect the population. We believe that
special attention should be given to the dangerous
relationship among drug trafficking networks, terrorist
groups, illicit traffic in weapons and money-
laundering. We must proscribe the transfer of weapons
to all rebel and extremist groups as well as to the
Governments that support them. Similarly, it is
indispensable to increase technology transfer bilateral
cooperation in the area of police and judicial training,
and financial assistance to all States that require them
to prevent and suppress terrorism.

In that context, constant dialogue and
communication among the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, Member States and regional and
subregional organizations creates an ideal framework
to coordinate and invigorate intergovernmental and
inter-institutional cooperation and assistance to prevent
terrorism and to strengthen national justice systems. In
this regard, we are grateful for the Committee's
establishment of a list of possible sources of expert
advice and assistance.

For its part, the Rio Group has held a series of
consultations in compliance with resolution 1373
(2001) with a view to preventing and suppressing
terrorist acts and to effectively implementing the
Security Council's decisions on this matter. In that
regard, I would like to highlight the document prepared
by legal experts of the Rio Group on the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), which was
been circulated as an annex to document S/2002/ 107.

As the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights has aptly said, combating terrorism
requires that we tackle the sources of insecurity at their
root. The Rio Group is aware that extremism is fuelled
by political oppression, extreme poverty, hunger,
destitution, disease and the violation of fundamental
human rights. We know that respect for human rights
and democracy in all fields is the best protection
against terrorism. The fight against terrorism must be a
reason to reaffirm basic rights. True and sustainable
peace is born of mutual respect, dialogue and the
rejection of violence.

For that reason, we believe that a comprehensive
strategy to ensure the respect for human dignity, in all
spheres, is required. We are convinced that fighting this
crime must lead us to build more open and tolerant
societies, where a true culture of peace, tolerance and
solidarity reigns. We are confident that the work of the
Security Council and its Counter-Terrorism Committee
will enable us to make progress towards that goal.

