Mr. Kvelashvili (Georgia): At the outset, let me
express our gratitude to the Chinese presidency for
convening today's meeting.

Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. In addition,
I would like to make some comments in my national
capacity.

The violence and brutality inflicted by terrorism
on humanity is of grave concern. Egregious attacks
on innocent civilians in different parts of the world
make it obvious that terrorism, one of the most
pressing challenges for the contemporary world, has
become transnational and cross-border in nature. The
situation in the Middle East overtly demonstrates how
inhumanely terrorists can abuse the opportunities
opened by modernity, modern technologies and
growing globalization.

Conflicts in Syria and Iraq have prompted violent
extremists to travel to those countries from all over
the world. The citizens of Georgia are also targeted
for recruitment to serve the interest of terrorist

organizations in territories controlled by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). In a technological
age, recruitment no longer requires face-to-face
communication. ISIL terrorists are using modern,
encrypted networks, and for law-enforcement agencies
that poses a huge obstacle in the process of combating
terrorism.

No single State can have full access to the
relevant data. T counter those challenges, Georgia
has significantly streamlined its procedures for
intelligence-sharing, and our special agencies have
demonstrated good practices in successful international
cooperation.

Bearing in mind the rapidly increasing ISIL
propaganda, relevant frameworks should be considered
in which influential religious and youth leaders can play
a key role. More must also be done to address the root
causes conducive to the spread of violent extremism,
including elaborating relevant policies aimed at social
and economic development, fostering education
and youth employment, women's empowerment and
inclusive national ownership. Georgia has taken
steps towards fuller integration of certain vulnerable
communities into society, with the participation
of civil society and advocacy groups. It should be
emphasized that criminal prosecution without a proper
resocialization strategy It should be emphasized that
criminal prosecution without a proper resocialization
strategy can only further aggravate radicalization.

Increasing threats emanating from various terrorist
groups make the possibility of exploiting security
vulnerabilities with criminal intent highly likely. It is
not a secret that some terrorist groups have already
demonstrated acute interest in acquiring weapons of
mass destruction to terrorize the world. Hypothetically
speaking, terrorists can unlawfully obtain weapons
of mass destruction or technologies and materials
necessary to assemble them. Therefore, one day, the
threat of weapons of mass destruction terrorism might
shed its blurred lines and acquire quite a clear shape. To
effectively prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction, we will have to enhance the existing
security architecture and reinforce the physical security
of sensitive materials.

The risks posed by the illegal military occupation
of 20 per cent of our sovereign territory by the
Russian Federation are our most serious problem. The
occupied regions of Georgia, like any other grey zone
throughout the world where legitimate national and
international mechanisms are nonexistent, have been
used for various sorts of illegal activities, including
smuggling and terrorism. In this connection, I would
like to remind this audience that over the past years
there have been a number of recorded and prosecuted
attempts to smuggle nuclear and radioactive materials
through the Russian-occupied Georgian regions, and
the international community has been duly informed
about them.

Full compliance with the obligations under
relevant international arrangements, such as the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological
Weapons Convention, Council resolution 1540 (2004),
among others, must stand out as the top priority for the
international community. In this regard. I would like to
remind the Council that, in coordination with the United
Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research
Institute, the Government of Georgia organized
high-level side events in October 2014 and 2015 on
topics related to chemical, biological, radiological or
nuclear - CBRN - risk reduction. In December 2015,
Georgia, the Kingdom of Morocco and the Republic of
the Philippines, as co-Chairs, established the United
Nations Group of Friends of CBRN Risk Mitigation and
Security Governance to promote various CBRN-related
topics in the United Nations by actively engaging with
Member States and the United Nations Secretariat.
The Group of Friends will help integrate the CBRN
component in the international security architecture and
foster regional and subregional cooperation on CBRN
challenges. When we held our second meeting at the
ambassadorial level on 6 April, we again encouraged
the other Member States participating in the European
Union's CBRN Centres of Excellence Risk Mitigation
Initiative to join the Group.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Georgia's
resolve and determination to further engage with our
partner countries and international organizations
with a common objective of reducing threats posed by
terrorism and violent extremism.

