The Secretary-General: I thank the Security
Council, under the presidency of Italy, for convening
today's open debate on trafficking in persons in
conflict situations.

Criminals and terrorists are capitalizing on and
perpetuating the disorder and mayhem of conflict. To
fund their crimes, they prey on the vulnerable. Their
brutality knows no bounds. Sexual exploitation, forced
labour, the removal of bodily organs and slavery are the
tools of theirtrade. Terrorist groups such as Da'esh, Boko
Haram, Al-Shabaab and the Lord's Resistance Army
are forcing women, boys and girls into dehumanizing
servitude. Committed in the shadows, these actions are
serious abuses of human rights and may amount to war
crimes and crimes against humanity.

In recent days, we have all been horrified by
images of African migrants beings sold as goods in
Libya. It is our collective responsibility to stop these
crimes. We must act urgently to protect the human
rights and dignity of migrant populations. That
means bringing the perpetrators to justice; it means
immediately increasing humanitarian aid; and it means
helping the Libyan authorities to strengthen their own
capacity to protect and provide for vulnerable men,
women and children. But there is also an urgent need
to create more opportunities for regular migration, to
restore the integrity of the refugee protection regime
and to increase the number of refugees resettled in the
developed world. Slavery and other such egregious
abuses of human rights have no place in the twenty-
first century.

According to the Global Report on Trafficking in
Persons, issued by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), increasing numbers of victims
trafficked from Iraq, Syria and Somalia are appearing
in Asia, Europe and the Middle East. The Security
Council has taken important steps against trafficking,
including by unanimously adopting resolution 2331
(2016) last December and the draft resolution to be
adopted this morning (S/2017/973). These texts call for
the targeting of financial flows to traffickers. They urge
every nation to adopt and implement the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children. Along
with the political declaration on the implementation of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons (General Assembly resolution 72/1), which was affirmed by every nation in September
of this year, we have built a framework for action
rooted in international law. Cooperation, mutual legal
assistance and information-sharing are the mainstays
of our activities.

The Council has before it my first report (S/2017/939)
on the implementation of resolution 2331 (2016), which
documents the ongoing work of Member States and
many parts of the United Nations system. These efforts
need to be intensified. We must make full use of the
data collection, analysis, tools and technical assistance
provided by UNODC and other United Nations actors,
particularly those operating in conflict and post-
conflict situations. Better understanding of human
trafficking markets and routes will strengthen analysis
and prevention, and coordination will be crucial,
including through the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons.

Trafficking is also a development issue. Preventing
the situations that lead to trafficking means addressing
poverty and exclusion, in line with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. We must also do more
to support the victims and survivors of trafficking.
Indeed, they should be treated as victims of crime
and not detained, prosecuted or punished for unlawful
activities in which they were compelled to engage in
order to survive. I also urge Governments, the private
sector and civil society to support the Blue Heart
Campaign and the United Nations Voluntary Trust
Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children.

The international community's commitment is being
tested. We need to show the world our determination to
end human trafficking, help its many victims and hold
those responsible accountable for their crimes.

