We express our appreciation for the three briefers today and thank the French presidency for organizing the open debate on children and armed conflict, a topic that is always touching and heart-wrenching at the same time. Fifteen years after resolution 1612 (2005) and 20 years after the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, today's meeting provides a meaningful opportunity to reflect on our efforts and progress, and serves as a reminder that much more needs to be done to fulfil our commitments to children. With the creation of the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, resolution 1612 (2005) is critical to the child protection agenda. The monitoring and reporting mechanism has proved to be a valuable tool for collecting and verifying information on grave violations against children in armed conflict. Behind each statistic are patterns and trends depicting the scale and severity of violations. Behind each statistic are untold stories of children suffering from violations. And behind each statistic is a growing urgency to prevent and stop all these horrifying practices. We are deeply grateful to all colleagues who, despite dangerous situations, work wholeheartedly to bring objective and reliable information to our attention. Furthermore, we fully share the sentiments of Mr. Olara Otunnu, former Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, when he said that "[a] monitoring and reporting mechanism is of limited value unless it leads to action" (S/PV.5129, p. 5). In that connection, the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict has been working diligently to review reports and make practical recommendations for various situations in specific countries. With the release of more than 155,000 children and over 60 country-specific recommendations, we have good reason to be encouraged by the continued impact and contributions of those two mechanisms with regard to the situation of children in armed conflict. We believe that the crucial factor to the success of the Working Group is sincere dialogue and the spirit of unanimity among all 15 members for the common goal of child protection. In furtherance of its entrusted mandate, the Working Group needs to continue upholding the long-standing tradition of consensus since it is the only way to fulfil its demanding tasks and, above all, to safeguard the best interests of the child, to which we are all dedicated. We take this opportunity to pay tribute to UNICEF, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and her Office, and United Nations peacekeeping and political missions for their work in advancing the children and armed conflict agenda. Though much has been achieved on this agenda, the situation of children in armed conflict remains painful. As shown in the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/525), in 2019, 25,000 grave violations against children were verified, or 80 violations committed every day. We are deeply concerned about the continued high level of violations. While a long-term solution to the problem of children in armed conflict lies in conflict prevention, it is imperative to work out concrete measures and immediate actions to save thousands of children from the devastating effects of armed conflict. We welcome the focus of today's discussion on the importance of education and vocational training. That is particularly true to ensure the successful rehabilitation and reintegration of children released from armed forces and armed groups. Witnessing and committing violence greatly affects their emotions and behavioural skills. For those children, education and vocational training will be the ticket to their lost childhood and a better future. Pursuing education is never easy during armed conflict. The international community needs to strongly condemn attacks on schools and their personnel. We call on all parties to armed conflict to immediately prevent and end such abhorrent attacks. With the arrival of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), access to education is now even more challenging. In that regard, we encourage the sharing of good practices and innovative ways to ensure the continuity of education. While online classes mostly work for children in urban areas, radio has been brought into use for children in poor and rural areas. In our country, we encourage the voluntary participation of young people to assist in the distribution of lessons to children in remote and mountainous areas. Ina broader sense, we share the concerns about the impact of COVID-19 on the implementation of national, regional and United Nations child-protection agendas. Children in armed conflicts and other fragile situations will be affected primarily by its secondary socioeconomic consequences. We therefore call for greater efforts and the cooperation of all Member States and the United Nations system as a whole to closely monitor the impact and to take timely action together in the fight against the pandemic. In conclusion, past progress shows that with political determination and through concerted action, our commitments can be translated into tangible results for the sake of our children. We must step up our efforts and build on our progress in order to bring children hope and enact positive changes that they need and deserve.
