Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I thank the Special Envoy and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs for their briefings and reiterate our full support for them. I also thank Ambassador King for her briefing. We have said it time and again: we must put an end to the suffering of the Yemeni people, and a comprehensive and inclusive political solution is the only way to achieve it. We are very concerned about the ongoing violent clashes in northern Yemen, which have resulted in many casualties. De-escalation must be pursued without delay, facilitated by direct exchanges between the parties, and we must move towards a cessation of hostilities. Confidence-building measures are needed in order to do so. Some initial progress has been made - the first medical evacuation flights from Sana'a to Amman in early February and the agreement announced on 16 February 2020 for a large-scale prisoner exchange. Additional progress is needed. The Riyadh agreement must now be fully implemented. A deteriorating situation in southern Yemen will benefit only the terrorists. Those processes must lead to the resumption of political dialogue with a view to reaching an inclusive solution for the whole of Yemen and its components. The role of the Special Envoy is central to the coordination of those efforts. Every effort must also be made to ensure humanitarian access. The parties are obliged to respect international humanitarian law. Increasing restrictions on humanitarian access and the diversion of humanitarian assistance must cease immediately. The announcement by the Houthis that they would abandon the 2 per cent levy on humanitarian projects is a first step, but much more progress is still needed. It is imperative that the entire humanitarian community remain steadfast in its commitment to the relevant principles and support the United Nations humanitarian response plan. That was the purpose of the donor coordination meeting held in Brussels from 12 to 13 February. Lastly, we urgently call for the United Nations to be given rapid access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which poses a serious threat to the environment. France will remain fully committed and ready to act to reach a political solution to the Yemeni crisis and, more broadly, to avoid any escalation in the region. French authorities are working with all stakeholders to that end.
