Mr. Popolizio Bardales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Asacountry committed to multilateralism, international law and the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes, Peru welcomes the timely initiative of Viet Nam to convene this important open debate in a year marking the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations. Since the end of the Second World War, humankind has evolved and made significant progress. The Organization has been instrumental in building a better world. In many cases, however, progress has been uneven and the international order has shown limitations in responding effectively to new and changing realities. We view with concern the spread of conflicts and the emergence of new threats to international peace and security that, in many cases, are caused by geopolitical tensions and global phenomena, such as growing inequality, the effects of climate change, the arms race and transnational organized crime. In such an environment, neither ramping up violence nor resorting to war is a viable or acceptable alternative for the international community. This sensitive situation is exacerbated by current and frequent violations of international law, including Security Council resolutions and especially international humanitarian law. We cannot maintain international peace and security without respecting the rule of law and ensuring more inclusive societies. For example, one of the cornerstones of the international order is the prohibition of the use of force in any way that is inconsistent with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. In that regard, we are concerned that some countries are positing arguments and interpretations that are ultimately alien to international law and undermine the collective security architecture. The limitations of the international community in addressing these realities should lead us to strengthen the dialogue, preventive efforts and international cooperation that are so necessary to implement the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter. We emphasize the validity of those purposes and principles and those of the Organization in order to resolve the serious problems facing us and to sustain and develop the collective security architecture and a rules-based international order so that we can thwart the emergence of major threats to peace and security. Specifically, we deem it necessary for the United Nations, and especially the Security Council, to promote dialogue and the peaceful settlement of disputes, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI of the Charter. We believe that this is vital to reaching peaceful solutions to major conflicts, such as those that are considered by the Council and which pose an ongoing challenge for it. Our task is to step up our efforts to ensure that the United Nations stands more robust in complying with the purposes and principles enshrined in its Charter, and that it becomes a catalyst for cooperation and partnership at all levels, with a view to making peace, social inclusion and prosperity available to all. I would like to conclude by recalling that former Secretary-General and compatriot Javier Perez de Cuellar noted that the role of a political institution, such as the United Nations, is to draw a line between efforts to build a better future and conflict and making it possible for nations to stay on the right side of that line.
