Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore, for her briefing.
We appreciate her leadership in these difficult
circumstances. We also welcome the presence of
the Permanent Representative of Haiti, Ambassador
Denis Regis.

Chile aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the delegation of Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.

On behalf of the Government and the people of
Chile, I would like to extend my sincere condolences to
our Haitian brothers and sisters in connection wiht the
devastating loss of life and material damage caused by
Hurricane Matthew. We assure them of our solidarity,
which initially consisted of a financial contribution
through the International Committee of the Red Cross,
with additional assistance to be provided later based on
Haiti's priorities. The latter includes the work on the
ground being done by our national contingent as part
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), which is supporting all the tasks that
it is responsible for in responding to this catastrophe.

This is a reminder to the international community
that it must continue to support Haiti. It is essential
that the major donors support the recent emergency
humanitarian appeal launched by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which seeks
to raise $119 million to provide immediate lifesaving
assistance to more than 750,000 Haitians.

We must contextualize the terrible impact of the
hurricane within the existing chronic vulnerabilities of
a country that is highly prone to natural disasters and
where there are also various long-term humanitarian
and development challenges. As such, it is crucial to
strengthen the response to overcome food insecurity
and the cholera epidemic, among other challenges. In
that regard, we note the recent strategy of the Secretary-
General along two axes and we look forward to its
prompt submission to the General Assembly. In this
complex scenario, it is more important than ever that
all the Haitian political players work cooperatively and
constructively to make progress in strengthening the
State and its institutions. We are confident that once the
emergency situation has been normalized, the electoral
timetable will be re-established.

With regard to the strengthening of MINUSTAH,
my delegation supports the Secretary-General's
proposal set out in his report contained in document
S/2016/753. We believe that these recommendations
are adequately reflected in the text, which is currently
under consideration by the Security Council.

It remains essential to continue strengthening
national capacities in terms of the police, the rule of
law, democracy and human rights, under the principle
of national ownership, so as to build on the gains
achieved thanks to the presence of the Mission.

Historically, the Haitian people have demonstrated
unique resilience. There is no doubt that once again
they will use that resilience to overcome the greatest
humanitarian catastrophe since the 2010 earthquake.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Chile's
commitment to strengthening Haiti's institutions and
to the development of Haiti and its people. We call
on Council members to adopt by consensus the draft
resolution that will renew the Mission's mandate,
thereby showing the unity needed at this time.

