Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): It is with great concern
that the Polish delegation is looking at the current
situation in Burundi. The whole international community
is deeply concerned. We all seem to agree that the state
of internal affairs in Burundi has to improve now, or else
it might be too late to prevent it from deteriorating further
and finally getting out of control.

It is very discouraging indeed that the observations
made by the Security Council's mission to Burundi one
year ago are still valid and that, regrettably, new negative
factors have emerged. It is deplorable that the majority of
the population is suffering because of political rivalries.
It is beyond comprehension that violence against aid
groups in Burundi has increased. Such acts of violence
primarily affect the most vulnerable people - children
and women. And what is really tragic is that they
discourage further initiatives of a humanitarian nature.

Let me take this opportunity to pay tribute to those
who, notwithstanding the cost and the danger, bring relief
to the suffering and exhausted people of Burundi. But
how much can we expect of them?

My delegation is very grateful to the Secretary-
General for his personal involvement and efforts aimed at
finding a way of dealing with the crisis in Burundi. We
thank the Secretary-General for the information he
delivered and also for the initiatives he submitted to the
Council. We fully support the sending by the Secretary-
General of a technical security mission to Burundi to
examine ways of improving security arrangements for
United Nations personnel and premises and also for the
protection of humanitarian operations.

We are counting heavily on the Secretary-General's
efforts to facilitate a comprehensive political dialogue.
The value of dialogue was emphasized by President
N yerere and cannot possibly be overestimated. We vividly
remember his words, but the basic question we face now
is how much time we have. Time is running out, and we
should not let the determination of the international
community fade away. After all, millions of lives are at
stake.

It is encouraging for us to see the cooperation
among the countries of the region, which are vitally
interested in achieving peace in Burundi and stability in
the whole area. There are many examples of decisive,
unanimous and effective cooperation between African
States. Therefore, we attach a great deal of hope to this
way of looking for a solution, and in this context we
 

welcome the European Union's decision to appoint a
special envoy to the region. In any case, those who exercise
political influence in Burundi have to realize that
cooperation is the solution - cooperation both between
political groups in Burundi and with the international
community, which is desperately trying to help.

In conclusion, let me state that Poland fully supports
the draft resolution under consideration.

