The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Viet Nam.

I thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing and for his
leadership of UNMIK. I also wish to thank Foreign
Minister Vuk Jeremic' of Serbia for participating in the
Council's meeting today and sharing his perspectives
on the situation on the ground. I acknowledge the
presence of Mr. Skender Hyseni at this meeting of the
Council.
Viet Nam continues to support the critical role of
UNMIK in maintaining security and stability in
Kosovo. We applaud UNMIK's efforts to engaged with
all communities in Kosovo and to facilitate cooperation
between Belgrade and Pristina.

We are encouraged to note that the Mission has
successfully completed its reconfiguration and moved
into a new phase, with a strong focus on providing
mediation services to local communities and
international organizations operating in northern
Kosovo. We commend the strengthened cooperation
between UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) under the overall
authority and within the status-neutral framework of
the United Nations. Such cooperation should be further
enhanced so as to create an enabling atmosphere for
dialogue among all Kosovo's communities and
between Belgrade and Pristina with a view to finding
durable solutions to the ongoing challenges in the
region.

We take positive note of the progress made in
such areas as the rule of law, justice and customs
during the reporting period, as well as the
demonstrated interest of Belgrade in finding solutions
to some of the pending matters.

We remain concerned about the fragile security
situation in Kosovo, marked by a series of security-
related incidents and confrontations between Kosovo
Serb and Kosovo Albanian communities in the North.
We are also concerned about ethnic tensions in the
North and the situation of refugees and internally
displaced persons, including thousands displaced from
Kosovo. We urge the local authorities in Kosovo to pay
due attention and undertake appropriate actions to ease
tensions related to these sensitive inter-ethnic issues.
We call upon the authorities in Pristina and Belgrade to
continue to work closely with all relevant international
stakeholders towards negotiated solutions to their
differences through peaceful means.

As a comprehensive and long-term solution to the
situation in Kosovo has yet to be achieved, Viet Nam
believes that the continued engagement of UNMIK
with all sides remains crucial at this juncture, as it
could facilitate the attainment of concrete progress and
the fruitful implementation of arrangements that can be
acceptable and beneficial to both Belgrade and
Pristina.
The increasing contribution of EULEX to the
areas of police, courts, customs, transportation and
infrastructure, boundary management and protection of
Serbian patrimony has already shown positive results
and should be encouraged. We urge all sides to
reinforce their constructive engagement and
cooperation with UNMIK within the framework of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) in working
towards the achievement of solutions to long-standing
impasses and of peace and security in the Balkans as a
whole.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I call on Mr. Skender Hyseni, who has asked for
the floor to make a further statement

