Judge Meron (spoke in French): It is an honour
for me to address the Security Council once again
as President of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I wish to
congratulate Ambassador Ge'rard Araud of France upon
his assumption of the presidency of the Council. France
is known for its tireless support to international justice.
I wish him the greatest of success in the discharge of
his duties.

(spoke in English)

I am appearing before the Council today in
my two capacities as President of the ICTY and of
the Mechanism. Written reports concerning both
institutions were submitted to the Council last month.
In my remarks today, I wish to focus on the most
noteworthy issues detailed in those written reports.
Before doing so, however, I would like to take this
opportunity to express my gratitude once again to the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
In particular, I would like to recognize the exceptional
leadership of Guatemala over these past two years.
Guatemala's support for the Tribunals and for the
Mechanism during this critical period of transition has
been sustained, constructive and truly appreciated. I
would also like to recognize the continuing support and
assistance provided to the ICTY and the Mechanism by
the Office of the Legal Counsel.

Allow me to first update the Council on the progress
being made by the ICTY towards the completion of its
mandate and its closure. The Tribunal has continued to
make progress in completing the final cases before it.
Since my last completion strategy report (S/2013/308),
the Tribunal has rendered five judgements. In the Trial
Chambers, judgements were rendered in the cases of
Prlic' et al. and Stanisie and Simatovic'. In addition, the
Appeals Chamber renderd a judgement in the rule 98
his appeal in the Karadeic' case. Finally, one contempt
trial judgement and one contempt appeal judgement
were also rendered.

The forecast judgement delivery dates remain
unchanged in seven of the Tribunal's 11 remaining
cases. In particular, the forecasts for the delivery of
the appeal judgements in the cases of Popovie et al,,
Stanifiie and Simatovic', Tolimir, Stanisic' and Zupljanin
and Prlic' et al. have not changed. The Hadeic' trial also
remains on track and is expected to be completed by
the end of 2015. The Mladie trial is likewise proceeding
apace and is expected to conclude by mid-2016, as
previously forecast.

The delays in three of the remaining four cases are
of a very limited nature. The delivery of two appeal
judgements in the multi-accused case of Sainovic' et al.
and in the case of Bordevie has been delayed by one
month. The appealjudgements in those cases, originally
forecast for December 2013, are now scheduled to be
delivered on 23 and 27 January 2014, respectively.
Those short delays have been the result of various
factors, including the complexity of the cases and the
heavy workload of the judges involved.

The Karadeie trial judgement, originally planned
for July 2015, is now forecast to be delivered in October
2015. The delay in that case is attributable to the Appeals
Chamber's rule 98 bisjudgement delivered in July ofthis
year. In that judgement, the Appeals Chamber reversed
the Trial Chamber's decision to acquit Mr. Karadzie on
count 1 of the indictment against him and directed the

Trial Chamber to determine Mr. Karadzie's relevant
culpability after hearing defence evidence. Following
the Appeals Chamber's ruling, the Trial Chamber
determined that an additional three months were
necessary for further preparation and presentation by
the defence.

Finally, the conclusion of the trial in the Seselj case
has also been delayed. The Trial Chamber in that case
had previously issued an order scheduling the delivery
of the judgement on 30 October. However, in July, the
accused filed an application for the disqualification
of one of the judges in his trial. The panel of judges
appointed to consider the issue upheld the application
by a majority and another judge was subsequently
appointed to the trial bench. That newly appointed
judge is currently familiarizing himself with the trial
record and reviewing related documents. Once he
completes that process, the trial bench will be in a
position to decide on the next steps in the case. I will of
course provide more information about the case in my
next completion strategy report.

As set out in my report, almost all ICTY cases will
have been completed by 31 December 2014. Of the six
cases that will not be concluded by then, half involve
the trials of the late-arrested accused Mr. Karadzie,
Mr. Hadzie and Mr. Mladic'. In addition, the judgements
in two appeal cases - Tolirnir and Stanisie and
Zupljanin - are forecast to be delivered in the first
few months of 2015. Finally, the multi-accused case of
Prlie et al. is expected to be completed in mid-2017.
I note that in the latter case, the trial judgement was
rendered only in late May and is very voluminous,
numbering approximately 2,500 judgement-size pages
or more than 4,000 pages in the United Nations format.
The case also involves a large number of appellants and
expected appellants. Those factors contribute to the
comparatively late forecast delivery date for the appeal
judgement.

I am of course so sorry that certain cases have
been delayed and that we will not be able to complete
all ICTY judicial work by 31 December 2014. I note,
however, that several of the delays that I have reported
and our inability to complete all ICTY judicial work
by the end of 2014 are directly attributable to factors
outside the case management process and reflect the
inherent uncertainty in predicting the time needed
to complete judgements in highly complex cases, as
well as previous uncertainties as to which cases would
transition to the Mechanism on appeal.
Looking forward, the Tribunal is making every
effort to ensure that the forecast completion dates for
cases remain on schedule. In particular, the Tribunal's
Chambers are coordinating closely with the Registry
to ensure that the significant reductions in personnel
do not adversely impact our ability to complete trials
and appeals in an efficient and fair manner. I remain,
as ever, tremendously appreciative of all the hard work
and dedication shown on a daily basis by the many
talented staff members employed by the Tribunal.

I note, however, that staff morale continues to be
affected by the knowledge that many staff members'
contracts will not be renewed. I have been working with
the Tribunal's Registrar and others to take a variety of
measures to bolster morale. Staff members nevertheless
continue to seek more secure employment elsewhere,
and staff departures pose additional challenges as we
strive to maintain the previously forecast judgement
delivery dates.

As I have previously informed the Council, other
potential risks to the timely completion of trials and
appeals stem from the unique circumstances of the
Tribunal, which is located thousands of kilometres from
the scene of the alleged crimes, required to translate
a myriad of documents into multiple languages and
called on to handle volumes of evidence that are almost
unheard of in domestic criminal prosecutions. The
Tribunal has developed robust systems and processes
to address those challenges. However, especially in
a downsizing environment and even as we take the
practical steps necessary to ensure the Tribunal's
orderly closure, I remain particularly vigilant to ensure
that the services necessary to the Tribunal's functioning
are retained long enough to ensure that trials and
appeals are completed in accordance with the schedule
previously forecast.

In that connection, I would like to note that the
terms of office of all ICTY judges expire at the end of
this month and Security Council action is needed. My
requests of 30 October and 19 November asked that the
judges' terms of office be extended through the period
in which their last trial or appeal is expected. In making
such requests, I was guided by the considerations
of efficiency and maximum transparency. Indeed,
extensions that correspond to the lengths of the judicial
proceedings in which the judges are engaged will
bolster the Tribunal and also reduce the demands on
the Security Council's valuable time. I am grateful for
the Council's consideration of my requests.

Before concluding my report on the ICTY, I would
like to share certain reflections based on my visit to
Bosnia and Herzegovina last week. I held meetings with
victims from various communities and participated in
a conference marking the twentieth anniversary of the
Tribunal. Discussions at that conference confirmed
the importance of the Tribunal's work in the former
Yugoslavia. However, conversations during my visit
also underscored for me that the Tribunal's work,
important though it is, cannot address all the needs
of the region. Instead, the international community
needs to support additional, complementary initiatives
that provide for reconciliation through dialogue and
restitution.

In particular, I would like to urge Member States to
support efforts to provide reparations and support for
Victims of the wars in the former Yugoslavia. Many of
those victims continue to face serious challenges relating
to injuries they suffered during wartime. More broadly,
I was particularly encouraged by the conversations that
I took part in during a meeting held at the Prijedor area.
Local representatives of victims' associations from
various communities undertook a dialogue that was
both constructive and forward-looking. In the coming
months, I hope to explore the possibility of encouraging
similar local-level initiatives. In my View, that kind of
dialogue is a necessary complement to the Tribunal's
work and essential to peace and reconciliation in the
former Yugoslavia.

I would now like to turn to the work of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.

Following the opening of the Mechanism's Hague
branch on 1 July 2013, the institution is now fully
formed. I am tremendously grateful to the Mechanism's
Prosecutor, Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, the Registrar,
Mr. John Hocking, the Mechanism staff, and the
principals and staff of both the ICTY and the ICTR for
all that they have done to ensure a smooth launch of
the Hague branch, as they previously did for the launch
of the Arusha branch. I am equally grateful for all that
they continue to do to ensure the Mechanism's efficient
and effective functioning.

As the Mechanism moves forward in its second
year, it is now operating on two continents and has
inherited work from two related but distinct tribunals:
the ICTY and the ICTR. There are many challenges
that come in the early years of any new institution, and
that makes the work both exciting and rewarding. The
Mechanism is fortunate in that, in its formative stages,
it can learn from and build on the best practices of
our predecessors, as well as draw upon the talents and
expertise of colleagues at the ICTY and the ICTR. Our
progress thus far is the result of a truly collaborative
undertaking.

As the members of the Council are aware, the
Mechanism's mandate encompasses both judicial work
and certain other essential functions. The one appeal
from judgement filed thus far, in the Ngirabatware
case, is forecast to be completed by the end of 2014.
In the meantime, my fellow Judges and I continue to
address a variety of other judicial matters, ranging
from requests for variation of protective measures
to motions concerning contempt allegations. The
Mechanism is also expected to hear appeals, if any, in
the Seselj", Karadeie, Hadeie and Mladie cases and must
remain ready to address any additional judicial matters
that may come before it, such as requests for review of
judgements or orders for retrial. Although we do not
know when the remaining three fugitives who have
been indicted by the ICTR and are expected to be tried
by the Mechanism will be arrested or will surrender,
I profoundly hope that it will be soon, and I call upon
the members of the Council and the Member States of
the United Nations to do all in their power to make that
hope a reality.

The Mechanism, of course, is responsible for
many other functions besides judicial work, including
ensuring the monitoring of cases referred to national
jurisdictions; providing protective services to witnesses
and victims; enforcing sentences of those convicted by
either the ICTY or the ICTR; responding to requests for
assistance from national jurisdictions; and managing
the archives of both the ICTY and the ICTR. Details
concerning the Mechanism's activities in those areas are
included in my written report; I wish only to underscore
that we are fully engaged with our responsibilities in
those areas and making good progress.

I mentioned a moment ago the importance of
Member States' assistance in relation to apprehending
the remaining fugitives who are expected to be tried
before the Mechanism. In truth, the Mechanism depends
on the cooperation of the international community
in all that it does, and it particularly depends on the
cooperation of the affected States, including both
Rwanda and the States of the former Yugoslavia. Strong
relationships and partnerships with those States, and
with other States and organizations, will remain vital

to the Mechanism going forward, given its unique
mandate to be an efficient and temporary institution
whose size and functions are to diminish over time.

In that respect, I am pleased to report that, several
weeks ago, President Joensen of the ICTR, Prosecutor
Jallow of the ICTR and the Mechanism, and I, along
with representatives of the Registrars of both the ICTR
and the Mechanism, visited Kigali, where we held
very productive meetings with Government officials. I
was also in Sarajevo just last week and hope to return
to the region again next year. Meetings of that sort,
whether with high-level officials or with those at the
working level, are crucial to helping to ensure that lines
of communication are kept open and that, during this
time of transition between the original ad hoc Criminal
Tribunals and the Mechanism, the nature and effect of
that transition are fully communicated and understood,
particularly in the communities most affected by our
work in both Rwanda and the States of the former
Yugoslavia.

One issue that continues to be raised, and one
that is particularly important for many from those
communities, concerns access to information about the
work of the Tribunals. In resolution 1966 (2010), the
Council requested that the Mechanism, along with the
ICTY and the ICTR, cooperate with Rwanda and the
States of the former Yugoslavia and other interested
parties to facilitate the establishment of information and
documentation centres by providing access to copies
of public records of the archives of the Tribunals and
the Mechanism, including through their websites. With
respect to the role of the Mechanism, I can assure you
that we are taking seriously our responsibilities in that
regard. In the months and years ahead we will continue to
take steps to ensure that such access is widely available,
whether online or otherwise, and we welcome ideas and
suggestions from any and all interested parties. I look
forward to reporting to the Council on our progress,
as well as on other developments, in my next written
report on behalf of the Mechanism next year.

As always, I come before the Council committed
to the most complete transparency possible. I hope,
however, that my frank discussion of delays, challenges
and potential future risks does not give an unnecessarily
negative impression of the Tribunal. The staff and
Judges of both the Tribunal and the Mechanism remain
fiercely committed to completing trials and appeals
efficiently and in accordance with the highest standards
of procedural fairness.
Indeed, the twentieth anniversary of the ICTY
this year provided an opportune time to reflect on the
Tribunal's tremendous accomplishments. What the
Tribunal has achieved in the course of two decades
has been extraordinary. It has accounted for all 161
individuals indicted, given rise to an authoritative
and extensive corpus of procedural and substantive
law relating to serious international crimes, assisted
national judicial systems in conducting their own trials
of such crimes, and helped to end impunity, even for
national or military leaders. These accomplishments
are a reflection not just of the hard work and dedication
of the Tribunal's staff and judges, but also of the key
assistance provided to the Tribunal by the United
Nations and its Member States. Without this support,
the success of the bold experiment in international
justice initiated by the Council in 1993 would never
have been possible.

As the Mechanism carries the legacy of the ICTY
and the ICTR forward, I know that it will serve as a
worthy successor to these two institutions and continue
to symbolize the determination of the international
community and the Council to bring an end to impunity.

