Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Iran's
pursuit of nuclear weapons capability constitutes a
grave threat and demands a clear statement from this
Council. Today we are placing Iran in the small
category of States under Security Council sanctions
and sending it an unambiguous message that there are
serious repercussions to its continued disregard of its
obligations and defiance of this body.

Nearly four months ago, the Council sent an
unequivocal message to Iran that it must take the steps
required by the Board of Governors of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), including fully
verifiable and sustained suspension of all enrichment-
related and reprocessing activities, research and
development. That step was taken to convince Iran to
relent from its confrontational course; consider the
offer of a negotiated solution by the United States,
France, the United Kingdom, Germany, Russia and
China on 1 June 2006; and avoid further Security
Council action. Regrettably, Iran continues to defy the
international community by its continued enrichment
activities, its refusal to comply with its obligations
under Security Council resolution 1696 (2006), and the
requests of the IAEA.

Today's Chapter VII draft resolution requires Iran
to suspend all enrichment-related and reprocessing
activities, including research and development, and to
stop work on all heavy water-related projects,
including construction of a heavy water research
reactor. That suspension is subject to IAEA
verification; a report from the IAEA Director General
on the status of the suspension is due to the Council
06-68094

within 60 days. Iran is also required to provide the
IAEA the access it needs to verify suspension and
resolve outstanding issues. Finally, the IAEA calls on
Iran to ratify the Additional Protocol.

In order to persuade Iran to take these steps, the
draft resolution imposes sanctions on elements of the
Iranian regime involved in dangerous proliferation
activities. It decides that Member States shall not
engage in trade with Iran in three key nuclear areas -
enrichment, reprocessing and heavy water projects -
and it prohibits Member States from engaging in any
trade with Iran that could contribute to its development
of a nuclear weapon delivery system. Similarly, the
draft resolution prohibits Iran from exporting a range
of proliferation-sensitive technologies or related
equipment.

This draft resolution prohibits any technical or
financial assistance related to the transfer or use of the
prohibited items to other countries; it requires States to
freeze the assets of identified individuals and entities
involved in Iran's proliferation-sensitive nuclear
activities or the development of nuclear-weapon
delivery systems, and calls on States not to allow
international travel by these individuals. The IAEA is
also required to stop providing technical cooperation
for such activities.

The United States expects that Iran and all other
United Nations Member States will immediately act
under their Charter obligations to implement the
requirements of this draft resolution.

This will be the second Security Council
resolution under Chapter VII on Iran in response to that
country's efforts to obtain a nuclear weapons
capability, reflecting the gravity of this situation and
the determination of the Council. We hope this draft
resolution will convince Iran that the best way to
ensure its security and end its international isolation is
to abandon the pursuit of nuclear weapons and take
steps needed to restore international confidence. In this
draft resolution the Council has clearly affirmed its
intention to review Iran's actions based on the IAEA
report and to adopt further measures if Iran has not
complied fully with its obligations.

We look forward to Iran's full, unconditional and
immediate compliance with this draft resolution. Iran's
cooperation would pave the way for a negotiated
solution. We hope that the Iranian leadership comes to
3
understand that the pursuit of a nuclear weapons
capability makes it less, not more, secure.

In conclusion, this draft resolution provides an
important basis for action. It compels all United
Nations Member States to take all measures necessary
to deny Iran equipment, technology, technical
assistance and financial assistance that would
contribute to Iran's enrichment, reprocessing, heavy
water or nuclear-weapon delivery programmes. It is
clear on this and not open to interpretation. We will
insist on absolute adherence to its requirements.

But adoption of this draft resolution is only a first
step. In the coming weeks, we will work with the
sanctions committee to ensure that this draft resolution
is as effective as possible. We will also take steps
under United States law to ensure that we have put in
place appropriate measures against individuals and
entities involved in the Iranian nuclear programme, and
we will call on every other country to urgently follow
suit.

Finally, if necessary, we will not hesitate to return
to this body for further action if Iran fails to take steps
to comply.

I thank you, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Council for your efforts in helping
secure this draft resolution.

