Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): The consistent position of
Azerbaijan with regard to the topic under consideration
has been stated on numerous occasions, including in
the Security Council. This position stems from the
experience of facing continued armed aggression and
ethnic cleansing and, above all, from my country's
keen interest in contributing to the achievement of
sustainable peace in our region and worldwide.

The unlawful use of force against the territorial
integrity and political independence of States, the
increased brutality of armed conflicts, growing terrorist
and separatist threats, the highest level of forced
displacement, racism, intolerance and discrimination
on ethnic and religious grounds continue to represent
the most serious challenges to peace, security and
sustainable development.

In their twin resolutions on the review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture, adopted in
2016 (General Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security Council 2282 (2016)), the General Assembly and the
Security Council have emphasized the importance of
reconciliation and stressed the need for the joint work of
Member States to sustain peace at all stages of conflict
and in all its dimensions.

In a number of situations, dedicated efforts have
helped move peace and reconciliation processes forward.
At the same time, more concerted actions and synergy,
along with closer strategic and operational partnerships
between the United Nations and Governments, are
required to end the conflicts of today and direct greater
attention to preventing the conflicts of tomorrow.

First and foremost, it is critical to ensure that
peace efforts, including reconciliation processes, and
conflict settlement frameworks are not used as a tool
to consolidate the situations achieved by the unlawful
use of force and other egregious violations of general
international law. Justice is a fundamental building
block of sustainable peace. It is essential to address
conflict-related violations by all available means.
Such efforts must be free of selectivity and politically
motivated objectives.

Unfortunately, in some situations of armed conflict,
including those of a protracted nature, accountability has
not received proper attention and perpetrators not only
continue to enjoy impunity for the most serious crimes
but are ostentatiously glorified at the State and society
levels. Accountability for such crimes is essential not
only for the purpose of bringing those responsible to
justice but also for ensuring the sustainability ofconflict
resolution, truth, reconciliation, the rights and interests
of victims and the well-being of society at large.

Intercultural and interreligious dialogue at the
national and international levels is one of the important
avenues within the broader objectives of peacebuilding,
sustaining peace and reconciliation. Azerbaijan is
keen to continue its efforts towards promoting mutual
understanding and respect for diversity, including
through the Baku process and the World Forum on
Intercultural Dialogue, which have received wide
global recognition since their inception. The continued
support of the United Nations for successful initiatives
of this kind on the culture of peace and multiculturalism
is essential in the context of building relationships,
overcoming stereotypes and misconceptions and
implementing development frameworks and policies.

In conclusion, it should be emphasized that the
United Nations plays a central role in ensuring the
uniform application of the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. Support
for that role of the Organization and for safeguarding
its collective security, political and humanitarian
mechanisms is crucial to addressing conflicts and to
achieving the goals of peace, inclusive sustainable
development and human rights for all. The President:
I now give the floor to the representative of Bahrain.

