Ms. Suleiman: I would like, first of all, to
convey to you, Mr. President, warm greetings from the
President of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Commission, Mr. Kadre Desire
Ouedraogo, whom I am honoured to represent at
today's important meeting of the Security Council.

The several meetings convened by the Council in
recent weeks to deliberate on the situation in Guinea-
Bissau bear witness to the importance that the Council
and the Secretary-General attach to the issues of peace
and security in West Africa. I wish therefore to express
the gratitude of the heads of State of the Economic
Community of West African States and the ECOWAS
Commission for the support that the Council and the
Secretary-General have given to the subregion in its
efforts to stabilize the peace and security environment.
9

As I thank you, Sir, for your excellent
stewardship of today's proceedings, I would also like
to acknowledge the speakers who took the floor before
me, in particular, Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea-
Bissau, as well as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Guinea-Bissau, the Minister of External Affairs of
Angola, who spoke on behalf of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), and the Chair
of the Guinea-Bissau country-specific configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission.

For years now, Guinea-Bissau has stood as a
major challenge in the ECOWAS space. The permanent
stand-off between the over-politicized military and the
perpetually bickering political class runs the risk of
transforming a beautiful country with great potential
into a virtual failed State. That trend cannot be allowed
to continue.

Since 19 April, the last time it briefed the
Security Council (see S/PV.6754), ECOWAS has
intensified its efforts aimed at pushing for the speedy
restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau,
but with mixed results. At yet another Extraordinary
Summit of ECOWAS Heads of State and Government
in Abidjan on 26 April, which previous speakers have
referred to, the Summit denounced the agreement
between the military command and the 26 fringe
parties to establish a so-called national transitional
council to rule the country for two years. Instead, the
ECOWAS Summit demanded the establishment of a
12-month transition in Guinea-Bissau that would
culminate in the holding of a presidential election. The
Summit also instructed the Commission to deploy the
ECOWAS Standby Force in the country to, among
other duties, secure the withdrawal of the Angolan
Technical and Military Assistance Mission in Guinea-
Bissau, secure the proposed transition and commence
work on the implementation of the road map for
defence and security sector reform in the country.

The heads of State adopted a series of targeted
sanctions on the military command and its associates,
along with diplomatic, economic and financial
sanctions on the country, if the junta failed to accept
ECOWAS demands within 72 hours. A regional contact
group, with Nigeria as Chair and comprising Benin,
Cape Verde, the Gambia, Guinea, Senegal and Togo,
was also established to follow up on the Summit's
decisions.

In a major breakthrough in the crisis, ECOWAS
succeeded, on 27 April, in securing the release of both
the Interim President, Mr. Raimundo Pereira, and the
Prime Minister, Mr. Carlos Gomes Junior, who had
been in detention since the 12 April coup d'etat. On
29 April, as was mentioned earlier, the regional contact
group held extensive consultations in Banjul with the
principal stakeholders in the crisis - lasting more than
12 hours - on the modalities for the transition. The
interlocutors included the military command, the
African Party for the Independence of Guinea and
Cape Verde (PAIGC), the group of five presidential
candidates in the aborted election, the group of
26 fringe parties allied with the junta and interfaith
groups for the promotion of dialogue. However, the
consultations failed to yield the desired results,
principally because of the intransigence of the junta
and its political allies. Therefore, targeted and general
sanctions came into effect at midnight on 29 April.

The ECOWAS Extraordinary Summit held in
Dakar on 3 May further consolidated the regional
position on the crisis in Guinea-Bissau. The Summit
provided further details on the proposed 12-month
transition, the highlight of which was the proposal to
reconvene the National Assembly, elect a new
leadership through a vote and make the Speaker so
elected the new Interim President. A consensual Prime
Minister with full powers would then be appointed to
head a transitional Government. The tasks of the
transitional authority would include, inter alia,
overseeing a review of the relevant legal texts, namely,
the Constitution and the electoral code, economic
reform, reform of the defence and security sector, a
national dialogue and the conduct of a presidential
election.

On Friday, 4 May, the Chairman of the Authority
dispatched an ECOWAS mission to Guinea-Bissau, led
by Nigeria, the Chair of the regional contact group, for
yet another round of discussions with the stakeholders.
At those discussions, the junta, the PAIGC, the five
presidential candidates, members of civil society,
interfaith groups and the political parties were present.
In the consultations, the proposals put forward by
ECOWAS were met by the stakeholders with broad
acceptance, even though some of the interlocutors
called for a joint technical team to review and
harmonize the proposals with the provisions of the
Constitution of Guinea-Bissau. ECOWAS believes that
12-33105
progress is being made and that a solution will soon be
found in that direction.

In adopting the strategy for the restoration of
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau, ECOWAS was
informed by its awareness of the seriousness and
complexity of the situation in the country. Against that
background, sacrifices and compromises must
necessarily be made by all stakeholders. The
constitutional order that existed prior to the coup d'etat
cannot be restored immediately, as the PAIGC is
demanding, if civil war is to be avoided in the country.
Nor will ECOWAS or any international authority
accept the proposals of the junta and its allies seeking a
two-year transition period, because that would be
tantamount to rewarding the coup plotters. A
compromise is therefore needed. In proposing a
transition through the National Assembly, ECOWAS is
aware that the overthrown Government of the PAIGC
controls 63 per cent of the seats in the Assembly and
would have a major say in determining who eventually
emerges as Interim President.

Even as ECOWAS is working hard to find a
peaceful solution to the constitutional crisis, the
planning element of the ECOWAS Standby Force has
maintained regular contact with the Bissau-Guinean
army on the modalities for the deployment of the
ECOWAS Force, which is imminent. In those
endeavours, ECOWAS has worked, and will continue
to work, in close cooperation with the African Union,
the United Nations and other partners, whose support
will greatly enhance the achievement of the set
objectives of the re-establishment of the rule of law
and the maintenance of peace and security in Guinea-
Bissau.

ECOWAS is acutely aware that the
implementation of the decisions of the subregion's
12-33105

heads of State and Government will require resolve as
well as the continued understanding and support of the
Secretary-General, the United Nations Security
Council and the international community at large.
ECOWAS will definitely need financial, technical and
logistical support, particularly for the deployment of
the Standby Force. Work on the details of the support
required is at an advanced stage and will be made
available to all partners as soon as possible.

The initiatives taken by ECOWAS are aimed at
helping the Government and the people of Guinea-
Bissau, because ECOWAS, as a regional body, is aware
of the country's problems and hopes, through dialogue,
to undertake a thorough review of the country's
political and military system, with a View to
transforming the country into a responsible member of
the international community and an agent for
international peace and security, in accordance with the
provisions of the United Nations Charter.

The political paralysis and the drug culture, to
which earlier speakers have referred, in Guinea-Bissau
today symbolize the fragility that threatens the
subregion's efforts to entrench democratic culture and
promote growth and development; it also threatens
international peace and security. The international
community has a responsibility and an opportunity to
transform that situation, and the time to do so is now.

