Ms. Amos: I appreciate this opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the humanitarian situation in
Cote d'Ivoire, including findings from my mission last
week to Man and Duekoue in Cote d'Ivoire, and
Monrovia and Grand Gedeh county in Liberia.

Despite the arrest of Laurent Gbagbo, the
humanitarian situation in Cote d'Ivoire remains deeply
troubling. The crisis that followed elections in
November and the escalation we have seen in the past
weeks have had far-reaching humanitarian
consequences for ordinary people throughout C6te
d'Ivoire and its neighbouring countries. These effects
will not subside without a significant and sustained
effort from the humanitarian community, and the
combined efforts of the broader United Nations system
in Cote d'Ivoire contributing to stabilization and
reconciliation.

In Due'koue', at least 255 people were killed in a
massacre between 28 and 29 March, during which
grave violations of international law took place. People
told me harrowing stories about the executions and
kidnappings that occurred. More than 27,000 people
have been forced to find refuge at the Catholic mission
in Duekoue', and there are another 1,000 displaced
people at another site in the city. Some of them had
walked 200 kilometres or more through the bush to
reach relative safety. The camp exists because of the
heroism of the pastor at the mission. It is being
protected by United Nations peacekeepers, whose
commitment to the mission of the United Nations is
commendable. Their focus on the protection of
civilians has saved many lives.

The Council will hear from the High
Commissioner for Human Rights that mass killings
have taken place in several other towns and villages in
the west of the country. These are in addition to the
widespread and indiscriminate attacks against civilians
that have occurred in Abidjan since violence flared up
last December, including extrajudicial killings and
forced disappearances. Sexual violence has been
perpetrated particularly against women and children.
Human rights investigations are ongoing, and the
commission of inquiry requested by the Human Rights
Council will deploy soon. It is vital that those
responsible be held accountable for the crimes they
have committed. There can be no culture of impunity.

In Abidjan, many of the city's 5 million people
are in crisis. Although open conflict has ceased, there
3
continue to be reports of sporadic violence. Many
families in the city are without food and are trapped in
their homes, too afraid of the militias and the fighting
to leave. Some have been forced by the violence to
flee. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has already
registered more than 130,000 displaced people in
Abidjan. Entire neighbourhoods have been without
electricity and water for weeks, raising concerns that
cholera, which is already present in care d'Ivoire,
could spread further.

Food is difficult to find in the markets and shops,
and prices have risen sharply. The World Food
Programme (WFP) has warned that malnutrition levels
in Abidjan and around the country are rising. Many
hospitals and health facilities have been unable to
operate properly. Those that have stayed open do not
have enough doctors, medicines or other basic
equipment to meet the needs. Schools have been closed
for months, leaving more than 800,000 children
without access to education.

Outside Abidjan, communities in the centre and
north, including Bouake', have had to deal with the
influx of the at least 800,000 people whom UNHCR
estimates have been internally displaced. Many have
been taken in by host families; others have gathered in
spontaneous settlements. Heavy fighting in other cities
has also had serious humanitarian consequences. In
Daloa and Due'koue in the west, the south-western port
city of San-Pedro, Abengourou and Bondoukou in the
east, Tiebissou and the capital Yamoussoukro, medical
centres have treated many people suffering from
gunshot and machete wounds. In all these places,
distributions of food, water, sanitation materials and
other relief items are still urgently needed.

And we must also not overlook the grave
psychological impact that these weeks of violence have
had. People are immensely traumatized. They have
witnessed terrible violence, and many have been
directly targeted.

The humanitarian response to the crisis has so far
been severely impeded by the security situation around
the country, which has prevented aid agencies from
scaling up their operations and accessing those most in
need. Some international United Nations staff stayed in
Abidjan throughout the crisis; most relocated to Man
and Bouake in recent days. Even for those who stayed,
their movements were severely impeded by the lack of
security. Immediately after the arrest of Mr. Gbagbo,
UNICEF was able to make a delivery of medical
supplies in Abidjan. It distributed essential medicines,
blankets, tents and nutritional supplements to a health
centre and a hospital in the Abidjan neighbourhood of
Treichville.

As soon as the security situation permits, it is
essential that more aid workers get into all areas of
Abidjan and that humanitarian organizations strengthen
their presence where they are most needed. A United
Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination team
has just arrived in Cote d'Ivoire to strengthen
humanitarian assessment, operations and coordination
for the ongoing relief effort.

Outside Abidjan, WFP is planning more airlifts in
the coming days to provide food assistance to tens of
thousands of internally displaced people. WFP, which
manages the humanitarian air service on behalf of the
whole aid community, plans to launch humanitarian
flights to northern towns such as Bouake and Man,
where relief agencies have relocated their operations.
The World Health Organization has shipped additional
supplies of kits to treat trauma injuries, malaria and
infectious diseases, to support the people who fled
Abidjan. The Food and Agriculture Organization is
helping people to restart their livelihoods with seeds
and tools. Numerous other United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are also
active on the ground.

The humanitarian community launched two
emergency action plans in January to raise funds for
the humanitarian response in Cote d'lvoire and Liberia.
Both appeals have been revised to reflect the greatly
increased needs on the ground. Overall, we estimate
that about $300 million is needed to cover priority
humanitarian needs. As of today, $57 million has been
committed, which is only 15 per cent of what is
needed. We need to act now to deliver more food,
provide shelter and offer better medical treatment to
those who are sick. We must not let down the people of
Cote d'Ivoire and the region. I hope that Member
States will redouble their efforts and respond to the
needs in Cote d'Ivoire and the region.

Cote d'Ivoire's neighbours - Liberia, Guinea,
Ghana, Mali and Burkina Faso - have between them
taken in more than 140,000 people since the crisis
began. More than 130,000 refugees are in Liberia. I
visited a refugee transit centre in Toe Town, in Grand
11-29790
Gedeh county, which is situated along the Liberia-Cote
d'Ivoire border. Most of the refugees are women and
children. They fled their homes with almost nothing.
The Government of Liberia and the Liberian people
need to be recognized for the welcome and support
they have given refugees. The majority of refugees are
staying in host communities, which also deserve
assistance. People are sharing their homes and their
limited supplies. Most of the people I spoke with
needed more food and non-food items, shelter, water
and sanitation and agricultural inputs. The ongoing
crisis forced many Ivorians to cross into the more
impoverished southern counties of Grand Gedeh and
Maryland. Access challenges related to the upcoming
rainy season are some of the factors worsening the
current humanitarian situation in Liberia.

While we can still count on Liberia to welcome
Ivorian refugees, the Government is obviously
concerned about the security and other economic and
social impacts of the Ivorian refugee crisis on Liberia.
Liberian authorities, United Nations agencies and our
partner NGOs are doing their utmost to ensure that the
response is adequate. But we still have a long way to go.

It was clear to me from my discussions in Cote
d'Ivoire that there are still many political challenges
ahead. Those challenges and the current social
tensions, which also impact on civilians, are likely to
continue for some time. In this highly militarized
context, I am concerned about the security vacuum in
certain parts of the country. It is important that UNOCI
continues to robustly pursue the implementation of its
protection-of-civilians mandate, including by
deploying into areas where civilians continue to be at
risk, and take appropriate action to deter threats.

It is crucial that we remind President Ouattara
that his Government and he as President must take
seriously their responsibilities to abide by international
law and to take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection of all civilians. All armed groups also
continue to bear responsibilities in that regard. Equally
important is the need to avoid retaliation, end impunity
and focus on reconciliation and social cohesion.

I have recently discussed with humanitarian
agencies and our partners the urgency of scaling-up our
activities in C6te d'lvoire and Liberia to immediately
respond to the needs of all affected people. We need to
continue to make every effort to ensure that assistance
is coordinated and provided in as coherent a way as
11-29790
possible. The people of Cote d'Ivoire deserve our
support.

