Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Allow me first
to express our sincere condolences to our French
colleagues on the loss of the soldier who was engaged
in peacekeeping operations in Mali.
We welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop in the Chamber. We congratulate
Jean-Pierre Lacroix on his new appointment and wish
him every success in discharging his duties and offer
him our support. We thank him for his update based on
his visit to Mali.

I would like to raise several key priorities given that
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
is scheduled to end in three months.

Kazakhstan notes the efforts taken by the Malian
Government in implementing the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, signed in June
2015. However, since tensions continue to prevail, we
encourage continued dialogue so as to reduce tensions
among armed groups and the consequent instability
that they cause. It is therefore necessary to engage
them in the peace process so as to integrate them in
State structures.

In particular, the mixed patrols by Malian security
forces and insurgents in Gao that have taken place since
23 February could gradually be extended. Similarly, the
work of the interim administration in the three cities
of Kidal, Gao and Timbuktu needs to be reinforced
to advance the Peace Agreement. Attempts by armed
groups to derail the peace process must be prevented by
vigorously implementing the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.

Our country stands in full agreement with the
opinion of the African Union (AU), the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
United Nations and the European Union, as it was
expressed in their joint statement of 7 March, that
putting the Peace Agreement within the framework of
the Algiers process is the only way to establish lasting
peace. The commendable mediation role of Algeria
must be fully supported with a focus on furthering the
political settlement as the ultimate solution.

Kazakhstan reiterates its support for the efforts of
the AU, ECOWAS and the countries of the Sahara and
Sahel region to strengthen border security and regional
cooperation. A regional strategy is the most effective
means of achieving the latter. We therefore encourage
the States members of the Group of Five for the
Sahel - Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the
Niger - to proceed with the establishment ofa regional
force to combat terrorism and transnational crime.

We join others in strongly condemning the
violent attacks perpetrated by terrorist groups against
civilians, humanitarian workers, Malian security
forces, MINUSMA and French personnel. The
emergence of five jihadi entities under the Group for
the Support of Islam and Muslims has significantly
increased the terrorist threat in the country and in the
region. As Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011)
and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh) Al-Qaida
and associated individuals groups undertakings and
entities, Kazakhstan strongly urges international
security forces and the Malian armed forces to upgrade
their anti-terrorist capabilities.

Such a destabilizing situation means that the
international community must find ways to strengthen
the Malian security forces with financial and technical
assistance. The recent decision of the European Union
to extend its Capacity Building Mission in Mali until
18 January 2018 is hailed as a prudent strategy. The
Mission greatly contributes to security sector reform.

The fragile security situation with an increase
in inter-ethnic violence has led to the deterioration
of human rights, which should be addressed by the
Council. Addressing the grievances and frustrations
of different communities, and especially the youth at
risk that are not benefiting from the peace agreement in
their daily lives, including those who could be recruited
by violent groups, is a related issue.

We pay tribute to the brave men and women of
MINUSMA for their sacrifice, and we thank the troop-
and police-contributing countries for their personnel, as
well as the countries that have provided much-needed
military-technical equipment, such as helicopters and
armoured personnel carriers.

