The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Tajikistan, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alimov
(Tajikistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Security Council have before them the
progress report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Tajikistan, document S/ 1997/56.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/ 1996/ 1065 , letter
dated 23 December 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting the
statement by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine
concerning the situation in Tajikistan; S/ 1996/ 1070, letter
dated 24 December 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting the
texts of the Agreement between the President of the
Republic of Tajikistan and the leader of the United Tajik
Opposition on the results of the meeting held in Moscow on
23 December 1996, and of the Protocol on the basic
functions and powers of the Commission on National
Reconciliation; S/ 1996/ 107 1, letter dated 24 December 1996
from the representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran
and the Russian Federation to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting the text
of a joint statement of the Islamic Republic of Iran and
the Russian Federation on Tajikistan adopted at the talks
in Tehran on 22 and 23 December 1996 between the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of
Iran and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation; and S/ 1997/55, letter dated 17 January 1997
from the Permanent Representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting the text of the Protocol on
refugees, signed in Tehran on 13 January 1997 by the
heads of the delegation of the Government of the
Republic of Tajikistan and of the United Tajik Opposition
in the presence of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the
progress report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Tajikistan of 21 January 1997
(S/1997/56), submitted pursuant to paragraph 6 of
Security Council resolution 1089 (1996) of 13
December 1996.

"The Security Council welcomes the signing in
Moscow on 23 December 1996 by the President of
Tajikistan and the leader of the United Tajik
Opposition of the Agreement (S/1996/1070, annex I), including the Protocol on the Commission on
National Reconciliation (S/ 1996/ 1070, annex II), and
notes the progress made in the inter-Tajik talks in
Tehran, in particular the signing of the Protocol on
refugees (S/1997/56, annex III). It believes that these
agreements, provided they are carried out as written,
represent a qualitative change for the better and give
a new impetus to efforts aimed at achieving national
reconciliation. The Council urges the parties to
honour and implement consistently and in good faith
the agreements already reached, in particular in the
course of negotiating future agreements. It also urges
them to make further substantive progress at the next
rounds of the inter-Tajik talks.

"The Security Council notes with satisfaction
that the ceasefire has been generally observed by the
parties since December 1996 and calls on them to
maintain it scrupulously for the whole duration of

 

the inter-Tajik talks in accordance with their
obligations and commitments.
"The Security Council commends the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and calls upon the parties to cooperate fully with him
in continuing the inter-Tajik talks. The Security
Council also commends the efforts of the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT)
in fulfilling its mandate.

"The Security Council calls upon the parties to
ensure the safety and the freedom of movement of the
personnel of the United Nations, the collective
Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) and other international
personnel in Tajikistan.

"The Security Council strongly condemns the
attacks on and kidnapping of international personnel,
in particular UNMOT, UNHCR and ICRC, and others,
and demands the immediate release of all those taken
hostage. It stresses the inadmissibility of kidnapping
and any other mistreatment of United Nations
personnel and supports the efforts of the Secretary-
General to ensure that the essential security
requirements of UNMOT are met.

"In this context the Security Council expresses
satisfaction at the efforts by and cooperation between
UNMOT, the Russian Federation and the parties to
resolve the hostage crisis.

"The Security Council considers it necessary for
the United Nations to continue vigorous support for
the political process in Tajikistan. It takes note of
the request from the parties to UNMOT to extend
the necessary assistance in the implementation of the
Moscow Agreement and to cooperate closely with
the Commission on National Reconciliation in its
activities. The Council accepts the Secretary-
General's recommendation not to change the nature
and size of the United Nations presence in Tajikistan
at this stage. It requests the Secretary-General to
keep the situation under review and to submit in due
course his recommendations with regard to the
United Nations presence in Tajikistan in the light of
the progress in implementation of the inter-Tajik
agreements and bearing in mind the request for
assistance by the parties contained in the Moscow
Agreement and the tasks and functions that would be
required to provide such assistance.

"The Security Council expresses deep concern
over the deteriorating humanitarian situation in
Tajikistan and calls for continuing emergency relief,
including assistance for the return of refugees, in the
context of the implementation of the Protocol on
refugees, and support to Tajikistan for rehabilitation,
aimed at mitigation of the consequences of the war
and reconstruction of its economy."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/6.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

