Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): First of all, my
delegation joins others in thanking Mr. Guehenno for
his informative briefing today on the situation in
Kosovo.

As the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) celebrates its third
anniversary this month, we would like to pay tribute to
all those who have worked, and all those who are still
working hard, to establish peace and stability in
Kosovo. The international community, and UNMIK in
particular, can look back with satisfaction on the great
achievements made since the Mission's arrival in
Kosovo. No doubt, still more needs to be done. The
reins are now in the hands of local leaders, to build a
society based on democracy, multi-ethnicity and the
rule of law.

The international community cannot disengage
itself at this stage from Kosovo, at least not until it is
reassured that the newly established Government is
able to manage its affairs in the best interests of all.
With the appointment of the Inter-Ministerial
Coordinator on Returns, the Kosovo Government is
now fully constituted and reflects the multi-ethnic
character of the population. Without doubt, the
members of the Government, having taken the oath of
office, will have to work together in shaping the future
of Kosovo without discrimination on any grounds. We
take note of the positive developments and encourage
the leaders to work truthfully by the letter and spirit of
the Constitutional Framework Agreement, and in line
with resolution 1244 (1999).

We are happy to note that the ingredients
necessary to make the machinery function in Kosovo
are in place. In fact, the minorities have appointed their
representative; the members of the Government have
taken their oath to show allegiance to their respective
posts; and laws are being passed to facilitate the
integration of ethnic minorities into the mainstream of
society. Moreover, the robust campaigning by UNMIK
and KFOR to combat crime and other illegal activities
has been successful in steadily reducing the crime
rates. The economy is picking up, and increasing
numbers of schools and hospitals are operating.

All these developments are most welcome. We
hope that this trend will continue and that Kosovo will
soon be able to be a stable and peaceful place where all
communities participate in the institutions that have
been set up under resolution 1244 (1999). We
encourage minority communities, especially in the
Mitrovica region, to abandon parallel structures and to
abide by the law enforced by UNMIK and KFOR.

Regional integration is an important factor in the
development of Kosovo. The provisional self-
government should strengthen its relations with
neighbouring countries, in particular with Belgrade. We
believe that enhanced cooperation with the Belgrade
authorities is an important component in helping to
solve the many difficult remaining issues, especially in
the upcoming municipal elections. We appreciate the
efforts of the authorities in Belgrade to help the Serb
communities to participate in larger numbers, thus
making the exercise more participatory and
representative.

As regards the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees, the steps taken by the
Government of Kosovo and UNMIK to encourage mass
returns are noteworthy. Now that the Serb community
has its representatives in the Government, their
concerns will be properly addressed and the return of
members of that community to their homes will be
facilitated. However, we believe that in order to be
sustainable it is more than necessary for that process to
have continued assistance from the donor community.

Finally, we extend a special thanks to Mr. Steiner,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his commendable efforts in advancing the peace
process in Kosovo. We agree with his observation that
Kosovo's institutions should be ready for Kosovo to
advance towards a fair and just society.

