Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me join others in
thanking Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and African
Union (AU) Commissioner Chergui for their briefings.
My statement will focus on three issues, namely,
political developments, the situation in Darfur and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).

First, it would be remiss of me not to begin
by welcoming the signing of the agreement on the
establishment of a new transitional Government and
transitional institutions and the swearing in of the
Prime Minister and the Sovereign Council. The people
of the Sudan deserve peace, stability and prosperity.
Momentum in realizing that hope is now evolving in
the Sudan. Indonesia congratulates the people of the
Sudan for that accomplishment and commends their
commitment to a peaceful transition.

The mediation role undertaken by the African
Union and Ethiopia is, indeed, laudable. The signing
of the transitional agreement is only the beginning of
the hard work. It must serve as a stepping stone for
further tangible progress, including sustainable peace
and socioeconomic recovery.

All parties in the Sudan should remain committed
to the effective implementation of the agreement
and refrain from actions that could undermine its
implementation. Inclusive dialogue is key to resolving
any differences. My delegation calls on the international
community to provide all necessary assistance
during this crucial period, while respecting Sudanese
sovereignty and national ownership.

Secondly, we note that the security situation
in Darfur has remained relatively stable, with little
disruption to the trends that have emerged since 2016.
Of course, there are a number of persisting challenges.
The Darfur peace process is stalling; conflict drivers,
including access to land and resources, have not been
systematically addressed; and human rights violations
continue to occur, including against women, children
and internally displaced persons.

The transitional agreement contains the parties'
commitment to achieving fair, comprehensive and
sustainable peace in the Sudan by addressing the root
causes of conflict and the impacts of war. We are
pleased to see that the Sudanese Prime Minister has
vowed to make peace one of his priorities. We urge
all armed groups to cease violence and destabilizing
activities and engage constructively in the discussions
towards peaceful solutions to the conflict. Indonesia
also stresses the imperative for the full protection
of civilians, unhindered access for humanitarian
assistance and strict observance of international
humanitarian law.

That brings me to the third issue. My delegation
was a member of the Council when it authorized the
establishment of UNAMID 12 years ago. Indonesia has
been a proud contributor ofpeacekeepers, both military
and police, to UNAMID since 2008. Much has been
achieved through the work of UNAMID in Darfur,
including improved security. Peacekeeping, however, is
not a silver bullet. There is a limit to what it can achieve.

The present challenges in Darfur are no longer of a
peacekeeping nature but require more peacebuilding and
stabilization efforts. We trust that the upcoming special
report will provide recommendations on the appropriate
course of action regarding UNAMID's drawdown.

Our position on UNAMID's drawdown remains
consistent. It must be responsible and guided by a
careful and honest assessment of the situation on the
ground. We take note that the United Nations and the
AU continue their discussions to develop a joint political
strategy for engagement after UNAMID. Regardless of
dynamics on the ground that might affect the issue of
UNAMID's drawdown, we should not lose our focus
and must spare no efforts in assisting the people of
the Sudan in attaining a peaceful life in the near
future. We cannot overemphasize the need for ample
and meaningful consultations with the transitional
Government in the Sudan.

