Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. lessen-Petersen, for his
presentation of the report on the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK)
during the first months of the year. With the
announcement of his upcoming retirement from that
post, my delegation wishes to express our gratitude for
the dedication and effort that the Special
Representative has shown as the head of UNMIK for
almost two years. We wish him almost every success in
his future endeavours.

We also wish to express our gratitude for the
briefing given us this morning by Ms. Sanda Raskovic-
Ivic, President of the Coordination Centre of the
Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija.

The political process intended to determine the
future status of Kosovo has made progress in the initial
months of application. Even though it is premature to
call for substantial agreements, we are encouraged by
the active participation of both parties in those
conversations, and by the progress in the
conversations. We hope that as a result of this
willingness we will soon begin to see initial
understandings. My delegation reiterates its support for
that political progress designed to find a negotiated
solution. We also support the approach adopted by the
Special Envoy to begin direct conversations between
the parties on practical issues and to gradually move
towards a future status.

But as we have said earlier, in the search for a
future status for Kosovo it is important not to delay the
implementation of standards. Indeed, important
progress in the attainment of standards is a crucial
condition in order to make progress in the political
process.

Whatever territorial entity may emerge in
Kosovo, it is important that it be a democratic entity,
where there is respect for civil freedoms, where there is
political and religious tolerance, where there is respect
for minorities, where there are economic opportunities
for all, and where power is transferred periodically in a
democratic fashion. The implementation of standards is
fundamental in order to establish an entity of that
nature and thus to help in the attainment of a European
vision for that region.

We are pleased to note the renewed commitment
with which the new leaders in Kosovo have proposed
to carry out the pending tasks in the implementation of
standards. Even though we understand that there are
major areas in which significant progress is yet to be
firmed up, the actions that have been undertaken and
that are set out in the report do make us hopeful about
short-term results. However, we must reiterate that all
the parties concerned must join and cooperate in that
process, which is decisive for their own future. The
building of a multi-ethnic and democratic society
requires the active participation of all parties involved
in order to build a consensus that would make it
possible to lay the foundations for a lasting solution to
the question of Kosovo.

In the implementation of standards, a priority is
reconciliation and the promotion of the return of
displaced persons, as well as full respect for the
diversity of the population. We welcome the recent
signing of the protocol, on 6 June, by representatives
of Serbia and of the Kosovo region to speed up the
return of displaced persons. The signing of that
instrument reflects the political will of the parties to
deal with the problem, which is crucial. Direct
conversations on the return of the displaced persons,
which have begun and which will continue at the
expert level, should be encouraged by the international
community with a View to producing concrete facts,
which would create a new, positive environment in the
treatment of the question of Kosovo.

One aspect that my delegation considers central
in standards implementation is progress in building a
viable economy in Kosovo, one with enough
productive capacity to ensure economic sustainability
and future democracy in Kosovo. A viable economy is
still quite remote in Kosovo, and thus there are doubts
that a future multi-ethnic democracy can be sustainable
in a country with such extreme poverty. We hope that
the economic actions presented in the report to
modernize the economy will in the short term generate
jobs and opportunities so that the local population can
become part of the economy and in that way help fight
the disturbing crime and international illegal activities
in Kosovo.

