Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke in French): There are only 39 days left before the
elections - the first in the history of the Democratic
Republic of Congo leading to a democratic handover
of power. We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zerrougui and her team for their
good offices and excellent briefing. We also thank
Ms. Mbela for her statement, which provided the
necessary additional context on the electoral process.

Today, I would like to address three points: first, the
progress of the preparations for the elections; secondly,
the need to further open the political space; and thirdly,
our concerns about the deterioration of the situation in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
progress made in the implementation of the electoral
calendar. These include the distribution of equipment
and the training ofpolling station staff. We also welcome
the invitation to the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), the African Union and the Carter
Center to send independent observers. They will play
an important role alongside the 40,000 local observers.
We also encourage political parties and citizens to be
certified as election witnesses.

The Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2018/882) that the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Independent National
Electoral Commission are working together to increase
women's participation. We applaud their efforts and
urge all parties to use these final days to strengthen
women's participation in this election. We remind
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo that MONUSCO remains ready to contribute
to logistical support. Much progress has been made in
recent months, but challenges remain, such as a lack
of trust and restricted political space. We call on all
political parties to campaign constructively and to help
find compromises to meet these challenges.

This brings me to my second point, concerning
the need to open the political space further. We
congratulate the Congolese Government on having
recently authorized several demonstrations, which took
place peacefully. Other demonstrations, however, have
been banned in several major cities. We once again urge
the authorities to lift the total ban on demonstrations
and to respect freedom of expression. We remind the
authorities of their promise to release 130 political
prisoners, including high-profile cases, in accordance
with the New Year's Eve agreement.

With the start ofthe campaign, it is essential to build
trust and to find consensus between the political parties
and the Independent National Electoral Commission.
In that regard, we welcome the opening of dialogue on
4 October and encourage all actors to work together in a
constructive spirit. We congratulate all political parties
on maintaining their commitment to participating in
the process.

The stakes of this historic election are immense. A
huge task awaits the winner, since he or she will have
to face the humanitarian and security challenges that
persist in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Thirdly, I would like to address the deterioration
of the security situation in the east of the country. The
number of armed groups has increased significantly.
Attacks on civilians and humanitarian personnel in
the Beni region are unacceptable. They threaten the
already uncertain fight against the Ebola epidemic,
which has been the largest in Congolese history to date.
We welcome the important work of MONUSCO in the
protection of civilians in this context. It is essential
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
international community work together to stabilize
Beni and gain the trust oflocal people. In that regard, we
welcome on this subject the recent visit of Mr. Lacroix
and Mr. Ghebreyesus,

In other areas, including around Bijombo, the
population is still suffering the consequences of violent
conflict and human rights violations. The humanitarian
crisis continues to deteriorate, and we call on all Member
States to increase their contribution to the humanitarian
assistance plan. We call on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and neighbouring States to implement the
compliance framework of the Political and Security
Committee of the European Union, and to cooperate on
the issue of internally displaced persons, including with
a view to their return, in accordance with international
human rights law.

In conclusion, we are witnessing a decisive moment
in the history ofthe Democratic Republic of the Congo,
a moment that the Congolese people have been hoping
for. In order to permanently eliminate the root causes of
the conflict and instability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, it is crucial to ensure that a democratic
transfer of power follows credible, peaceful and
transparent elections. The Congolese citizens will cast
their votes and judge the credibility of the process. At
this final stage, the Council and its regional partners,
including the African Union, SADC, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
should continue to closely monitor the situation.

