President Tadic': Thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting of the Security Council in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).

Before turning to the issue that has brought us
together, I would like to express my deepest
condolences to the friendly Government and people of
the Republic of Haiti - as well as to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and the United Nations
Secretariat - in the wake of the tragic earthquake that
has claimed countless human lives and resulted in
unimaginable destruction. Our thoughts and prayers are
with the families of the victims. As a contributor to the
police component of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, the Republic of Serbia will continue
to work with the survivors and with the international
community. We will help in the effort to rebuild the
country through the material assistance our
Government has pledged to provide, and by greatly
increasing our presence in Haiti.

Once again we are gathered to discuss the
situation in the Serbian province of Kosovo and
Metohija. Almost two years ago, its ethnic Albanian
authorities attempted to secede from my country
through a unilateral declaration of independence, or
UDI. Our principled position regarding our province's
future status is set in stone. Serbia will never, under
any circumstances, implicitly or explicitly, recognize
the UDI. This is a constitutional imperative, as well as
our moral, historical and, above all, democratic duty.
On this fundamental point, our nation is united as one.
The UDI has divided the world and the Balkans. It has
brought into question the fundamental tenets of the
contemporary international system, while setting back
efforts to consolidate the region's democratic gains.

A substantial majority of United Nations Member
States and of Security Council members have not
supported the attempt to impose the forcible partition
of a United Nations Member State. They have
continued to respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of my country. On behalf of the Republic of
Serbia, I would like to reiterate our deep gratitude to
the friendly Governments and peoples of those
countries, for their dedication to upholding
international law as we seek to resolve Kosovo's future
status through law and diplomacy. Their solidarity will
never be forgotten.

As the report (S/2010/5) before the Council
reminds us, the General Assembly tasked the
International Court of Justice with determining
whether the UDI conforms to international law. This
has turned out to be a landmark case. It is the first time
that the Court has been asked to consider the legality of
a unilateral attempt by an ethnic minority to secede
from a United Nations Member State in peacetime, in
defiance of its Constitution and against the will of the
Security Council. It is also the first time that all five
permanent members of this Council have participated
in a proceeding before the Court. During the reporting
period, a crucial stage in the judicial process, the oral
hearings, came to an end. A record number of countries
presented their views. This made it the largest case in
the Court's history, and it demonstrated that Kosovo's
future status remains an open, unresolved question.

The International Court of Justice will deliver its
conclusions this year, with overarching consequences
for the international legal order. It is therefore
particularly important for all to respect the fact that the
Court has begun its deliberations. The judges' work
should be allowed to run its course, without political
pressures such as further recognition of Kosovo's UDI.
Once the Court hands down its opinion, an opportunity
will be created to find a way forward.

We believe that dialogue is the most effective
means to achieve the only sustainable outcome: a
mutually acceptable, Viable solution that will not
recklessly sacrifice the geostrategic priorities of all on
the altar of the communal aspirations of a single party.
Serbia seeks to resolve all outstanding political
differences through negotiations. We are fundamentally
committed to making 2010 the year of peaceful
solutions, as the next logical development following
the Court's decision. And we are carefully examining
all the possibilities.

This will not be easy. The psychological barriers
are high, and trust needs to be restored. A first step is
to realize that the 19905 are gone for good.
Contemporary Serbia is a democratic, forward-looking
society that will soon join the European Union. We
should all work together on achieving a common
future, with all deliberate speed. As I made clear
during my remarks over Christmas from Kosovo in the
monastery of Visoki Decani, my message is one of
peace, and one of reconciliation - between individuals
as well as peoples.

I would like to welcome the new members of the
Security Council, as well as Special Representative
Lamberto Zannier. The United Nations remains an
indispensable actor in Kosovo. It is therefore critical
that the Council continue to support the fully
reconfigured presence of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) as a
crucial pillar of peace and stability.

The constructive approach adopted by the United
Nations and organizations that operate under its overall
authority has set the stage for responsible stakeholders
to act together on improving the lives of all residents in
the province. That has been done by putting aside
status considerations on a growing number of practical
issues. My country has continued to embrace such an
approach, in line with the provisions of the November
2008 report (S/2008/692). That has been recognized by
the Secretary-General, who has written that: "UNMIK
engagement with Belgrade continued to create
opportunities for good-faith dialogue and for the
development of solutions on a range of issues"
(S/2010/5, para. 48).

That has produced tangible results. For instance,
the protocol on police cooperation between the Serbian
Ministry of the Interior and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), signed a few
months ago, has begun to be implemented. An annex to
the protocol was signed in late November, a fact that
the report did not mention. That has produced a
welcome increase in the exchange of information on
organized crime and terrorist activities in the province,
an area that continues to be the hub of a sinister
international network of traffickers in arms, drugs and
human beings.

On a number of other fronts, a shared dedication
to status-neutrality by responsible stakeholders has
ensured that: "The overall security situation in Kosovo
remained relatively calm, but potentially fragile"
(S/2010/5, para. 22). One example is UNMIK's
external representation function. When it is honoured
by Pristina, its voice in regional forums continues to be
heard, with our support and encouragement. That will
remain the only legitimate way for the province to
participate in multilateral meetings. Unfortunately,
Kosovo's ethnic Albanian authorities refuse to
participate with UNMIK in the Central European Free
Trade Agreement and other regional organizations, as
the report makes clear. Such a policy by Pristina can
only lead to self-isolation. We deeply regret Pristina's
unwillingness to abide by the provisions of the region's
free trade accord and, more generally, the binding
procedures on external representation. We call on the
province's authorities to reverse that counterproductive

policy.

In sum, on the issue of external representation,
Kosovo can and should participate in multilateral and
regional forums, with the presence of UNMIK
officials, who speak first and with either the UNMIK-
Kosovo nameplate or a personalized one. No other
arrangement will work, despite all the pressure to the
contrary.

Working within the framework of status-
neutrality has also ensured that issues related to the
supply of electricity to Serbian communities do not
spiral out of control. As the report highlights, the
Pristina-based Kosovo Energy Corporation (KEK)
unilaterally cut off the supply of power to north
Kosovo. Thanks to the timely response of the Electric
Power Industry of Serbia (EPS), a humanitarian
catastrophe that would have affected up to 100,000
residents was averted. We gratefully acknowledge the
positive role played by UNMIK and the European
Union (EU) in preventing further unilateral action by
the ethnic Albanian authorities. Serbia looks forward to
the successful completion of technical talks between
KEK and EPS, which ought to produce a satisfactory
long-term solution, including a second provider.

I come to the matter of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR). Its unique ability to bridge existing
communal divides and to maintain peace and stability
on the ground, thanks to its status-neutral approach,
remains acknowledged by all. The Republic of Serbia
will continue to engage with all responsible
stakeholders to ensure KFOR's role is not diminished,
especially in the context of safeguarding Serbian
patrimony.

Since the March 2004 pogrom, in which 35 holy
sites were destroyed over a tragic three-day period,
KFOR's direct responsibility for providing security to
the Serbian Orthodox Church has been a success. We
believe that proposals to hand over responsibility for
guarding a number of these sites to local police units,
as reported, would not contribute to improving the
fragile security situation. That is especially important
given the opposition to such plans clearly expressed by
the monastic communities most affected.

We would like to salute UNMIK's "efforts to find
durable solutions aimed at the protection of Serbian
cultural heritage in Kosovo" (S/2010/5, para. 10),
especially its engagement with the EU and the
Reconstruction Implementation Commission, chaired
by the Council of Europe. We concur with the
assessment that considerable progress was achieved on
this sensitive matter during the reporting period. At the
same time, we share the Secretary-General's
disappointment that an agreement has not yet been
reached. In that context, we welcome his readiness to
"support any constructive initiatives by the European
Union ..., including the appointment of an envoy"
(S/2010/5, para. 49).

We believe that an EU facilitator will be able to
take appropriate measures to strictly enforce
compliance by the authorities in Pristina on all matters
related to the protection, conservation and restoration
of our holy sites in the province. Regrettably, the
precarious state of Serbian patrimony remains a deeply
troubling part of the reality on the ground in Kosovo.

The report brings to our attention a number of
ongoing problems that have not yet been justly
resolved. That includes the repeated refusal of local
officials to restore the cadastral record of the Decani
monastery - a UNESCO World Heritage Site in
Danger. It also includes an incomplete list of
desecrated graveyards - hate crimes meant to
compound the physical destruction with an attempt to
erase our every trace throughout Kosovo.

Unfortunately, the report passes over in silence
the fact that the ethnic Albanian authorities continue to
defend the outrageous decision to pave over with
concrete the remains of the Serbian church in the
centre of Djakovica that has been destroyed twice. This
is the fourth time that Serbia has raised the issue in this
Chamber. Is it possible that the international
community is powerless to get that awful deed
reversed? Does the will exist to undo that and other
acts of cultural cleansing? Once again, we ask for the
Council's help.

Commitments made in this Chamber must be
honoured in full. What is agreed in the Security
Council and welcomed by it must be implemented in
its entirety, from resolution 1244 (1999) to the
Secretary-General's six-point plan. Unfortunately, real
steps still have not been taken on the political
implementation of the provisions related to, for
example, the judiciary and customs, despite the clear
readiness that we have expressed, time and again, to
work out ways of putting into practice what has been
mandated by this body.

I start with the judiciary. There have been some
constructive preliminary discussions with UNMIK and
EULEX. Yet, we have regrettably not been able to
move forward on issues such as determining the
territorial jurisdiction of the court in Mitrovica, the
appointment of judges and prosecutors designed to
reflect the ethnic communities that they would serve,
and the applicability of UNMIK law. It is high time for
talks to intensify. Consensual solutions must be found,
in accordance with the provisions of the November
2008 report.

With respect to the delicate matter of customs,
technical cooperation between Belgrade and EULEX
has proceeded smoothly. Information is exchanged
regularly on topics of mutual concern, such as
smuggling. Unfortunately, we have not achieved
progress on the much more fundamental issue of
revenue collection and how it will benefit relevant
communities. We hope that, in the months ahead, we
can come to workable arrangements with our UNMIK
and EULEX partners within the framework endorsed
by this Council in November 2008.

The Secretary-General's report discusses at
length local elections held in Kosovo called by the
province's ethnic Albanian authorities. Much is made
of the participation of a minority of Kosovo Serbs and
of the unverifiable claims about the elections made by
a non-governmental organization called the European
Network of Election Monitoring Organizations. We are
greatly disappointed that the report is entirely silent on
the fact that the election itself was entirely illegitimate,
since it was not held in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999).

The facts speak for themselves. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General did not call it,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) did not monitor it and the United
Nations did not certify it. Under such circumstances, it
was simply impossible for Serbia to support the
election because it was clear that conditions did not
exist for a vast majority of Kosovo Serbs to participate
in it.

I also underline that the report paints an
incomplete picture of a highly flawed exercise. It
greatly underplays the level of fraud in Serbian areas
and fails to account for credible evidence pointing to
intense ballot-stuffing, voter intimidation and other
grave violations of campaign and election-day
procedures, such as disinformation tactics. All this is
highly regrettable. An opportunity was missed to
depoliticize this vitally important issue. Instead of
working with the international community, Pristina
chose a unilateralist approach consistent with the so-
called Ahtisaari Proposal (S/2007/l68/Add.l) - a
document that the November 2008 report rightly
asserted was "not endorsed by the Security Council"
(5/2008/692, para. 5).

It is now imperative that we focus our energies on
finding a way forward. As has always been the case,
we remain in favour of establishing functional
decentralization acceptable to all stakeholders.
Pristina's election was a false start that will not lead
anywhere. We need to work in concert through a status-
neutral organization, such as the OSCE, to create a
legitimate decentralization package designed to
succeed.

The report before us today is entirely silent on the
critically important issue of facilitating the entry and
transport of Serbian officials within the province. From
the adoption of resolution 1244 (1999) to the present
day, Serbia has followed a well-established procedure
designed to address the security concerns of senior
officials moving about the province. We have often
asked for escorts due to the heightened degree of risk
associated with travelling in that unstable portion of
our country. Regrettably, the issue has been
increasingly politicized for more than a year. The
number of positive replies to our requests for escorts
has dramatically plummeted.

It is difficult to imagine how we can contribute
positively to developments on the ground if our ability
to work closely with the Kosovo Serb community
throughout the province is hindered. Encouraged by
claims made in previous reports that freedom of
movement for Serbs was no longer a problem, Goran
Bogdanovie, our Minister for Kosovo and Metohija,
decided to travel to the Serbian enclave of Strpce
without an escort. He was detained at gunpoint in a
village near Strpce by over 40 ethnic-Albanian special
operations police officers. This was a clear violation of
resolution 1244 (1999). Heavily armed men told him

that they were under instructions to escort him back to
the administrative boundary line. Minister Bogdanovie
asked why he was being forcibly deported, and no
answer was given. Later, we were told that Minister
Bogdanovie's very presence in southern Kosovo was
somehow considered to be a threat to public order,
despite the fact that he resides legally in the province.

This is an absurd and dangerous claim for anyone
to make in twenty-first century Europe. The status-
neutral international institutions enabled by this
Council to control the province's police structures have
an obligation to prevent such abuses to the system for
blatantly partisan, illegitimate purposes from taking
place. Political disagreements on status should not
result in provocative denials of basic human rights to
anyone. Such a climate of zealous intolerance cannot
but adversely affect what the report qualifies as an
already very low number of internally displaced
persons who have returned to the province. More than
200,000 Serb victims of ethnic cleansing continue to be
denied the right of return. Regrettably, Kosovo's ethnic
Albanian authorities seem to want to send the message
that accepting the unilateral declaration of
independence is a precondition to being beyond the
arbitrary reach of the police.

Despite such deplorable conduct, the Republic of
Serbia remains dedicated to finding a way to overcome
these and many other issues in status-neutral ways,
consistent with resolution 1244 (1999) and the values
and principles it presupposes.

The Secretary-General's report draws particular
attention to the situation in northern Kosovo, which it
characterizes as "fragile." Serbia concurs with this
assessment. We feel that harsh rhetoric emanating from
Pristina regarding legitimate Serbian institutions in
northern Kosovo does not contribute to maintaining
stability in that part of Serbia. By referring to them as
"parallel", EULEX representatives, for instance, have
not respected the explicitly status-neutral terms of their
own mandate. And they have violated resolution 1244
(1999), the very basis of their legitimacy and presence
in Kosovo under the overall authority of the United
Nations. Such regrettable outbursts are unacceptable to
the Republic of Serbia.

The truly parallel institutions that operate in
Kosovo are those created on the basis of the unilateral
declaration of independence. Their existence is a
violation of resolution 1244 (1999). Should EULEX,
KFOR or anyone else wish to condemn any authority
in Kosovo, let them begin with those created
unilaterally by the ethnic Albanian authorities in
Pristina without the approval of this Council and in
clear breach of the principles of international order.

In addition, I must draw attention to alarming
news reports that have circulated about what has been
termed a "final solution" for northern Kosovo.
Sponsored by the so-called International Civilian
Office, this plan outlines a number of coordinated
policies and actions designed to impose acceptance of
the unilateral declaration of independence on the
Serbian majority in northern Kosovo. These unilateral
schemes, intended to forcibly implement the so-called
Ahtisaari Proposal, blatantly violate resolution 1244
(1999). That strategy can be advanced only by the
enforcement of a draconian and undemocratic set of
measures on the Serbian community in northern
Kosovo. Those who announced it - they and they
alone - should bear responsibility for the destabilizing
atmosphere that such conflict-inciting designs can only
be meant to produce.

The Republic of Serbia harshly condemns
Pristina's unnecessary and hazardous provocations.
That is not the way to constructively engage in
overcoming challenges, especially given the enormous
efforts of Serbia and other responsible stakeholders to
maintain the fragile climate of stability throughout the
province in the wake of the unilateral declaration of
independence.

I want to underline that it is clear that all parties
have their constraints. It is all part of the reality on the
ground. But that must not harm those who matter the
most, namely, the residents of the province. Pristina's
final solution for North Kosovo would not benefit
those who live there. It would only satisfy the
extremists who want everything that happens in
Kosovo to be seen through the distorted lens of the
unilateral declaration of independence. Should a choice
be made to act on that proposal, we would justifiably
expect KFOR and EULEX to protect the Serbian
community in North Kosovo from that aggressive
intent. We sincerely hope that it will not come to that.

From the right of return to external
representation, and from the six points to the future
status, our collective experience in the nearly two years
since the unilateral declaration of independence
teaches us that denying the basic principles of
European concord - such as compromise, concession
and consensus-building - serves the genuine interest

of no responsible party. There is no legitimate
alternative to finding a way forward together. The
unilateral declaration of independence was just another
failed attempt to impose a one-sided outcome. Instead
of bringing us closer to one another, it has driven us
further apart. That is why it is unsustainable, and why
we must now find the courage to harness the forces of
moderation and rebuild bridges.

We will have to overcome our prejudices and
tame our passions. That will necessitate reconciliation
and learning to live with difference. Some will be
tempted by the comfort and seductiveness of the old
ways. Yet nothing is more certainly doomed to failure,
for that time has passed. It must never be allowed to
return to the Balkans.

I believe that 2010 can become the year of
solutions. It can turn out to be the year when we
resolve the status issue in a way that contributes to
advancing regional priorities, such as membership in
the European Union, within the framework set forth by
international law. It can be the year of our success, our
year of peacemaking. It is up to us - to this generation
of leaders - to find the necessary strength to do the
right thing. For the extremists who will want to reject
the opportunity that we shall have this year will in
truth be rejecting the future we all must share.

