Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): My
delegation wishes to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the two International Criminal
Tribunals, the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), for their
briefings before the Council on the activities that the
two Tribunals have undertaken in the last six months to
implement their completion strategies, pursuant to
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004). We take note
of the reports of the Tribunals in this regard.

The reports of both Tribunals show that they will
be facing challenging workloads in the coming two
years. Although both Tribunals have made efforts to
speed up trials, it seems that neither will be able to
meet the timelines set by the Security Council for the
completion of their work.

We share the assessment of the Tribunals that it is
important to have adequate measures to retain the
Tribunals' qualified judges and staff. We also believe
that, besides trying to improve the expeditiousness of
the Tribunals' proceedings, further efforts should be
made to refer cases to national jurisdictions. Viet Nam
will continue to join other members of the Council in
efforts to render necessary support to the Tribunals for
the achievement of their completion strategies.

International cooperation plays a crucial role in
the fulfilment of the Tribunals' mandates, particularly
in the apprehension of the remaining fugitives. My
delegation notes with appreciation the efforts of the
Tribunals to obtain the cooperation of States and
organizations involved in cases, as well as the
cooperation already shown to the Tribunals. We
express, however, our concerns over the cases for
which cooperation has been insufficient, as mentioned
in the Tribunals' reports.

The Vietnamese delegation is of the View that
determined efforts on the residual mechanism and its
functions will help to ensure the success of the
Tribunals' completion strategies. We need to have the
residual mechanism in place and ready to operate when
the Tribunals close their doors so that impunity is not
allowed and the legacy of the Tribunals will be
protected. My delegation, therefore, appreciates the
work done in 2008 by the informal Working Group of
the Council on the international criminal tribunals
under the chairmanship of Belgium. We also welcome
the inputs provided by the Tribunals to facilitate the
discussions of the Working Group.

My delegation is not discouraged by the fact that
the Working Group has not been able to finalize its
work in terms of a Council resolution on the residual
mechanism. That shows how complicated the issue is
and that members of the Council are committed to
ensuring thorough discussion of the issue.

Finally, let me reiterate our firm commitment to
working constructively with other members of the
Council to ensure a smooth and effective completion of
the Tribunals' work.

