Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you and your
country, Madame President, on Nigeria's presidency
this month and commend you on your excellent
management of the Council's work. I would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing on the latest developments in the region.

I would like to express my deep condolences to
the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on the passing of
Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud. May he
rest in peace. I would also like to extend my deep
sympathies to the sisterly Republic of Turkey in the
wake of the earthquake that has claimed hundreds of
lives there.

I would also like to express our great gratitude to
all those who have congratulated Tunisia and its people
on the historic elections held in my country on
23 October, as well as our appreciation for the warm
support they have offered us on their countries' behalf.

Tunisia associates itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the Arab Group by the
Permanent Representative of Qatar, as well as the
statements made by the representative of Kazakhstan
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and by the representative of the sisterly Republic of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The international community finds itself once
more at an important moment in the history of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, especially with regard to the
Palestinian cause. Despite the readiness shown by the
Palestinian side to reinvigorate the peace process and
work to reach appropriate and final solutions to the
outstanding issues, we are once again seeing Israel set

ll-56143
up new obstacles that will undoubtedly hinder the
resumption of negotiations and could undermine
international efforts aimed at breaking a stalemate that
has lasted too long and that may lead to the
exacerbation of tension, frustration and violence in the
region.

Here, we note Israel's recent unilateral actions,
undertaken in complete disregard for and defiance of
united international opinion and the efforts of
influential and active parties in the peace process,
especially those of the members of the Quartet, whose
statement of 23 September (SG/2178) included a time
frame for the resumption of dialogue and negotiations,
and stressed the importance of both sides implementing
their obligations under the Road Map. First and
foremost of those is a complete halt to settlement
activity.

Israel's unilateral actions include its
announcement on 14 October of its intention to build
2,610 new housing units in Beit Safafa in East
Jerusalem, destroying Palestinian homes, evicting their
residents and leaving them homeless. Israel has already
demolished 31 residences since the beginning of the
year, leaving 106 Palestinians homeless, including 61
children. Israel's actions also include the ongoing
Judaization of the holy city of Jerusalem and stripping
it of its Arab and Islamic character, as well as the
continuing isolation of Palestinian territories in order
to create a fait accompli on the ground that suits
Israel's interests and objectives. Those and other
examples clearly reflect the Israeli occupation
authorities' ongoing violations of international law and
treaties, including the peace process terms of reference,
the Road Map, the outcome of the Madrid Peace
Conference and the Arab Peace Initiative.

On 14 October, the Secretary-General issued a
statement (see SG/SM/l3879) in which he expressed
his deep concern over the continued settlement activity.
He also renewed his call to end such activity and
affirmed that any unilateral actions on the ground by
Israel would not be recognized by the international
community, but would be considered null and void and
without legal effect, pursuant to the Road Map and the
agreements that have been concluded.

During the morning part of this meeting, we
heard clear and honest statements from delegations
indicating that Israel could not continue its settlement
activities. In addition, Tunisia strongly condemns the
ongoing unjust siege imposed on the Gaza Strip and the
repeated acts of aggression carried out against it. We
also condemn Israel's oppressive measures to limit the
freedom of the Palestinian people and their rights to
transportation, work, shelter, health and education.
Their tragic suffering has been made worse by the
current unjust policies of the Israeli occupation
authorities.

Tunisia will maintain its principled and firm
position in support of the efforts of the brotherly
Palestinian people to achieve a just, permanent and
comprehensive solution that ends the suffering of our
Palestinian people, restores their national legitimate
right to self-determination and establishes an
independent sovereign State on their land, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

The Government and people of Tunisia strongly
support the Palestinian application for full United
Nations membership and consider that as a legitimate
right based on firm historic, moral and objective
foundations. Given the most fundamental rule of
justice and its minimum requirement, a people have a
right to regain freedom lost decades ago. Equally, they
have the right to enjoy sovereignty over their own land.

It is also important that Palestine be granted full
United Nations membership, as international and
regional organizations and financial institutions have
agreed that Palestine possesses the requisite elements
of statehood in terms of administration and institutions
and the ability to manage them. Tunisia therefore calls
upon the members of the Council to support the
legitimate request of Palestine.

Moreover, Tunisia steadfastly supports the
principles of international legitimacy and peace. We
therefore call for support for negotiations and dialogue
to achieve peace. At the same time, we call for efforts
to avoid a return to stalemate and tension, which would
only threaten peace and security in the region and limit
the prospects for the peace to which we all aspire.

As today's discussion has been on the Middle
East, I renew my country's call for an end to the Israeli
occupation of the Syrian Golan and the remaining
occupied Lebanese territories, in accordance with
international law, so that all of the peoples of the
region can enjoy peace and security and focus their
attention on development and on building a better
future.
The Tunisian people have taken to the streets in
neighbourhoods throughout the entire country before
and after Palestine submitted its request for full United
Nations membership. In addition, the interim
Government has continued to clearly express its
unconditional support for the legitimate aspirations of
the Palestinian people. I wish to reiterate here that this
is a principled position that will not be changed, as it
has emerged out of the Tunisian people's profound
empathy for the just Palestinian cause, as well as out of
our support for the cause of justice throughout the
world.

In a symbolic gesture of great meaning, a blue
chair - to recall the colour of the United Nations -
was designated at the Palace of Conferences in Tunisia,
where the media centre of the most recent elections
was based. The following slogan was raised over the
chair: "Palestine - a Member of the United Nations".
We hope very soon to see a genuine seat for Palestine
as a sovereign State in this important international
Organization.

