Mr. Kumar (India): Let me at the outset congratulate
Judge Meron on his assumption of the presidency of
the Residual Mechanism, in addition to his continuing
presidency of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). I would also like to
congratulate Judge J oensen on assuming the presidency
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR). We have listened carefully to their presentations
and assessments of the work of the Tribunals. We also
appreciate the two Prosecutors' briefings.

India welcomes the progress made by the Tribunals
in expediting their work. We are reassured by the opinion
of Judges Meron and Joensen that the preparations for
implementing the Residual Mechanism are on track, and
we have noted that the Arusha Branch of the Residual
Mechanism will begin its work on 1 July.

We are happy to see that the Council's
recommendations, including those on hiring and
retaining qualified interns, made during the previous
reporting period (see S/PV.6678), have brought tangible
results and helped the Tribunals progress faster towards
implementing a completion strategy and launching the
Residual Mechanism.

We appreciate the fact that Judge Meron has
undertaken a variety of reforms to improve the
functioning of various sections of the Tribunal. As a
result, the trials of Mladie, HadZie and Karadiie have
gone forward many months ahead of their expected
schedules. Similarly, appeals in some cases have been
advanced significantly ahead of schedule. This is a very
positive sign and we congratulate Judge Meron on a
welcome development.

We are happy to note that the ICTR has completed
work at the trial level on 83 of 93 accused, while nine
remain at large. All the trials are on track and will be
completed by the end of the year.

We commend the efforts of the Prosecutors to
undertake outreach initiatives, including training aimed
at strengthening the capacity of national systems to
handle referred cases effectively, thereby preserving
the Tribunals' legacy. We also note with satisfaction
the progress made in implementing the Residual
Mechanism. Any functional, operational or institutional
issue that may arise in the implementation of the
completion strategy or the Residual Mechanism should
be addressed by the Council, in consultation with its
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.

It is critical that the Tribunals finish their work on
time. We have listened very carefully to the concerns
raised by the Presidents of the Tribunals about their
ability to keep up with their work while adhering to
the expected timelines until the close of business.
The Judges have pointed out that trials and appeals
continue to be affected by staffing shortages and the
loss of highly efficient staff members. We share their
concerns, especially on the need for retaining adequate
and experienced staff. Careful consideration should
be given to the Judges' suggestions on how to address
those challenges. This is a practical issue that requires
pragmatic and innovative solutions. We stand ready to
work with other members of the Council to solve the
problem.

The Judges have also raised the issue of relocation
of those people who have been acquitted or have already
served their sentences. Some of them have been living
in safe houses in Arusha for the last five years. This
is an important humanitarian issue and needs careful
consideration.

We welcome the cooperation extended by all States
concerned with the Tribunals, which is vital to ensure
fulfilment of the Tribunals' mandates as well as their
successful implementation of their completion strategy.
We appreciate Serbia's sustained efforts in that regard
and request other States to continue to extend effective
cooperation, so that the remaining fugitives can be
located soon and surrendered to the Tribunals so as to
end impunity.

In conclusion, we believe that the two Tribunals
have admirably implemented their mandates. We believe
that the support of the Security Council is crucial at
this critical juncture in the life of the Tribunals. At the
same time, we urge both Tribunals to take all necessary
measures to keep the trial and appeal schedules on
track. That will pave the way for successful trials of the
remaining accused and a smooth implementation of an
efficient Residual Mechanism.

