Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): We would like first of all
to congratulate the newly elected and re-elected judges
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) after what became a hard-fought
election.

Pakistan attaches great importance to the role
played by the International Tribunals set up by the
United Nations to prosecute crimes against humanity
under the genocide conventions and international
humanitarian law. The cornerstone of our policy is to
promote respect for and compliance with international
law.

The Secretary-General aptly pointed out, in his
recent statement to the General Assembly, that

"Rule of law as a mere concept is not enough.
Laws must be put into practice and permeate the
fabric of our lives." (see A/59/PV3)

The two Tribunals are doing exemplary work in
the field of the international rule of law and justice,
which we fully support. We strongly believe that there
should be no impunity for crimes against humanity,
including genocide. We support all efforts aimed at
increasing the efficiency of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
We hope that these efforts will help in the fulfilment of
the completion strategy of the Tribunals.

We are grateful to the Presidents and the
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunals for
the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda for their written
assessments and briefings today to the Security
Council, pursuant to resolution 1534 (2004), and we
appreciate the efforts of the two Tribunals made in
pursuance of the completion strategy, as reiterated in
resolution 1534 (2004). We are heartened to note that
the ICTY will be able to complete all investigations by
the end of 2004 and all trial work at first instance by
the end of 2008, in accordance with the completion
strategy.

We have also noted that by 2008 the ICTR may
be able to complete trials and judgements in the range
of 65 to 70 per cent, depending on the progress of
present and future trials. We have also taken note of
other issues that might affect the completion strategy,
such as retaining old and hiring new staff, as well as
the need for all States to cooperate fully with the two
Tribunals. We believe that the arrest and prosecution of
indictees at large, especially those indicted for
genocide, is equally important for the completion of
work of the two Tribunals.

The transfer of cases involving intermediate and
low-rank accused to competent national jurisdictions
would help the two Tribunals to concentrate on the
most senior leaders suspected of being most
responsible for crimes within their jurisdiction. In this
regard, we have noted that the Special Chamber of the
State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina will soon be
ready to accept transferred cases of lower- and
intermediate-level officials.

The ICTY and the ICTR are performing
important work in the context of the international rule
of law and justice. To borrow a phrase from the ICTY
assessments, the Tribunals continue to send a powerful
message of responsibility and accountability. They
need the support of the international community to
achieve their completion strategies. We stand ready to
contribute to the efforts of the two Tribunals to fulfil
their completion strategies.

