Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting and to welcome the presence of
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, who reminded us
of the responsibilities of the international community,
in particular the Council, given the serious and terrible
developments in Syria.

Peru follows with great concern the humanitarian
situation in that country. We must express our sorrow
and solidarity to the victims of the conflict, most of
whom are children. We deeply regret that, two weeks
after the ceasefire was unanimously adopted by the
Council through resolution 2401 (2018), there has not
been sufficient progress in its implementation. As
the Secretary-General noted, a sustained cessation of
hostilities has not materialized. The conflict continues to
claim civilian victims. The much-needed humanitarian
assistance has been provided in a very limited way.
International law and international humanitarian law
continue to be violated with impunity.

The bleak outlook requires us to redouble our
efforts. The Security Council must remain united in
its responsibility to protect the Syrian population by
promoting all actions conducive to ensuring the full
and immediate implementation of resolution 2401
(2018). The responsibility to act is clearly greater for the
countries with the greatest capacity for influence in the
field, in particular the guarantors of the de-escalation
zones agreed in Astana.

The situation is particularly serious in eastern
Ghouta, where, among other emergencies, more than
1,000 people need to be evacuated for medical reasons.
It is also serious in Idlib, Afrin, Rukban and Raqqa,
among other places. We need to remember that the
ceasefire must cover the entire Syrian territory and
allow humanitarian assistance in a sustained, safe and
unhindered way.

The Syrian Government must comply with the
ceasefire immediately and fulfil its responsibility to
protect the population and its obligation to cooperate
with the implementation of resolution 2401 (2018). The
fight against terrorism cannot be used as an excuse to
violate human rights and international humanitarian law.

Peru supports the proposal of Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura to promote dialogue with the
opposition groups that have expressed their willingness
to comply with the ceasefire and to expel members of
terrorist organizations linked to the Al-Nusra Front
from eastern Ghouta.

Peru remains committed to achieving a political
solution to the conflict that ends the ongoing
humanitarian disaster, ensures accountability for the
atrocious crimes committed in that country, including
the use of chemical weapons, supports regional stability
and achieves sustainable peace in Syria.

We would like to conclude by expressing our
support for the Secretary-General in his call for the
immediate implementation of resolution 2401 (2018)
and for his tireless efforts and those of his team on the
ground. We also wish to highlight the professionalism,
the courage and the sense of duty of the United Nations
humanitarian personnel and of the humanitarian
agencies such as the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, among
others deployed in Syria.

