Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Eide, for
his briefing. We would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Holmes for his briefing. The
Chinese delegation welcomes the presence of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan and
Pakistan and thanks them for their statements.

China is pleased to note that the Paris Conference
has raised $20 billion for Afghanistan, which
demonstrates once again the staunch support of the
international community for peace and reconstruction
in that country. We welcome the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy drafted by Afghanistan and we
support the central role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
coordinating the assistance efforts of the international
community to Afghanistan, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of resolution 1806 (2008).

At present, the Afghan Government is still
confronted by daunting challenges characterized by the
worsening security situation in that country and an
increase in terrorist and violent incidents. China was
shocked by the suicide bombing of the embassy of
India in Kabul on 7 July. We offer our deep
condolences to the victims and their families. China
condemns terrorist activities in all their forms.

We call upon the international community to
strengthen its assistance to Afghanistan in order to help
the country address its challenges. In that regard, I
would like to highlight the following points.

First, the Afghan Government, together with the
international community, should spare no effort in
resolving the security issue. China calls upon all ethnic
groups and factions in Afghanistan to put the long-term
interests of the nation and the people above everything
else, nurture and practice a culture of reconciliation
and maintain and strengthen the authority of the central
Government of Afghanistan.

The International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) has been playing an important role in
maintaining security and stability in Afghanistan. We
appreciate its efforts in that regard. At the same time,
we are concerned that ISAF military operations have
caused civilian casualties. We also believe that the
international community should provide more
resources to help Afghanistan to strengthen its military
and police forces so that they can independently and as
soon as possible assume the responsibility for
maintaining national security and social stability.

Secondly, the key to achieving long-term peace
and stability in Afghanistan lies in accelerating
economic growth and improving the livelihood of its
people. China highly appreciates the fact that the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy places
special emphasis on poverty alleviation and achieving
the Millennium Development Goals. China calls upon
the international community to step up its efforts to
assistance Afghanistan in implementing the Strategy so
that the Afghan people can see and enjoy the fruits of
development, thus re-establishing their confidence in
the future prospects of the country.

Thirdly, capacity-building should also be given
priority consideration in Afghanistan's reconstruction
process. Human resources are key to national
development. The Afghan Government should invest in
building a well-qualified team of civil servants. While
providing wide-ranging material assistance to
Afghanistan, the international community should focus
on training personnel in all fields and on strengthening
the country's capacity-building.

It is the shared aspiration of the international
community to see Afghanistan achieve stability and
development, a goal towards which we are all working.
As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China attaches
great importance to that country's stability and
development. At the Paris Conference, China again
pledged this year to provide Afghanistan with a grant
of RMB50 million. We will continue to offer assistance
to Afghanistan within our abilities.

