Mr. Gunnarsson (Iceland): Allow me first to
thank the presidency of Kazakhstan for convening this
quarterly meeting on the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.

The Middle East region faces ongoing major
conflicts and multiple humanitarian crises. The
humanitarian situation in Syria remains marked by
unparalleled suffering, destruction and disregard
for human life, as the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs has described it. It is just over
a year since the General Assembly adopted resolution
71/248 on establishing a mechanism to assist in the
investigation and prosecution of those responsible for
the most serious crimes in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The resolution demonstrates the determination of the
General Assembly to ensure justice in the long term. In
the meantime, as the Secretary-General has said, peace
is a moral and political imperative for the Syrian people
and for the world.

What the Secretary-General has called a stupid
war has devastated the lives of millions of Yemenis.
It has been called the world's largest humanitarian
catastrophe and is entirely man-made. We should pay
more attention to that conflict, where civilians are
paying a huge price in a senseless war that has been
overshadowed by other conflicts in the region. One has
to wonder about the humanity of those responsible.

Compared with other conflicts in the Middle East
region, the Israel-Palestine conflict should be solvable.
There is a clear objective - the two-State solution,
under which both Israel and Palestine will live side
by side in peace. We must avoid actions that take us
further away from the two-State solution or that have
the potential to further undermine trust, enflame
passions and spark violence. That applies equally to
violence by Palestinian individuals or organizations
targeting Israelis and the disproportionate Israeli
military response and to the ongoing Israeli settlement
policy. We also appeal to powerful sponsor countries to
work for the conditions and environment conducive to
conducting peace negotiations.

Meanwhile, the precarious existence of many
Palestinians, particularly in Gaza, is a humanitarian
and security concern. Failure to address the ongoing
humanitarian needs of the Palestinian refugee
population has the potential to create a breeding ground
for extremism among young people, who would be put
out of school and out of hope. On behalf of the United
Nations, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) is
carrying out vital work, under the principled leadership
of Commissioner-General Krahenbuhl. Undermining
UNRWA now undermines peace and stability in the
Middle East.

Iceland believes that international law and
multilateral institutions, even though not always
perfect, must underpin relations between States
and their peoples. The alternative is that the rule of
might is right, which almost always leads to violence
and conflict. As the Secretary-General said a few days
ago [AT A PRESS CONFERENCE], we need more
dialogue and deeper international cooperation.
