Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for their briefings. I would like to start on a positive note. First, from what has been said so far in the Council, we see someagreement between us. That was expressed earlier this week (see S/PV.8701), when all 15 members agreed to extend the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (resolution 2505 (2020)). The agreement on the situation in Yemen is slightly reminiscent of the one we reached in this organ on Colombia a couple of days ago (see S/PV.8702). I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing. He also struck a positive note and I think we need to recognize that so far it has indeed been possible to isolate Yemen from the escalation in the region. That is very positive. He mentioned the military de-escalation and some political progress in Al-Hudaydah with regard to the prisoner release. Nevertheless, there is no reason for complacency. I was appalled when I heard about the attack on the Red Sea Mills, a site we have been discussing over the past couple of years and which my American colleague also mentioned earlier today in her statement. Those responsible for these kinds of attacks show an incomprehensible degree of cynicism and barbarism. The OCHA Director, my American colleague and the Ambassador of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines all reminded us that we are still facing the largest humanitarian crisis on the globe, with more than 15 million people in need of humanitarian aid. We therefore continue to be concerned. I would like to highlight the comments made by my Tunisian colleague and the Ambassador of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. The lack of respect for international humanitarian law that we have witnessed in Yemen and in other areas is something we all need to be concerned about. Germany has highlighted that point for the past two years while it has been a member of the Security Council. I would like to encourage OCHA and Mr. Griffiths to continue their work and demand that access be granted to humanitarian workers for the purposes of opening up humanitarian corridors and starting mercy flights. People who are severely injured need help and there are hospitals around the world ready to treat them. It is unacceptable to prevent them from flying there. What kind of barbarism is that? With regard to respect for humanitarian aid workers, there are reports that humanitarian aid agencies have been bombed. Prisoner releases continue. We are also very concerned about reports of ever-increasing violence against women and of the repression of women. As we do at almost every meeting, we encourage Mr. Griffiths to insist on the participation of women in political talks. I would like to commend OCHA for all its work. At this stage, I would also like to commend all humanitarian aid workers and non-governmental organizations for continuing to do their very important work in extremely difficult conditions. Let me end by supporting and highlighting Mr. Griffiths' optimism. I hope that he is right when he says that 2020 will bring peace to Yemen. I hope that a political solution is reached so that, as Mr. Griffiths said, we can launch a formal political track. Germany will continue to support Mr. Griffiths and OCHA. We will remain one of the main humanitarian donors. We will also continue to contribute substantially to the Yemen humanitarian response plan. On the political track, we are also ready to support the process by facilitating meetings at various levels.
