Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): Let me express my
delegation's profound gratitude to you, Sir, for convening
this crucial debate. We appreciate this opportunity to
continue to engage the Security Council on matters of
international peace and security. Our appreciation also
goes to the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs for his comprehensive briefing this morning.

At the very outset, we wish to align ourselves with
the statement made by the representative of Zimbabwe
on behalf of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), as well as the one to be delivered
by the representative of Morocco on behalf of the
Africa Group.

We welcome the Council's tradition of discussing
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, in an effort to engage the
international community and to share ideas on how we
can work together to contribute to peace and prosperity
in the Middle East.

My delegation ha and continues to follow with keen
interest the socioeconomic and political developments
in the Middle East, particularly in Syria and Iraq and on
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Of particular concern is
the fact that extremist activities and terrorist attacks
perpetrated against innocent civilian populations in the
region and the world continue unabated.

My delegation will remain steadfast in condemning
all forms of human rights violations, whenever and
wherever they occur. As the custodian of international
peace and security, we urge the Security Council to
work in unison to condemn such violations and bring
the perpetrators book.

The recent bomb attack of 7 January 2015 at the
Police Academy in Sana'a, which killed at least 37 and
injured many more, as well as the terrorist attack in
Lebanon on 10 January, is not only horrific but should
be condemned in the strongest possible terms.

On the situation in Syria, my delegation would
like to express its continued support for the people of
Syria and to call for an end to the humanitarian tragedy
besieging the people of that country. We are particularly
concerned about the plight of the millions of women and
children who have been displaced and are without food,

shelter and medical care. We call on the international
community, as well as on humanitarian organizations
the world over, to respond in kindness and care to the
refugees of Syria.

On the question of the Palestine, Botswana
continues to believe that there is no alternative to the
two-State solution. The importance of the coexistence
of Israel and Palestine living side by side as two
sovereign States cannot be overemphasized. That will
not only be of value to the Israeli and the Palestinian
peoples, but will contribute to the regional stability
and offer new opportunities for the region as a whole.
My delegation believes that the peace process, where
all parties, including the international community, are
involved, could usher in the desired peace and stability
so longed for in the region.

The reality is that violence is not sustainable and
cannot bring about peace. The people of Israel and
the people of Palestine both need sustainable peace
and development if they are to prosper. That can be
attained only if there is opportunity and growth in
an environment of peace in the Middle East. It is my
delegation's beliefthat this should be augmented by both
regional and international support. We furthermore call
on the parties to create an environment of mutual trust
throughout the negotiations in order to safeguard the
integrity of the negotiations, lest they be undermined.

In conclusion, Botswana believes that a stable
and peaceful Middle East is in the broader interests of
the peoples, the region and the world community as a
whole.

