Mr. Haysom: I arrived in Somalia on 3 October
and was well received by prominent officials of the
Federal Government and of the regional states. I have
been impressed with the Government's far-reaching
reform agenda and its commitment to practical
implementation through road maps for delivery in
each relevant sector. Somalia has maintained a positive
trajectory, but continuing political turbulence could
throw it off course.

In December, the International Monetary Fund
completed its first review of the third staff-monitored
programme, noting the satisfactory performance by the
Federal Government. In recognition of the country's
significant progress, the World Bank's 2019-2022
country partnership framework unlocked International
Development Association financing through pre-arrears
clearance grants totalling $80 million to strengthen
basic service delivery, improve financial management
capabilities and restore economic resilience.

Improvements in public financial management
and an expansion of the domestic revenue base, with
a recorded fiscal balance surplus of $8 million in
September, means that 56 per cent of the Federal
Government's $340 million budget for 2019 will be
financed from domestic revenue, with the rest provided
by donors. I want to commend the Office of the Prime
Minister for leading Government efforts to tackle
corruption, including the announcement on 9 December
of the Federal Government's intention to ratify the
United Nations Convention against Corruption.

Turning to political progress, the road map on
inclusive politics covers elections, the constitutional
review, federalism and reconciliation. These are
components essential to Somalia's State-building proj ect.

The draft electoral law has been submitted to the
Cabinet, and amendments from political parties, civil
society and the international community have been
provided. The delay in submitting the draft electoral
law to Parliament will see a key milestone missed
as per the Government's commitment to have the
electoral law adopted by December 2018. This could
have a possible impact on the timelines for the electoral
process. However, the National Independent Electoral
Commission is still making headway with pre-voter
registration preparations, including the recruitment
and training of new staff, the planning of the mapping
of voter registration sites and the establishment and
consolidation of its subnational structure. So far, 35
political parties have been registered.

Technical cooperation has continued on the
constitutional review process, laying the groundwork
for real progress at the national level. The F ederalization
Negotiation Technical Committee has been negotiating
draft political agreements on justice, mineral-resource
sharing, the allocation of powers and fiscal federalism.

Women's meaningful participation in these
decisions is essential. Members ofthe women's caucuses
from both houses of Federal Parliament recently held the
second annual conference for women representatives
of federal and state assemblies to consider the
constitutional review process and preparations for the
national elections.

Despite these positive developments, the stalemate
between the Federal Government and the federal
member states continues to impede concrete progress in
defining the federal model and in building institutions
of State, as well as in the implementation ofthe national
security architecture.

The halt to cooperation between the Federal
Government and the federal member states was
announced by the Council of Interstate Cooperation
on 8 September. After visits to all the regions by
Ambassador Madeira and myself, there have been
encouraging Somali-led initiatives to restore relations.
President Farmajo offered direct dialogue behind
closed doors, and in October Prime Minister Khayre
established a six-member ministerial committee to
work with the Upper House to end the stalemate.

However, the landscape is complicated by the
electoral processes that are currently under way in
several of the member states. Politics is complex in any
nation, but in one that is still establishing its norms and
institutional parameters, and still debating the roles and
responsibilities of its respective governance structures,
there is a risk that complexity might shift to conflict.

We witnessed this during the electoral process in
South-West state. Allegations of interference by the
Federal Government and the violence that erupted
following the arrest of one of the candidates, a former
Al-Shabaab deputy leader, marred the process and does
not bode well for the upcoming electoral processes in
other regions or for the 2020 national elections. This
may also have implications for the likelihood of future
Al-Shabaab defectors who may be considering taking
a political path instead of that of violence. Regrettably,
15 people, including a regional assembly member, were
killed during the violence.

Strains between the executive and the legislature
also came to the surface on 9 December, when members
of the House of the People submitted a motion for
the impeachment of President Farmajo. Completing
the demanding legislative agenda requires continued
cooperation between the executive and legislature.
Discord between the two can seriously hinder Somalia's
progress. I welcome the recent progress made, however,
on the passage of the 2019 budget and the pension law
before Parliament adjourned for recess.

I strongly condemn the mortar attack on our
premises that took place two days ago and the casualties
caused by such use of force. In no country are attacks
against the United Nations acceptable. As the Council is
aware, three of our staff were injured, one seriously but
not critically. It may also be aware that responsibility
for this attack was claimed by Al-Shabaab. I welcome
the Federal Government's condemnation of the attack.

Al-Shabaab remains the biggest source of insecurity
in Somalia. Despite the ongoing operations to degrade
that terrorist group, it still has the capacity to conduct
indiscriminate attacks on Somali citizens and to target
electoral delegates, the Somali security forces and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). As
AMISOM. and the Somali security forces operations
have succeeded in denying Al-Shabaab the possibility
of launching conventional attacks, it now relies on
improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and targeted
assassinations. It is of note that on 9 November,
Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility for a complex attack
against the Sahafi Hotel in Mogadishu initiated by three
vehicle-borne IEDs. More than 50 people, including
seven Al-Shabaab militants, were killed in the attack.

In Mogadishu and Puntland, elements that are
pro-Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham have targeted
business owners using extortion to extract revenue and
carrying out assassinations. It appears that the cause
of conflict between the two extremist groups is now
primarily driven by financial interests. Their focus
is now on extortion of so-called taxes. In addition
to military operations, it is therefore important to
tackle this aspect as well as the infrastructure used by
Al-Shabaab to assemble IEDs.

There has been some progress in building the
institutional capacity of the security sector to tackle
these threats. Biometric registration programmes for
the Somali National Army and the Somali Police Force
are forging ahead. An operational readiness assessment
of the regional forces is under way, and these processes
will, hopefully, assist in the mapping of regional
capabilities ahead of the future integration of these
forces into the national security architecture.

The implementation of the transition plan made
an encouraging start, but has recently slackened.
There will need to be a more comprehensive and
better-coordinated planning process to achieve the
more ambitious transition locations in the timelines
contained in the Somali transition plan. This must be
guided by respect for human rights and appropriate
measures towards stabilization, as agreed in the
transition plan. Overall, the approach to transition
should be conditions-based, with progress in building
effective Somali security institutions as the main factor
setting the pace.

We have continued to support conflict resolution
and conflict prevention efforts in several parts of the
country, in collaboration with other partners. The
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) engaged in shuttle diplomacy between
Puntland and Somaliland to help them de-escalate the
tension in Tukaraq and find a sustainable solution. As a
result of the joint mediation effort, a de facto ceasefire
is holding.

At the regional level, the tripartite agreement
signed between the leaders of Somalia, Ethiopia and
Eritrea on 6 September is an opportunity for Somalia to
strengthen its regional ties and provide further support
to Somalia's economic, political and security progress.
The humanitarian crisis in Somalia remains among
the most complex and long-standing in the world. Armed
conflict and widespread violence, as well as recurrent
climatic shocks, perpetuate high levels of humanitarian
need and protection concerns. While the humanitarian
situation has improved compared to last year, owing
to above-average Gu rains, needs remain high, with
4.2 million people in need of assistance and protection.
Of those who need assistance and protection services,
almost two-thirds are children. Around 1.5 million are
severely food insecure at crisis or emergency levels.
Around 2.6 million people are internally displaced.
The 2019 humanitarian response plan, to be announced
this month, targets 3.4 million people, or 81 per cent of
the 4.2 million people in need of assistance, requiring
$1.1 billion for its implementation.

Respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians in
the context of the conflict remain key for Somalia's
transition and sustainable peace. UNSOM. has
documented 1,384 civilian casualties in 2018, with
Al-Shabaab accounting for 60 per cent of these.
Progress has been made, including in taking steps to
establish institutions that protect human rights, such
as the federal independent national human rights
commission. I encourage the Federal Government to
finalize the commission's foundation.

Somalia has laid the foundations to make
significant progress in 2019. The plans are in place
and the milestones are clear. The management of the
upcoming regional elections in 2019 and the remaining
political processes, particularly the review of the
Constitution, will determine whether Somalia makes
further progress or not. Achieving this will require all
role players to pull in the same direction. Somalia has
set that direction, and I hope that the Council will be
updated on the progress in the year to come.

