The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Dominican Republic.

We thank Ambassador Wronecka for her briefing
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, and for
her initiative to brief us in an open meeting.

With regard to the issue under discussion, my
delegation welcomes the various initiatives in the
peace process in Darfur, such as the signing of the
pre-negotiation agreement between the Government of
the Sudan, the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi
faction and the Justice and Equality Movement in Berlin
on 6 December 2018, as well as the Government's arms
collection campaign, which has achieved a certain
level of security in urban areas. We would also like
to highlight the positive developments in regional
dynamics, mainly with neighbouring countries.

Unfortunately, despite those signs of commitment
by the parties to the conflict, the peace process in the
Sudan faces a number of challenges. We are troubled by
the clashes in the Jebel Marra area, which have resulted
in further displacements, a humanitarian crisis and
human rights abuses. The vulnerability of women and
girls, who continue to be the target of conflict-related
sexual violence, is of great concern.

Meanwhile, it is disturbing that the Government of
the Sudan and the armed groups are still not complying
with the terms of the arms embargo, in clear violation
of paragraph 7 of resolution 1591 (2005), and that the
travel ban and assets freeze are not being implemented.

Finally, we urge the Government and the other
stakeholders in the conflict to step up their efforts to
implement those measures but, above all, to create
conditions for the eradication of the vulnerable
situation of girls and women and for the cessation of
sexual violence and to ensure effective accountability
for the perpetrators of those crimes.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

