Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations Bintou Keita for her introduction of the
special report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/143).
Likewise, we also welcome the presence of the Special
Envoy for South Sudan of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), His Excellency
Mr. Ismail Wais. We thank him for his briefing today
and take this opportunity to express our delegation's
full support for the work he has been doing to make it
possible for dialogue and the negotiation of a political
settlement in South Sudan to succeed.

We would like once again to express our concern
about the difficult security situation, the slow progress
in the process of political dialogue and, above all, the
precarious humanitarian conditions in South Sudan,
all of which compounds an already difficult economic
situation. Against that complicated backdrop, we are
aware that it is very difficult to find an immediate
solution, especially in the light of the deep divisions
between the parties. It is necessary for regional
organizations, the United Nations and the international
community to unify their efforts and work in the same
direction with clear objectives in mind. We in the
Security Council have agreed that the only way out of
this conflict will be through a process of inclusive and
sincere political dialogue among the parties that leads to
compliance with the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.

Accordingly, we welcome IGAD's leadership and
commitment to the people of South Sudan. Despite the
difficulties that lie ahead, IGAD continues to strive to
bring the Government and the opposition groups to the
table for dialogue. It is clear that this kind of process
will not produce positive results until the parties take
their commitments seriously and demonstrate genuine
political will to see them implemented.

We welcome the progress that has been made in the
second phase of the High-level Revitalization Forum
on the peace process in South Sudan. We emphasize
the inclusiveness of the process and encourage the
parties to continue to follow that path. While there
are differences on key issues such as governance and
transitional security arrangements, the parties need to
engage constructively with the process, which we hope
will resume as soon as possible. In the same vein, we call
for compliance with theagreement on the cessation of
hostilities, the protection of civilians and humanitarian
access, which is fundamental to the continuation of the
second phase of the Forum.

Furthermore, the humanitarian situation remains
alarming. The data presented by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) show
us a very difficult reality, in which around 60 per cent
of the population will need humanitarian assistance
in 2018. Millions of refugees and internally displaced
persons face a lack of basic services, food insecurity
and the outbreak of diseases such as cholera, together
with the potential threat of famine in some parts of
the country. We are also concerned about the many
challenges that lie ahead this year. We call on the
international community to cooperate with OCHA
to ensure the provision of humanitarian assistance in
South Sudan.

Similarly, we believe that it is essential that
a good operational environment be provided for
humanitarian workers and the United Nations Mission
in Southern Sudan (UNMISS). We call on Government
and opposition forces to guarantee security for
humanitarian actors throughout the country and allow
for unrestricted access for humanitarian aid. We also
welcome the conclusions of the special report of the
Secretary-General on the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan.

We believe that we must give priority to
strengthening the political process in the country,
support humanitarian access, take measures to prevent
violations of the status of forces agreement, fight
impunity and support the establishment of the Hybrid
Court for South Sudan under the leadership of the
African Union. We also believe that the possibility of
adopting a more efficient model that takes advantage of
the full capabilities of United Nations staff in the field
should be explored. We must also review the mandate
of the Regional Protection Force in order to adapt it to
the current environment.

In conclusion, we would like to express our sincere
thanks to the United Nations team, UNMISS and
humanitarian actors for their dedicated and committed
work in the difficult environment of South Sudan.

