First of all, I thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAM]), for her briefing. The new Iraqi Government has made the holding of early elections one of its top priorities. We welcome all efforts by political actors to ensure that the 6 June elections will be credible, fair, free and inclusive. We take note of the progress made in recent months, in particular the recent signing of the electoral framework by President Salih. We welcome UNAMI's commitment to provide electoral assistance to the Government of Iraq and, in accordance with its mandate, further develop its electoral assistance with the Independent High Electoral Commission. The holding of fair, free and inclusive elections can pave the way towards achieving a more stable and democratic Iraq. In that regard, Belgium once again stresses the importance of the full, active and meaningful participation of women in this context. When Belgium joined the Security Council two years ago, Iraq was already at a crossroads. The political, economic and security challenges remain enormous. There is an urgent need to make tangible progress in those areas. Continued strong political leadership is required. As a State member of the European Union, Belgium remains committed to helping overcome those multiple challenges. First, the Iraqi economy remains highly dependent on oil exports. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has further exacerbated an already disastrous economic situation. We support the Iraqi Government in its efforts to diversify and support economic development, increase private-sector engagement, implement administrative reforms and fight corruption. We welcome the recent adoption of the white paper by the Council of Ministers. Secondly, human rights and fundamental freedoms must be respected at all times. The Government's progress on compensating the victims of the violence committed during the demonstrations that began in October 2019 is a positive step. However, we call on the Government to continue to support the most vulnerable people, including internally displaced persons. All camp closures must be preceded by, and carried out with, sufficient notice and in full consultation with the representatives of the displaced persons and humanitarian agencies. The return of displaced persons should be safe, voluntary, dignified and sustainable. We call on the Iraqi Government to work closely with international partners, including the relevant United Nations agencies. The distribution of humanitarian aid should always be carried out in full compliance with humanitarian principles. Thirdly, my country encourages the parties to implement the Sinjar agreement, which was facilitated by UNAMI. Although many questions remain, this will be an important test for building mutual trust. We call on the parties to capitalize on this momentum to resolve other outstanding issues, including the discussions under way on oil revenues. The Iraqi people deserve a political consensus to resolve the economic impact of COVID-19. Fourthly, we note with concern that, despite the military defeat of Da'esh in Iraq, the group continues to operate as a clandestine network and to carry out attacks. We renew our commitment to combating terrorism as part of the international coalition against Da'esh in collaboration with the Iraqi Government. We are concerned about the continued violence, including the rocket attacks on the Green Zone last week, for which the Ashab Al-Kahf militia claimed responsibility. We encourage the Iraqi Government to continue security sector reform. Armed non-State actors should not be allowed to operate outside of State control. Furthermore, as Iraq opens up to neighbouring countries, with a view to strengthening bilateral and regional relations, the fundamental principles of respect for sovereignty, equality and territorial integrity must be respected. Lastly, Iraqi children deserve a future. They deserve to live in security and prosperity. My country once again underscores its support for the Government of Iraq in addressing its many remaining challenges.
