Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his very enlightening
briefing. I also welcome the highly appreciated presence
of Ambassador Konfourou in the Council, who will
deliver a statement on behalf of Mali.

I wish to begin my statement by conveying our
wishes for a speedy recovery to the five Chadian soldiers
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) who were
seriously injured when their vehicle passed over an
explosive device yesterday in northern Mali. I also pay
tribute to the memory of Corporal Abdelatif Rafik, who
died under accidental circumstances on Wednesday in
Gao during Operation Barkhane. His death brings the
number of French soldiers who have died in Mali since
2013 to 23. Finally, our thoughts go out to all the Malian
and regional soldiers and MINUSMA Blue Helmets
who have lost their lives in recent months while
combating terrorism and promoting peace in Mali and
the Sahel. Their sacrifice must be heeded by all of us in
our reflections on our obligations.

The election that led to the reappointment of
President Keita was an important moment in Malian
democratic life. I wish to commend the decisive role
played by MINUSMA, both through its good offices
and its logistical and security support, to ensure that
the election was conducted in satisfactory conditions,
as has been acknowledged by the Council and all
observers present on the ground. It is now essential that
all Malian political actors move forward, recognizing
the results of the election and working together for
the stabilization of the country. The announced
postponement of the legislative elections for a few
months, following a favourable opinion on the part of
the Constitutional Court, is also welcome. That should
make it possible to implement, in the meantime, several
institutional reforms that will have a direct impact on
those elections.

The implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali must remain the top priority. The
signing of the pact for peace, just a few months after the
adoption of resolution 2423 (2018), is good news. That
document notes, in particular, the commitment of all
Malian parties and international actors to the swift, full
and inclusive work of implementing the agreement. It is
now up to us to support that dynamic by mobilizing all
of the tools available to the international community to
encourage the parties to move forward. In particular,
we hope that the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali will continue
its work in the coming weeks by visiting the country
itself, which will enable it to make contact with all of
the Malian parties, as well as with various international
mediation actors. In that regard, I would like to
commend the work carried out by Sweden as Chair of
that Committee.

But let us make no mistake - there is still much
progress that needs to be made, and urgently. Resolution
2423 (2018) provides a clear framework in that regard
by defining a list of priority measures resulting
from the road map agreed by the Malian parties. Its
implementation will be examined in a report of the
Secretary-General to be submitted every six months
once the Malian President assumes power. That period
has already begun and merits our full engagement. It is
necessary that we act now.

The past few weeks have witnessed the start of a
positive dynamic that we must welcome, encourage
and strengthen. I am referring in particular to the
announcement of the upcoming launch of an accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process for Operational Coordination Mechanism
combatants, the ongoing finalization of the northern
regions development zone, the granting of greater
roles for women within the new Government, and the
establishment of a weekly consultation framework
among the various Malian parties under the leadership
of Minister Lassine Bouare'. Those are all indications
that illustrate for us the will of the parties to step up
the pace of the implementation of the Agreement.
Continued progress is clearly needed, especially with
regard to the institutional component and the areas
of justice and reconciliation. Once again, however, a
positive dynamic has been initiated, and it is essential
that it bear results in the coming weeks.

As the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations recalled earlier, the continuing deterioration
of the situation in the centre of the country continues to
be of great concern to us. The attacks of recent days
illustrate the gravity of the threat weighing on that
part of Mali and, more generally, the Liptako-Gourma
region. We commend the actions taken by the Prime
Minister in addressing that issue and his recent visits to
the region to encourage the return of a State presence
and authority in the centre. It is imperative that the
international community fully support those efforts
so that the Malian State has the necessary additional
resources at its disposal to regain control of the centre.

The redeployment of the Malian armed forces in
that area is one part of the equation. Tools have been
put in place in MINUSMA's mandate to support that
undertaking since June 2017. It is important that
the Malian authorities and the Mission make better
use of them. We also expect MINUSMA to continue
to implement the new directions in its mandate with
regard to the protection of civilians with the means
at their disposal, while avoiding compromising the
strategic priority of supporting the implementation of
the agreement.

France emphasizes the fact that the stabilization
of Mali and the region can be achieved only through
the complementary and coordinated action of the
various security forces on the ground, which all share
the same goal of supporting the implementation of
the Agreement. The support provided by Operation
Barkhane to the Malian armed forces within the
framework of a counter-terrorist operation within
the three-border region this week exemplifies the
advantages of such an approach based on partnerships.
On another level, the same applies to the operational and
logistical support regularly shared among the various
actors. Resolution 2423 (2018) sent a clear message in
that regard, according to which each entity must play its
individual role within the limits of its mandate, but all
must coordinate and support one another on the ground
in the prevailing difficult circumstances. Let us not
forget that the enemies of peace have not waited for us
to begin cooperating among themselves.

As we collectively expressed in the adoption of
resolution 2423 (2018), the urgency now lies with
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation. The six-month period for implementing
the priority measures identified by the Council has
begun. The Malian parties must now concentrate all
their energies to that end. France will issue a press
statement to that effect at the end of this meeting.

