Mr. Niyonzima (Burundi): The Burundi
Government will never tire of expressing its gratitude
to the Security Council and the international
community for the multiform support that they gave to
our people during critical moments of the fratricidal
war. Indeed, without their invaluable assistance, we
simply would not have been able to put our country
back on the rails of peace and security.

The Burundi people therefore understand better
than many the meaning of peace and security. For the
Government of Burundi, there is no other way to show
our thankfulness than by sending our troops wherever
there is a threat to peace and security on this planet.
The Burundi Government also wants to thank the
African Union Commission for the wise and
constructive guidance to our countries.

While we watched the whole world standing up
to fight piracy in the international waters along the
coastal part of the Horn of Africa, the Somali unrest
has somehow been perceived, for quite some time, as a
Burundian and a Ugandan issue. However, the recent
visit of the President of the General Assembly and the
Secretary-General to Somalia was a political message,
sent not only to the region but also to the whole world,
that peace in Somalia is a concern of the international
community. We therefore commend the initiative of
other regional countries to get on board and join our
forces in combating the rule of a dangerous
fundamentalism.

The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) is not a peacekeeping mission. A
peacekeeping mission is normally deployed upon
agreement between belligerents. Instead, AMISOM. is a
target. It is considered by some Somalis as an
occupation force. Today, as in the past, a military
commitment in Mogadishu has never been a
recreational tour. It is therefore not a secret if I say that
Burundi has paid clearly in terms of human sacrifice.

That situation triggered some internal fears and,
as part of a democracy, some political activists tried to
politically exploit the sad Burundian ongoing
experience in Somalia. But let me say it again - for
the Burundi Government, nothing will be strong
enough to divert or dilute our dedication to peace and
stability, not only in Somalia but also wherever our
contribution is needed.
The challenging situation in Somalia requires
more in terms of troops, logistics and, most important,
dedication. The Burundi Government supports the
expansion of AMISON, and remains flexible as to the
decisions of the African Union and the Security
Council.

In conclusion, I would like to thank all for paying
tribute to Burundi for its effort and commitment in
Somalia.
