Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I would
like first of all to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Modibo Toure, and the
Permanent Representative of Brazil, Mr. Mauro Vieira,
who spoke in his capacity as Chair of the Guinea-
Bissau country configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), for their briefings.

For years now, Guinea-Bissau has been marked by
a protracted political crisis. In a region characterized by
increasing attention to and respect for the rule of law,
human rights and democracy, Guinea-Bissau continues
to be out of step, as indicated once again in the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/110). In the
light of this, the Kingdom of the Netherlands wishes to
underscore the following three points with regard to the
situation in Guinea-Bissau.

First, the Conakry Agreement of 2016 and the six-
point road map should remain the basis for a political
solution in Guinea-Bissau, and its provisions should
honoured. Secondly, the diplomatic and political efforts
of the region through the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) deserve the steadfast
support of the United Nations, and particularly the
Security Council. Thirdly, the role of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS) in the country at this critical juncture,
with elections around the corner, is as important as ever.
It is therefore imperative that its mandate be extended.

First, with respect to the Conakry Agreement,
almost a year and half has passed since the Agreement
was concluded. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
reiterates the centrality of the Agreement in peacefully
resolving the current crisis, and urges the parties
to abide by its contents. It is clear that an important
roadblock with regard to its implementation is the
appointment of a consensus Prime Minister. The need
for this appointment has become increasingly urgent.
With parliamentary elections on the horizon, it is
imperative that these elections be held in a timely,
transparent and inclusive manner.

Secondly, with regard to support for ECOWAS,
while the past six months were mainly characterized by
the same intransigence as in previous reporting periods,
concerted action and increased pressure on the part of
the region, and ECOWAS in particular, could actually
lead, when given the necessary support, to tangible
progress in resolving the Bissau-Guinean crisis.
Yesterday's decision of the African Union Peace and
Security Council to support the efforts of ECOWAS is
a case in point. The Secretary-General rightly observes
in his report that the continuing efforts of ECOWAS to
resolve the crisis are commendable.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to
clearly point out that it supports and endorses ECOWAS
mediation efforts and its imposition of sanctions. We
welcome the ECOWAS unified action and believe that
the presence ofthe ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau
is vital to the stability of Guinea-Bissau. ECOWAS has
shown before that, when united, it has the ability to
act as the region's power broker, for example as it did
in The Gambia. Like it did then, the Council should
firmly support ECOWAS in taking up this role and
responsibility, as it should in the case of any other
regional organization in Africa that takes the lead in
maintaining peace and security in the region.

My third point is that ECOWAS cannot do this alone.
We commend the African Union and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries for their collaboration
with the European Union and for the support they have
brought and the constructive role they play.

From the report of the Secretary General, it is
evident that UNIOGBIS plays a vital role in Guinea-
Bissau. With legislative elections scheduled for 2018 and
presidential elections in 2019, the role of UNIOGBIS is
more crucial than ever. We therefore call for a renewal
of its mandate for no less than one year, in addition
to allowing for longer-term planning, including setting
more concrete priorities for the mission and making
adaptations to meet specific needs. UNIOGBIS's
convening power in Bissau remains essential, as will
be its role in ensuring peaceful, free and democratic
elections in Guinea-Bissau, as well as a smooth post-
election process. Renewing the mandate for less than
12 months would send the wrong signal.

In conclusion, sustained pressure to implement the
Conakry Agreement, the maximum possible support
to ECOWAS's ongoing efforts and measures and
UNIOGBIS's continued support to the political process
will be crucial factors in ending the deadlock in Guinea-
Bissau, particularly in the light of the constitutionally
mandated elections.

