Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Permanent Representative of
Japan, Mr. Yukio Takasu, for his briefing on the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), for his regular 90-day report, and for the
work he has undertaken.

We note that, during the reporting period, the
Committee continued to act in strict compliance with
its mandate. We expect the Committee' programme of
work, which we will have to adopt in the near future,
will promote the effective implementation of tasks in
that area.

In the light of the Council's adoption of
resolution 1929 (2010), of even greater relevance is the
further resolute work of the Committee in the spirit and
letter of relevant Security Council resolutions to
resolve the Iranian nuclear problem through
exclusively political and diplomatic means. Of
principal importance is that all States Members of the
United Nations be guided by a similar approach. Strict
compliance with restrictive measures under the
Council's resolutions requires Member States to refrain
from taking additional restrictive steps not covered
under those resolutions, especially those of an
extraterritorial nature.

We are concerned in that respect by the
unacceptable prevention by third-party States of the
delivery of supplies to Iran under the pretext that it is
not in compliance with the domestic norms of those
States. Such steps are not in line with the resolutions of
the Security Council.

Concerning the situation with respect to the
Iranian nuclear programme, our position remains
unchanged. We have consistently advocated the
resolution of problems arising as a result of that
programme through dialogue and cooperation with the
Iranian side. The Russian approach has always been
and always will be to engage in discussions to find
diplomatic solutions to involving Tehran in joint work
in close cooperation with the International Atomic
Energy Agency.

We call on Iran to take the steps necessary to
rapidly resuming dialogue with the five plus one group
with a view to resolving the situation concerning the
Iranian nuclear programme through negotiations. We
are convinced that such a settlement would be in
keeping with the interests of the entire international
community and of Iran itself.

