Mr. Valle (Brazil): The delegation of Brazil
wishes to express its appreciation to you, Mr.
President, for the initiative of convening this debate on
the issue of small arms. We also thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs for
presenting the Secretary-General's report (S/2005/69)
on ways and means in which the Security Council can
contribute to dealing with the question of the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons, in interaction
with the General Assembly.

The issue of the uncontrolled traffic in such
weapons has become a matter of great concern for the
international community due to the tragic
consequences of arms availability in terms of making
local conflicts more lethal and of generating a sense of
insecurity in civil society.

The subject of small arms, whether in the context
of disarmament, national security and public security
or from a humanitarian perspective, must be
permanently discussed in all relevant forums. The
solution to this problem requires the commitment of all
States and the assistance of civil society, along with the
input of international, regional and subregional
organizations.

The Secretary-General's report recognizes some
progress made on his recommendations within the
competence of the General Assembly since our last
debate on small arms, at our 4896th meeting, one year
ago. The Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade and Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects is the reference that
regulates United Nations activities in this field. The
delegation of Brazil expects that the consideration of
its implementation at the Second Biennial Meeting of
States, to be held next July, will contribute to the good
results of the 2006 review conference on the
Programme of Action.

For that reason, the step taken by the General
Assembly towards constituting an Open-Ended
Working Group to negotiate an international instrument
to enable States to identify and trace, in a timely and
reliable manner, illicit small arms and light weapons is
crucial. The Working Group has put great efforts into
its endeavour. We expect that the document to be
produced at its third session will be legally binding and
responsive to the urgent necessity of interrupting the
illegal flow of such weapons. Our next step should be
to consider how to improve international cooperation
in preventing, combating and eradicating illicit
brokering in small arms and light weapons.

The delegation of Brazil is very pleased with the
reaction of Member States to the recommendation in
favour of greater participation in the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms and in the United
Nations standardized instrument for reporting military
expenditures. This enhanced participation continues to
be required, as it generates transparency and stronger
confidence among countries.

There have been important developments at the
regional and subregional levels as well. Brazil strongly
supports all the efforts that have been deployed by the
Organization of American States to curb the illicit
traffic in small arms and light weapons, such as those
related to the implementation of the Inter-American
Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives, and
Other Related Materials, and of the model regulations
of the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control
Commission.

Unfortunately, despite the national efforts made,
there are still loopholes in the regime governing the
legal transfer of arms that allow for the diversion of
arms to the illegal market. Brazil stands as an example
of such efforts, having adapted its legislation to current
necessities. Last year, President Lula sanctioned the
innovative Disarmament Statute, which restricts the
bearing, possession and commerce of arms, in addition
to criminalizing international arms trafficking. Brazil
has also adopted a national arms system as a measure
of preventive control. Aside from the strengthening of
legislative measures, we also regularly exchange
information with our neighbours and have established
border procedures. With its partners in MERCOSUR,
Brazil is developing a network of activities that are
progressively strengthening cooperation among its
members. However, despite all these national,
subregional and regional initiatives, we still have not
solved the problem. With reference to the
recommendations of the Secretary-General that fall
within the Security Council's purview, our delegation
would like to highlight the need for a comprehensive
approach to the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants. We fully support
the Secretary-General's concern with the social and
economic aspects of post-conflict situations. It is
crucial for the accomplishment of a peacekeeping
operation's mission that provision be made for
technical, financial and logistical support for the
reintegration phase.

Much more remains to be done. May this broad
exchange of opinions constitute further evidence that
all United Nations Members are renewing their
commitment to work together and to contribute to our
common efforts towards eradicating the illegal flow of
small arms.

Finally, we join members in thanking the
delegation of Japan, through Ms. Kawaguchi, for the
preparation and presentation of the draft presidential
statement.

