Mr. Dausa Cespedes (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me to express sincere congratulations to the
President on behalf of my delegation for convening this
meeting and for the interest Canada, Minister Axworthy and
you yourself, Mr. President, have placed on the issue
sanctions. I also wish to congratulate you, sir, for the work
you have done to date as President of the Security Council
for the month of April.

In accordance with the spirit of the Charter, the
imposition of sanctions constitutes an extreme measure to
be considered only when there is a real threat to
international peace and security, when all the means
foreseen under Chapter VI of the Charter for a peaceful
solution of disputes have been exhausted and after a careful
assessment of the short- and long-term economic, social and
humanitarian impact of those sanctions. However, we all
know this has not always been the case.

In the Cuban delegation's view, in order for sanctions
established by the United Nations to become an effective
and just mechanism that adheres strictly to the provisions
of the Charter, comprehensive reform of the Security
Council is needed. Therefore, in our judgment, the issue of
the implementation of sanctions is inextricably linked to the
reform of the Council's working methods and the expansion
of its membership.

Pursuant to what is set out in the Charter of the United
Nations, the Council acts on behalf of all Members States
of the Organization. This means that the imposition of
sanctions by the Council against a Member State ought to
be a collective decision, or at least have the understanding
and approval of the collective will of the rest of the
Member States that the Council represents.

In this sense, the imposition and implementation of
sanctions cannot constitute a second privilege in addition to
the power of the veto. It cannot represent an exclusive right
of a select club of countries, nor a coercive instrument in
the hands of a few Security Council members. My
delegation believes that from this stems the need to
democratize the decision-making processes of the Council
and to guarantee that its decisions really respond to the
collective will of the Organization.

Unfortunately, in spite of being an Organization with
188 Member States, in practice decisions concerning to
whom, how and when sanctions are applied depend
almost exclusively on the arrangements made by the five
countries having the veto power. It is precisely this fact
that has made it possible for some permanent members of
the Security Council to plainly manipulate the sanction
regimes according to their geopolitical and hegemonic
interests, including the well-known cases of Libya -
whose sanctions have not been permanently lifted
although it is in full compliance with Council
resolutions - and of Iraq, whose children continue to die
as a result of sanctions in spite of the acknowledged
progress that has been achieved.

It is not surprising, since the Security Council is an
organ where developing countries are totally under-
represented, that the 14 sanctions regimes hitherto
implemented by the Council have been against countries
of the developing world, without exception. Particularly
illustrative is the fact that nearly 70 per cent of the
sanctions regimes currently in force are concentrated in
African countries.

Can anybody seriously argue that no developed
country has ever threatened international peace and
security in such a way as to justify the implementation of
sanctions?

Did not the bombings that the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization carried out for 79 days, less than a year ago
in Kosovo, in flagrant violation of the Charter and in
gross disregard of this Council, justify the immediate
implementation of sanctions against the sponsors of such
actions? It is obvious why the Council was totally
incapacitated, unable to take action to sanction those who,
with total impunity, breached the peace and in effect
broke the mechanism of collective security derived from
the Second World War.

This same Council cannot act or take any measure
against a country that maintains a genocidal regime of
unilateral sanctions against Cuba, violating the principles
of the Charter and the most elemental norms of
international law. The economic, financial and
commercial blockade by the United States against Cuba
is maintained not only outside the framework of the
United Nations, but also in spite of being condemned for

 

seven consecutive years by this Organization's General
Assembly.

In Geneva, the United States and its accomplices and
lackeys devote so much rhetoric, so much hypocrisy to the
issue of human rights and indulge in the dirtiest
manipulations with regard to the
issue, while the United States blockade against Cuba
constitutes a gross and flagrant violation of the Cuban
people's human rights. Eleven million people see their
fundamental rights to life violated just because they want to
be free, only because they rejected the imperial dictate
more than 40 years ago.

To guarantee that sanctions can act as a just and
effective mechanism would also require the establishment
of a genuine dynamic interrelationship between the Security
Council and the General Assembly, pursuant to the
provisions of the Charter. The functions assigned to the
Assembly in matters of peace and security ought to be
urgently strengthened, even more so as the reform of the
Security Council is still a goal to be met.

Only once a year the General Assembly receives from
the Security Council, in the form of faits accomplis, scant
information of little use on the work of the Council in the
area of sanctions. We strongly feel that the General
Assembly should be given the chance to participate actively
in the process of decision-making on the possible
implementation of sanctions against a Member State and,
later, on the follow-up to that implementation.

This could be accomplished through the consideration
of special reports that the Council should submit to the
Assembly in this connection. Unfortunately, what is
established in Articles 15 and 24 of the Charter continues
to be implemented selectively, and it would seem that there
is no issue in the Security Council's opinion that would
warrant submitting special reports.
We reaffirm once more our total rejection of the
imposition of blockades whose consequences never achieve
their goals, only taking a toll on and damaging peoples, in
particular the most vulnerable sectors.

Sanctions regimes must have clear-cut objectives and
must be immediately lifted when such objectives have been
met. We also think that any attempt to use sanctions to
totally change or modify a country's political or legal order
or to resolve international disputes is illegal and in violation
of international law.

Every sanctions regime must include specific and
appropriate measures to make sure that the affected
population has the necessary humanitarian assistance and
is not deprived of the rights to life, food and health.

Sanctions regimes must be subject to periodic
reviews and be adjusted in accordance with the
humanitarian situation in the sanctioned State. In addition,
substantial modifications are required in the working
methods of the sanctions committees of the Security
Council, presently characterized by the same distortions
seen today in the decisions and procedures of the Security
Council, including the lack of transparency.

The fact that we advocate a comprehensive reform
of the Security Council and the re-establishment of the
balance of functions between this organ and the General
Assembly as basic prerequisites for the sanctions regimes
to function in accordance with what is envisaged in the
Charter cannot be construed as an invitation to stand idly
by in the present situation. On the contrary.

The Council must immediately listen to Member
States' demands concerning the need to draft clear-cut and
concrete criteria for the imposition, implementation and
lifting of sanctions.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
Millennium Assembly mentions instances of some
countries that have allegedly worked in the interest of
making sanctions humane. However, it is also important
to recall that, for various years the countries of the Non-
Aligned Movement - which, by the way, are the
majority in this Organization - have reiterated a wide-
ranging set of proposals on the implementation of
sanctions by the United Nations, and these have been
included in many documents and statements.

We sincerely hope that those proposals are duly
taken into account in all future discussions on the issue of
sanctions, including in the informal working group to be
established today by the Security Council.
