Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving my
delegation this opportunity to participate on this open
debate on threats that terrorist acts pose to international
peace and security.

We fully subscribe to the contents of the
statement made by the representative of Slovenia
speaking on behalf of the European Union.

First I would like to reiterate the firm
commitment of Spain in the fight against all forms of
terrorism, whatever may be the motivation, and our
wish that this struggle be an ongoing priority on the
agenda of the international community and thus of the
United Nations.

Terrorism is a global problem that can be
effectively addressed only if we act in a decisive and
coordinated manner. To that end, my Government is
convinced that multilateral action is an indispensable
approach for dealing with terrorist barbarity and wishes
to emphasize again the central role that the United
Nations should play in order to ensure legitimacy for
the common efforts undertaken by its Member States
and by international organizations, always in strict
compliance with their obligations under international
law.

The work accomplished by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and its Executive Directorate over
the last few years has been particularly relevant in
serving to promote and monitor compliance with
Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2004). Four years have gone by since the
establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), and now it is time to
assess the progress that has been made by the
Executive Directorate in fulfilling its mandate. Spain
does this with particular satisfaction, as it was one of
the first driving forces in its development during its
term on the Security Council in 2003 and 2004, and
because it chaired the CTC. Also, the first Executive
Director of CTED, Mr. Javier Ruperez, was a Spaniard.

Since then Spain has continued to actively
support CTED and remains committed to the
development of its objectives. That commitment is
manifested in the technical assistance that we have
provided to various regions of the world and in various
areas of activities such as legislative development and
the fight against terrorism and its sources of financing,
and in areas such as border control or the work carried
out by police and security forces. Moreover, Spain has
cooperated in the financing of activities such as the
CTC's fifth special meeting on the prevention of
terrorist movements and effective border control,
which was organized by CTED with various
international, regional and subregional organizations in
Nairobi in October 2007.

We appreciate the recommendations made earlier
by the Executive Director of CTED, Mr. Smith, aimed
at modifying the Directorate's organizational plan,
which proposes to update the scope of its functions,
improve its tools, reform its working methodology and
adapt its operational structure to the new needs and
challenges that it faces. The presentation of this new
organizational plan is a step forward and deserves our
acknowledgement.

Spain welcomes the adoption of the revised
organizational plan by the CTC under the skilled
chairmanship of Croatia. We also approve the
extension of the mandate of CTED by the Security
Council.

We consider it very important that CTED should
be able to continue to develop its work of assisting the
CTC in fulfilling its mandate and to continue its efforts
to strengthen its role as a facilitator of technical
assistance between donor and recipient countries, to
promote dialogue with Member States, intensify
cooperation with international organizations, improve
information on its work and step up cooperation with
other specialized committees of the Security Council as
well as with other United Nations bodies.
In September 2006, the General Assembly
adopted by consensus the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and its Plan of Action
(General Assembly resolution 60/288). For the
implementation of this Strategy and Plan, an
implementation team was put into place to coordinate
the 24 units involved in this task within the United
Nations system and beyond. Among the new challenges
that CTED identified was the need to ensure its active
participation in the work of this implementation task
force, thus contributing towards coordinated and
cohesive action within the United Nations. A year and
a half has gone by now since the adoption of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and efforts should
indeed be redoubled in order to ensure its effective
implementation. In order to make effective progress
towards that goal, it is crucial that we enhance and
increase coordination and collaboration between the
General Assembly and the Security Council in all areas
pertaining to the fight against terrorism. This is the
challenge that we all must face and where we must
spare no efforts.

