Ms. Rice (United States of America): Somalia has
made significant progress in recent months. Among
Somalis and the international community alike,
pervasive despair has turned to cautious optimism
as Somalia enters a historic new phase of national
development.

First and foremost, I congratulate the Somali
people and applaud their hard work and profound
sacrifice. Still, success has been born of partnership.
The African Union, the United Nations and the
international community have joined with the Somali
people to achieve the significant gains we have seen
of late, and we must renew our shared commitment to
ensure that progress continues.

The end of Somalia's transitional period marks
a new era in governance. We are encouraged by the
results of the road map process, including a provisional
Constitution, the election of a new President and the
appointment of a Prime Minister-designate. Those
promising developments have come through Somali-led
efforts and are nothing short of remarkable.

Addressing the Secretary-General's mini-summit
on Somalia last month, President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud outlined his vision for inclusive, broad-
based governing institutions in Somalia. We welcome
that vision and the initial but important steps that
President Hassan Sheikh has taken to bring it about,
including the appointment of Prime Minister-designate
Saaid. We hope that the Prime Minister-designate will
work closely and collaboratively with President Hassan
Sheikh and the Parliament to improve governance and
security in Somalia through inclusive, transparent and
representative processes and institutions. Somalia's
long-term stability and development demand it.

As the United States and other international
partners help build the capacity of Somali institutions,
the new Somali leadership must take urgent steps to
tackle corruption. The mini-summit laid a foundation
for coordinating the efforts of the international
community, and I hope that both here in New York
and in Mogadishu we will be able to continue that
collaboration.

The security situation has improved dramatically in
the last year, but Somalia would not be where it is today
without the contributions of the Somali security forces,
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
their strategic allies in the region. Their efforts have
made Somalia's transition possible, and it has not been
without cost. I would like to recognize the sacrifices
made by the Somali National Security Forces and
AMISOM. forces, including those killed and wounded
in the line of duty while protecting President Hassan
Sheikh in the first days of his presidency.

The United States has been a leading donor for
efforts to improve security in Somalia. We have
contributed more than $131 million to build the capacity
of the Somali security sector. We have also provided
more than $429 million, in addition to our share of
assessed expenses for the United Nations Support
Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia,
which amount to $225 million to date, towards training,
equipment and logistics support to AMISOM. troop-
contributing countries. We welcome all new partners
in this endeavour.

Despite the military successes and security
improvements, Al-Shabaab remains a threat to Somali
security, as demonstrated by the terrorist attacks
in Mogadishu on 21 and 22 September. We need to
maintain focus on improving the security situation
in Somalia and continue to reinforce AMISOM. and
Somalia's capacity to root out Al-Shabaab.

We encourage all Member States to contribute
to building the capacity of Somalia to provide for its
own security. We especially urge new donors to assist
the Somali National Security Forces with equipment,
salaries, infrastructure, logistical support and support
for regional training efforts.

The United States also welcomes the United Nations
strategic review of its engagement in Somalia as well
as the African Union strategic review of AMISOM
operations. Now is the right time to take stock and
consider how the United Nations and AMISOM. can
adapt to support Somalia in its post-transition phase. It
is more important than ever that the Somalis themselves
participate in this process, so that it supports their
vision for the future Somalia.
While efforts by Somali forces and AMISOM. to
degrade Al-Shabaab remain essential, creating the
conditions for effective and legitimate governance is
the foundation of sustainable security for the Somali
people. National and local Somali leaders must provide
timely and visible benefits to Somalis in recently
liberated areas. Establishing police forces and courts,
increasing access to food and water, health care and
education, and providing economic opportunity are
what will earn the respect of the Somali people for their
leaders and their Government. That is also what will
lead to stability.

We recognize that former combatants defecting
from Al-Shabaab will need to be reintegrated into
local communities. We urge further progress under the
national stabilization plan to cement military gains and
to lay a foundation for long-term reconstruction and
economic development.

Meanwhile, we cannot forget the humanitarian
crisis that continues to afflict Somalia and neighbouring
countries. Inside Somalia, more than 2 million Somalis
are facing an acute food security crisis, and 1.3 million
remain internally displaced. In 2012 alone, there have
been more than 60,000 new refugee arrivals, bringing
the total number of Somali refugees in the Horn of
Africa to more than 1 million.

The United States has contributed more than
$1.2 billion in humanitarian assistance to the region
since 2011. We must sustain our humanitarian response,
and we urge all Member States to strongly support
the $1.16 billion United Nations consolidated appeal
for Somalia and to coordinate closely with the United
Nations to ensure a coherent, effective and efficient
response.

While Somalia's journey has been difficult, and
there were many disappointments along the way, the
completion ofthe transition was a real success, inspiring
hope among Somalis for the first time in many years.
We encourage the Somali people and leaders, with the
support of the international community, to build on
this momentum, as there is much more to do. Many
challenges lie on the road ahead.

Let me reiterate our strong support for AMISOM
and the United Nations efforts in Somalia, and express
our continuing commitment to supporting the people
of Somalia, so as to ensure that the next phase of their
national development is indeed a success.

