Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): If I can paraphrase
Ambassador Hume's last comment, I will just make a
short statement today because you, Sir, do not have
time for me to make a long one.

It is good to have you here, Mr. Minister, and it is
good to see the truly personal interest that you have
taken during the last month, both in the work of the
Council itself and in the Colombian presidency. We
thank you for that, and we thank you also for the work
that has been put in to the presidency by the Colombian
delegation, which, as I said to you last night, has been
an extremely competent, professional and inspired
operation. I think there are some lessons we can all
learn from you. One of them is the continued attention
that the Colombian team has given to time
management. This is something that Ambassador
Greenstock has been very concerned that the Council
try to do: to improve the way in which it allocates its
time - which, inevitably, is limited. I think we must
keep up the effort to make sure that we do things as
efficiently, as effectively and as quickly as we can-
consistent with getting a good result.
I think it is entirely reasonable that if there are
procedural issues that need to be addressed, or
problems that are perceived, then the informal working
group on documentation and other procedural questions
should be asked to look at them. But I would say
only- as I said yesterday, during our session in the
room next door - that it is only fair to our experts on
that working group that we ensure that, before we ask
them to set off on a particular journey, they are clear
about exactly the problem they have to solve. I hope
that next month the French presidency will be able to
play a facilitating role in clarifying what needs to be
done, by whom and when.

I would also like to join others in saying that I
think these wrap-up discussions have been useful and
are useful. I think that we learn from what we do, and
occasions such as this are quite useful to that process.
But I would just caution against us and those who are
sitting on the red seats, as Ambassador Hume put it,
thinking that everything is dreadful simply because we
are engaging to a degree in a little exercise in self-
examination. I think that in quite properly drawing the
lessons from wrap-up meetings of this sort, we must
also bear in mind what the Council has done, as well as
what it might not have done or is not doing. So I would
hope that we and the wider membership will look at
what we do in various wrap-up meetings from that
perspective. I think it is quite important both for
ourselves and for the standing of the Council in the
United Nations.
Let me address just a very few specific points. I
appreciate Ambassador Wang's reference to
Afghanistan. It is a point that has been picked by
others, too. That was an important focus, I thought, and
one important outcome of it was that the Council
indicated that it was looking forward to receiving in
October ideas from the Secretary-General on a
comprehensive approach to Afghanistan, and that the
Council would revert to them shortly afterwards. This
is a very important issue, and it is certainly our hope
that the Council will be able to take some fairly
definitive action on Afghanistan as soon as we
reasonably can, later in the autumn.

This brings me to a point that Ambassador
Lavrov raised about the Council's prerogatives vis-a-
vis itself and vis-a-vis the other organs of the United
Nations. I would like to say here and now that as far
my delegation is concerned we have no intention of
working for a creeping extension of the Council's
jurisdiction over other people's business. But as we
move on through the list of the various items on our
agenda it is clear that many of them are
multidimensional; many of them have facets that are
not the Council's traditional business, but that need to
be addressed if those issues are going to be dealt with
properly. Particularly as regards Afghanistan- not
least since the Secretary-General himself has indicated
that he believes the Council should be in the lead - I
think it is incumbent on us to pick up that particular
baton and run with it as the Secretary-General has
asked.

I would also like to echo Mr. Kasse's point,
which has been picked up by Ambassador Doutriaux
and others, about the need for us to make sure we keep
our relations with the troop-contributors in good order.
As I have said in the consultation room, I believe it is
most important that at this particular stage in the
proceedings we make sure that resolution 1353 (2001)
is implemented fully and conscientiously. I know from
what Ambassador Doutriaux has said that the French
presidency - and I am sure the Irish presidency
following it - will have that dimension fully in mind
this autumn as we work our way through the discussion
of various peacekeeping operations.

Finally, as regards groups of friends, I only want
to echo briefly what Ambassador Doutriaux said in
response to Ambassador Ward's comment. We believe
that groups of friends have a very useful role; they
provide a way of doing what it is that we all have really
been talking about under the larger heading of
transparency, that is, involving delegations with a real
interest in a subject a little more closely in the work of
the Council. But equally - again, as I made clear
yesterday - the members of groups of friends have a
responsibility to behave correctly, responsively and
openly with respect to Council members themselves. I
do not want to enter into the substance of all this now.
This is a topic that has been on our agenda for many
months. But I think it was worth just saying these few
sentences.

And with that, Mr. Minister, thank you again.
Thank you for the presidency and thank you for the
coffee.

