Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix, Commissioner Smai'l Chergui and
Executive Director Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka for their
respective briefings.

The African Union-United Nations joint mission
to South Sudan, which took place at the beginning of
October, could not have been more timely. It provided
an opportunity to express support for the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan and to shed light on the
remaining challenges that need to be addressed as a
matter of urgency.

The inclusion of women in the implementation of
the revitalized Agreement needs particular attention.
We are encouraged by the expressed commitment of
the parties to the fight against sexual and gender-based
violence. The perpetrators of that crime should be held
to account as a matter of urgency. We also have no
doubt that the provisions of the revitalized Agreement,
which stipulate the fair participation of women in the
executive as well as other branches of the Government,
will be implemented faithfully.

It is opportune that this meeting is taking place
following today's extraordinary session of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
Council of Ministers in Addis Ababa to discuss the
situation in South Sudan. The implementation of the
revitalized Agreement on the Resolution ofthe Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan remains the only viable
option to ensure lasting peace in South Sudan and
address the current political, social, economic and
security challenges facing the country. We understand
the scepticism about the implementation of the
revitalized agreement. However, the signing of the
agreement by the majority of the parties to the conflict,
as well as the positive developments that followed,
clearly indicate the commitment of the parties to
implement the revitalized agreement.

The fighting across the country has decreased
significantly. The National Pre-transitional Committee
has started its work to establish a road map for
the transitional period in South Sudan. The peace
celebration day event in Juba on 31 October under the
theme "Celebrating the Dawn of Peace, Appreciating
Friends, Cherishing Reconciliation and Unity", which
took place in the presence of the leaders of countries
of the region, sent a strong message to the people of
South Sudan of the commitment of the parties to fully
implementing the peace agreement. Countries of the
region have expressed their readiness to help them in
that endeavour.

The international community has a historic
opportunity to end the cycle of vicious violence in
South Sudan and bring about tangible results to the
country's people, who have suffered for far too long.
That opportunity should not be allowed to slip away
simply because earlier attempts have failed to bring
about the desired results. As there is no plan B, it is
imperative to seize the momentum. The full support
of the international community for the implementation
of the peace agreement is critically important. All
possible efforts should therefore be made in support of
the successful completion of the pre-transitional period.

The Security Council has a particular role to
play in ensuring the implementation of the revised
peace agreement. IGAD has requested the support
of the Council in ensuring the full deployment of the
Regional Protection Force and a further review of its
mandate so that it will be in a better position to support
the implementation of the revised peace agreement.
We hope the Council will respond positively to that
request. The Chiefs of Staff of the IGAD countries
have been working to assess the operational needs and
the additional tasks of the Regional Protection Force
in the light of the revised peace agreement and the
current situation on the ground. The results of those
assessments will be communicated to the Council as
soon as they become available.

The support and assistance to IGAD and other
parties provided so far by the African Union, the United
Nations, IGAD partners and the wider international
community should be extended to the implementation

of the agreement as well. Maintaining unity of purpose
among IGAD, the African Union and the United Nations
in the quest for lasting peace, security and stability in
South Sudan still remains vital in the post-revitalization
period. IGAD is resolved more than ever to ensure
that the agreement is implemented. Improvements
in the relations among countries of the region would
add impetus to the successful implementation of
the agreement.

Even though we are encouraged by the progress
made so far, we would like to underscore the
importance of nurturing trust among the parties for the
full implementation of the revitalized agreement. More
confidence-building measures should be undertaken
and, in that regard, we welcome the holding of meetings
in Yei and Kajo-keji between senior field commanders
of the Sudan People's Liberation Army in Opposition
and the South Sudan People's Defence Forces and the
agreements reachedbetween them. Confidence-building
measures of that kind should continue because without
them it will be difficult to proceed to the transitional
period. We would also like to highlight the urgency
of implementing the pre-transitional period tasks as
stipulated in the peace agreement's implementation
matrix to lay the foundation for the transitional period.
The longer the pre-transitional period takes, the less
likely it will be to make meaningful progress. We hope
the parties will stay committed to doing so.

Ensuring the further reduction of conflict and the
total cessation hostilities is critically important. While
it is a necessary condition for the implementation of
the peace agreement, silencing the guns in South
Sudan would also facilitate the delivery of much-need
humanitarian assistance. The parties need to prioritize
the implementation of the permanent ceasefire on
cessation of hostilities, the protection of civilians and
humanitarian access. The restoration of a permanent
ceasefire is essential for unhindered access to the
affected population and the safety of humanitarian
personnel and assistance delivery.

