First of all, I would like to thank the Nigerien presidency of the Security Council for holding this open debate devoted to the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF), which was founded 50 years ago in Niamey. For the first time, the Security Council is devoting a debate to cooperation between the United Nations and the OIF. This is an opportunity to reiterate my deep commitment to renewed multilateral cooperation to benefit the people we serve and to a more agile, supportive and effective multilateralism, particularly in the maintenance of international peace and security, which are the subjects we will be discussing today. The International Organization of la Francophonie is a regional organization under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. But it is, in fact, transnational, since it brings together 88 States and Governments, including 54 full members from five continents, united by a common language and common values. As acrucible of cultural diversity, our organization has made cooperation and solidarity the guiding principles of its action, which has been particularly developed in the political and diplomatic fields. One of the first objectives of the OIF charter, under the heading of solidarity between peoples, is to help establish and develop democracy, prevent, manage and resolve conflicts and support the rule of law and human rights. The OIF has specific tools to accomplish that. Its knowledge of countries, the bonds of trust established with local actors and diversified networks of expertise enable it to intervene nimbly and closely match the requirements of each situation. Preventing and responding to crises and conflicts in francophone countries is carried out in close cooperation with our international partners, first and foremost the United Nations. The OIJF's actions in support of international peace and security consist of three main areas. The first is peacekeeping. While the OIF does not currently deploy personnel in the field, I am hopeful that it will be a major player in peacekeeping. Our actions in this area have three objectives: to support the emergence of a francophone strategic vision; to strengthen the ability of our member States and their personnel to optimally contribute to peacekeeping operations; and to increase the use of French in said operations. Today, out of the 13 operations deployed by the United Nations worldwide, seven are in the French-speaking world. When it comes to francophone theatres of operations, mastery of French and knowledge of the local culture contribute to their overall performance and security. Despite real progress, the current level of participation of French-speaking personnel in peacekeeping operations is still relatively limited. As of June 2020, the proportion of uniformed peacekeeping personnel who are nationals of OIF member States stood at approximately 40 per cent, of whom not even 3 per cent were women. In view of the stakes in the field of peacekeeping for French-speaking countries, I have decided, in consultation with the Secretary-General of the United Nations, to further strengthen and systematize the mobilization of the International Organization of la Francophonie and its member States. The OIF is the first international organization to volunteer to formally assume the role of champion of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations. Through Morocco and France and in conjunction with the United Nations, the OIF will fully participate in the organization of the second ministerial conference on peacekeeping in the French-speaking world, scheduled for 2021. In the meantime, we will organize a high-level event on the French language and intercultural issues in peacekeeping operations, which will unite the efforts of francophone actors. At the programme level, OIF and United Nations teams, in partnership with France and other member States, will continue working on capacity-building for French-speaking troops, the translation of operational manuals into French and the teaching of French to non-French-speaking troops. We will also take action to increase the number of female military officers in order to promote the presence of French-speaking women, both civilian and military, in peace operations. Our second area of action, through which we also contribute to the major missions of the United Nations and the Security Council, is crisis prevention and management. In tense situations, I take political and diplomatic action - either directly or through special representatives and envoys - to prevent the escalation of tensions or to facilitate dialogue among the parties. As such, the OIF is highly mobilized in the Central African Republic to support the peace process driven by the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation, signed in February 2019. The International Organization of la Francophonie deliberately considers its crisis prevention and management efforts in the context of larger dynamics for greater effectiveness. This concerted approach is fully consistent with the development of networked multilateralism promoted by the United Nations Secretary-General. In that spirit, in November 2019, I encouraged the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the Commonwealth Secretary-General to make a tripartite visit to Cameroon to spur and support Cameroonian partners in the search for a solution to the crisis in the North-West and South-West regions of the country. Those concerted efforts continue within the United Nations. Finally, we also stand by our countries facing major crises, as is currently the case in Mali. As I indicated before the Permanent Council of the OIF on 25 August, I have undertaken to rapidly dispatch a high-level delegation to Bamako, in consultation with our close international partners. I will appoint the members of that delegation in the coming days. The OIF will play its full part in the efforts to end the crisis and restore constitutional and democratic order to Mali. This mobilization is part of the OIF's growing investment in the Sahel, alongside international and regional partners. That investment is notably reflected in its cooperation with the Permanent Secretariat of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to promote governance and stability, and more effectively combat violent radicalization and extremism. I hope that our cooperation with the G-5 Sahel will reach a new level with the establishment, in the coming months, of a youth radio station in the Sahel. We have worked hard on this at the highest levels. In that regard, I would like to salute the commitment of the Heads of State of the region, the Executive Secretary of the G-5 Sahel and our technical and financial partners, in particular the European Union. Finally, and this is our third area of action, la Francophonie supports the democratic processes of its member States. We offer structural support for institutions of our member States that contribute to democracy, the rule of law and good governance. The expertise we make available to our member States is based on a unique mechanism - the networks of institutions of la Francophonie. Within these structures, which include judicial, regulatory and mediation institutions, as well as institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights - the OIF mobilizes the best skills and makes them available to its member States in a spirit of sharing best practices. This in-depth work contributes to consolidating the institutional frameworks essential for democratic development. We are also very committed to supporting electoral processes themselves. In many of our member States, elections can still bring out latent tensions and generate major crises. The OIF has therefore developed a dedicated programme to support and strengthen the capacities of actors involved in the preparation and holding of elections, namely, electoral commissions, constitutional courts, media regulatory authorities, political actors and civil society. Our actions are designed to strengthen the professionalism and capacities of these actors on key electoral-process issues, such as the management of litigation, the consolidation of electoral data and national election observation. In this way, we are helping to promote the holding of free, fair and transparent elections. This year, the OIF has been particularly active in support of preparations for year-end elections scheduled in Cete d'Ivoire, Burkina Faso, the Central African Republic and the Niger. On 25 September, together with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cete dIvoire, I launched a francophone platform in the Security Council. This new platform provides a framework for regular dialogue on international peace and security issues with a view to amplifying the francophone voice in the Security Council, as well as to develop convergences between francophones on issues on the Security Council's agenda. Currently, 7 of the 15 members of the Council are members of la Francophonie. It is also through this platform that we will continue our actions to promote the French language and linguistic diversity in the work of the Council. This diversity, which is dear to us, has been undermined in recent months and has contributed to creating inequities in the participation of various members of the Council, as well as stakeholders and members of the public that follow the Council's work. This is why I welcome today, in particular, the use - for the first time - of the Security Council's new multilingual video-conferencing system, which allows participants to have access to simultaneous interpretation of the proceedings in the six official languages of the United Nations, including French. This is a very important step forward in ensuring that all delegations can participate from a distance in the work of the Council fully, equitably and effectively. We hope that today's debate will contribute to a more systematic consideration of linguistic and cultural issues in the mandates of peacekeeping operations decided by the Council. More broadly, I call for everyone to get involved in order to ensure that cultural and linguistic diversity is truly considered a cardinal value of the multilateral system. The global health crisis has further revealed the need for international cooperation and for strengthening, while renewing, the multilateral system. The 88 States members and Governments of la Francophonie, be they from the North or the South, are deeply committed to the principles of multilateralism. They have placed solidarity and cooperation at the heart of la Francophonie's action. In conclusion, I wish to assure members of the Security Council of our determined commitment to working together with the United Nations to build and strengthen a truly democratic multilateralism that is in service of our populations.
