Mr. Edjang Nnaga (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to express my thanks
to the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Jean Pierre Lacroix, for the hard work
he has undertaken within the scope of his mandate
and especially for the excellent briefing he gave us
today. I am also grateful for the briefings delivered by
Ms. Pramila Patten and the Ambassador of Poland.

The Government of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the recent joint field visits between the South Sudan
People's Defence Forces and opposition forces. We
call on the Government of South Sudan to continue
organizing such joint visits to all areas of the country
in order to promote peace and reconciliation among the
South Sudanese people. That will enable the parties to
help silence the guns in South Sudan.
With regard to the conflict there, my country
welcomes the positive political atmosphere that has
prevailed in South Sudan since the signing of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan in September.
We praise all parties to the conflict for their political
will and commitment. However, we are concerned
about the latest reports of sexual abuse against women
and girls. We strongly condemn those events and call
on the Government of South Sudan to identify the
perpetrators of these terrible actions and hold them
accountable.

We are also concerned about the humanitarian
situation, which remains precarious. That is why we
want to respectfully remind all parties involved that,
in addition to seeking peace, there is an obligation to
alleviate the humanitarian needs of the population,
who are facing poverty, food insecurity and a shortage
of basic services. The successful fulfilment of that
obligation will be achieved only if humanitarian
operations are facilitated and the threats and risks
faced by humanitarian organizations and their brave
personnel are eliminated. Attacks on humanitarian
workers are unacceptable.

I express my gratitude to the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan staff, the police and the
other organizations that work courageously to protect
civilians in vulnerable situations, facilitate the delivery
of humanitarian aid, protect human rights and support
the peace process. I once again commend the United
Nations team and non-governmental organizations
for their immense bravery and sacrifice in providing
humanitarian aid.

In conclusion, my Government thanks the
Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) for his efforts in directing the
peace process and supporting the first steps of the
implementation process. We also commend the tireless
efforts of the Heads of State and Government of IGAD
for the steadfast manner in which they have guided the
peace process.

I express my sincere thanks to the Chairperson of
the African Union for his valuable efforts for peace in
South Sudan, and I offer him my country's full support.

