I thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, for his briefing. Tunisia's support for Special Envoy Pedersen's efforts aimed at promoting the return of peace in Syria against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic remains constant. In the last quarter since the Special Envoy's call for a durable nationwide cessation of hostilities, there have been some encouraging developments. Remarkably, the last month registered the lowest civilian-death toll since the start of the conflict. However, the overall political and security trends observed in Syria and across the wider region remain particularly worrisome. While the 6 March ceasefire in Idlib seemed to have held and violence dropped in May, the pace of recruiting Syrians to fight in Libya increased significantly in the same month. This month witnessed a surge of violence in north-west Syria, which engendered renewed displacements in southern Idlib and northern Hama and reversed the recent returns of internally displaced persons to their areas of origin. We are concerned about the potential breakdown of the ceasefire, in the light of the resumption of air strikes and the reported arrival of military reinforcements on the ground in Idlib. Such developments undermine the political process on track, as the Constitutional Committee discussions are slated for resumption in Geneva at the earliest opportunity. We call on parties to exercise the utmost self-restraint and work together to sustain the truce. The north-west, as much as the rest of Syria, cannot endure a new humanitarian catastrophe. We reiterate our support for a stepped-up role of the United Nations and its Special Envoy in mustering ceasefire initiatives in line with resolution 2254 (2015), with a view to ensuring a nationwide and durable ceasefire in the country. The activities of terrorist organizations, including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida affiliates Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and Horras Al-Din, are yet another worrisome trend. Attacks carried out by ISIL have been on a steady rise for months now in Syria and Iraq and require due attention from the Security Council. Tunisia reiterates that marshalling collective counter-terrorism efforts is necessary if any solution to the conflict is to take hold in the long run. We reaffirm that the ceasefire remains a temporary form of relief until a joint and genuine solution has been identified to address the threat of Council-designated terrorist groups and eradicates the safe haven that these groups have established in the region. The latest approval by Israel of a plan to build a new settlement in the Golan is a blatant move in Israel's endless series of actions undertaken in systematic contempt of international law, international legality and the international community. Tunisia reiterates that the Golan is a Syrian Arab territory occupied by Israel. We condemn Israel's repeated and flagrant violations of the unity, independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of Syria in its territories, including the Golan territory. Such violations are contrary to the Charter of the United Nations, the principles of international law and relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution 350 (1974), on the disengagement between the Israeli and Syrian sides, and resolution 497 (1981). Finally, let me reiterate that there is no military solution to the Syrian crisis. The only way forward is through a political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015) that ends the suffering of the Syrian people and safeguards Syria's sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial integrity. Indeed, it bears repeating: the political solution must be one that safeguards Syria's sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial integrity.
