Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to welcome
you, Sir, to the Security Council to preside over this
important meeting, which has been organized by the
United Kingdom presidency. I also thank the Secretary-
General for his clear statement today and for his report
on the rule of law and transitional justice in conflict
and post-conflict societies.

The need for justice and the rule of law is self-
evident, particularly in conflict societies. Those
principles are critical for the realization of social and
economic justice and for the implementation of
political, economic, cultural, religious and
environmental rights. They are an essential means for
the realizations of human aspirations for peace,
equality and justice.

I have a few comments on the subject.

First, each conflict situation is unique and has its
own dynamics. We agree with the Secretary-General
that pre-packaged solutions are ill-advised and that we
must eschew one-size-fits-all formulas. Secondly, we
support the recommendation that needs related to
justice and rule of law should be integrated into any
international or United Nations involvement in post-
conflict societies. Thirdly, we recognize the importance
of building national capacities in independent national
institutions. Fourthly, we support the promotion of
good governance and national institution-building,
particularly national judicial capacity-building.

Fifthly, we believe that use can be made of
indigenous and informal traditions for the
administration of justice and settlement of disputes, if
they are consistent with international laws. Sixthly, we
fully support the need for ending impunity for crimes
against humanity. Seventh, justice, peace and
democracy are mutually re-enforcing and should be
simultaneously promoted. Eighth, reconstruction,
economic revival and employment generation also
create a wider stake in the preservation of the rule of
law.

Ninth, the need for ending impunity for financial
crimes is also important. The international community
should strengthen and improve cooperative
mechanisms to ensure that looted money or other assets
acquired through corruption and other unlawful means
are returned to the countries of origin.

Justice and the rule of law is vital for the
establishment and maintenance of order, peace and
stability, both at the intra-State and inter-State levels.
The international community today could also be
regarded as a conflict society. Thus, national rule of
law strategies must be complemented by the
international rule of law.

The Secretary-General made a powerful
statement in opening the general debate of the General
Assembly this year. I would like to quote three
sentences from his statement at the Assembly's 3rd
meeting
"The rule of law is at risk around the
world Every nation that proclaims the rule of
law at home must respect it abroad; and every
nation that insists on it abroad, must enforce it at
home.

Those who seek to bestow legitimacy must
themselves embody it; and those who invoke
international law must themselves submit to it."

The United Nations must build its capacity to
uphold the rule of law, both at the national and - even
more importantly - the international level. The
international judicial system should be strengthened to
promote adherence to the principles of the United
Nations Charter and international law. The
international judicial bodies which have been
established so far are, we believe, a good start. But we
should seek to promote and further the international
judicial systems, in the context of the measures being
considered, to create a United Nations system
responsive to the realities of the twenty-first century.

