Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): First of all,
I should like to say, Sir, how deeply touched I was by
your words of welcome. I sincerely thank you. It is a
pleasure for me to join the United Nations family again,
for the third time in my career, and it is an honour for me
to sit beside ambassadors who, on a daily basis,
contribute their wisdom and experience to this
Organization. Like my outstanding predecessor and friend,
Alain Dejammet, I shall listen to everyone, pay attention
to the concerns of all and remain ready to enter into
discussion and dialogue.

It is good that our Council is again addressing the
question of the situation in East Timor. This is a
particularly difficult situation, but for the United Nations
it is a mission that could become a model. We have read
the report of the Secretary-General and listened attentively
to the information provided by Mr. Hedi Annabi, whom
I should like to thank. In the spirit of this interactive
briefing, I should like, with your permission, Sir, to ask
him a few questions relating to three issues.

The first point that concerns us is the situation with
regard to the return of refugees from West Timor. If I
understood Mr. Annabi correctly, there are still about
100,000 of them, and the problem therefore remains one
of the major concerns of our Council. The Indonesian
authorities and the army high command have affirmed
their willingness to work to put an end to the activities of
the pro-integrationist militias. But are the Indonesian
authorities really in a position to implement those
commitments on the ground and strictly to monitor the
local echelons of the militia hierarchy? Here, I should like
to associate myself with the comments of previous
speakers; we are deeply concerned about what has been
said in this regard. Has the rate of return increased in
recent weeks? Furthermore, we have heard that former
members of the pro-integrationist militias now seem to be

 

returning to East Timor. If that is the case, how are they
being welcomed, what treatment are they receiving from the
local population and what role is the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
playing in this regard?

My second question relates to the National
Consultative Council. Of course, France welcomes the fact
that it was set up on 2 December; it will make it possible
for all Timorese to express their views. Has a preliminary
assessment been made of the activities of the National
Consultative Council? Does it meet on a regular basis? Is
it dealing effectively with all important issues? Has the
Forum for Unity, Democracy and Justice, the only pro-
autonomy group that had not joined the Council by the end
of January, done so yet?

Finally, I would like to ask a more future-oriented
question. UNTAET is, of course, doing excellent work and
enjoys our total and unqualified support. I would like in
particular to pay tribute to the outstanding work being
carried out by Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello. But East Timor
must, of course, have a future beyond the United Nations
presence. In that context, are there any expectations that
local resources will expand? We noted with much interest
that just yesterday the first tax was levied in East Timor, in
the form of a 5 per cent customs duty. We would be
interested to hear Mr. Annabi's views on the long-term
prospects for East Timor.

