Mr. Spirie (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in Bosnian; English text provided by the delegation): At
the outset, I would like to express my condolences to
the peoples of China and Myanmar on the occasion of
the tragic catastrophes that took place in those
countries.

I would like to thank you very much,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on such an
important subject as post-conflict peacebuilding.
Please let me express my appreciation for the
opportunity to address the Security Council during this
important debate in order to share with it the
experiences of my country since 1995 and to share my
views regarding the international community's
involvement in post-conflict Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I come from a country where a tragic conflict
took place between 1992 and 1995 ending with the
Dayton Peace Accord, which was negotiated under the
auspices of the international community. I use the term
"tragic conflict" deliberately, given the fact that the
term was used by the authors of the Dayton Peace
Accord. Such a definition, avoiding words such as
aggression and civil war, makes it possible to take a
more courageous step out of an inglorious and
unfortunate past that cannot be changed. Such a step
will, hopefully, lead us into a future that includes
coexistence, tolerance, reconciliation and forgiveness
as guarantees for the ultimate success of my country.

The Dayton Peace Accord ensured the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its
constitutional framework, under which the country
consists of two entities - the Republika Srpska and
the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina - with a
clear constitutional basis. A formula was therefore
established that would mean success for all. A strong
State means strong entities and strong entities mean a
strong State; or, to use terms from the world of sport,
strong football clubs make for a strong national team.
Unfortunately, some would like to change that formula
without offering a better one in its place, a problem
that confirms the very vision of the authors of Dayton
Peace Accord.

With various degrees of success and with the
assistance of the international community, since 1995
Bosnia and Herzegovina has overcome many obstacles,
faced many challenges and carried out many reforms. I
would like to mention a few.

Defence reform has been successfully completed,
which is considered to be the best reform project in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That reform has led Bosnia
and Herzegovina to join the Partnership for Peace,
thereby enabling my country to cease being a mere
consumer of NATO peace operations and become an
ally in the peace operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. At
the Bucharest NATO summit, NATO member States
decided to initiate an intensive dialogue with Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We are also committed to working
towards full membership of NATO.

We have established a unified intelligence sector
by successfully emerging two previously opposed
intelligence agencies into a State-level body with all
the responsibilities of any modern intelligence service
anywhere in the world.

The process of reforming the taxation system was
significantly advanced through the introduction of a
value-added tax that ensures a steady inflow of revenue
and reduces tax evasion and the grey economy.

We have implemented justice system reform and
begun trials for war crimes suspects within the justice
system of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We are now working on education reform and
have thus far adopted all the necessary legislation.

We are actively working on public administration
reform, and even reform of the sports sector is under
way.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has made significant
progress in the economic realm. Although we may
agree that it is not yet satisfactory, there is no question
that the economy is on the right track. In 2007, the real
growth rate in the gross domestic product was 6.1 per
cent. The projected growth rate for 2008 is 6.5 per
cent. Further growth is expected in 2009 and 2010.
Foreign direct investment in Bosnia and Herzegovina
reached record highs during 2007.

The reforms and economic progress to which I
have just referred have been accompanied by
accomplishments with regard to relations with
neighbouring countries and foreign policy as a whole.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has become a member of the
Council of Europe and the Partnership for Peace.
Sarajevo has been chosen as the headquarters of the
Regional Cooperation Council centre for South-Eastern
Europe. Bosnia and Herzegovina has also become a
member of the Human Rights Council. And, in
December 2007, we initialled the Stabilisation and
Association Agreement with the European Union. After
fulfilling the final political requirement for the signing
of the Agreement, we expect that Brussels will inform
us of the date for the signing ceremony.

It is important to mention that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is currently participating in six United
Nations peacekeeping missions around the world: three

military missions - in Ethiopia and Eritrea, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Iraq - and
08-34704
three police missions - in Liberia, Cyprus and the
Sudan.

Everything that I have mentioned serves to prove
that Bosnia and Herzegovina has made progress in the
recent past. I am fully aware that more could have been
done, although we still face many unresolved issues
and difficult challenges. I would like to remind the
Council that, just 13 years ago, Bosnia and
Herzegovina was in the midst of a bloody war. Since
then we have been the only country in Europe to
experience three extremely difficult and demanding
processes, namely, the reconstruction of a war-ravaged
country, the re-establishment of trust between three
former warring factions and the process of transition
and Euro-Atlantic integration. Those processes have
been very difficult but, with the help of the
international community, we have successfully
concluded that phase of the Dayton Accord.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
my deepest appreciation for the international
community's involvement in the post-conflict recovery
of my country. Many great things have been done, from
its active role in stopping the war - the most
important thing - to its active participation in, and
support for, the reforms. From the very end of the war,
the international community has implemented a special
model of indirect rule in Bosnia and Herzegovina
through the High Representative and his Office and the
strong powers conferred by the Bonn Conference,
which has now resulted in various disputes.

Those powers included the ability of the High
Representative to remove elected officials and to
impose laws and decisions. I do not want to argue that
that was not necessary immediately following the war
in order for progress to take place, but today we must
reconsider those powers, for many have found them to
be very much in conflict with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. I believe that those
powers also contradict the Brussels road map for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Moreover, the Council would
agree that the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
2008 is significantly different from the circumstances
in 1995 or 1996. It is therefore almost certain that,
more than 10 years after Dayton, the model for
administering Bosnia and Herzegovina through the
High Representative and his Office has been exhausted
and that it is now time to look for a new formula for
success in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

One should bear in mind that the international
community, which undoubtedly had the best of
intentions, created major dependences among local
politicians. I have repeatedly said that domestic
politicians feel that they do not have to deal with or
discuss difficult issues or seek compromise, because
they know that the representatives of the international
community will do it for them. That is not the right
way to do things.

Given everything I have mentioned, I am
convinced that Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to take a
new step forward and move into a new stage. I would
call it a sobering-up phase. Now is the time to realize
that we must step out of the wheelchair and take
responsibility for crucial processes, not just formally
but substantively. It is time for our friends to advise
and support us, but not to speak and work in our place.
I know that the beginning will be painful, but I am sure
that that is the only way for us to realize that all of us
living in Bosnia and Herzegovina must turn to each
other. That is the only way to establish the necessary
dialogue among elected officials. I also think that
Bosnia and Herzegovina, like any other post-conflict
country, needs to build trust within, along with
dialogue and reforms. I daresay that the building of
trust is more important that any reform. When
dialogue, respect and fruitful discussion prevail, we
can say that we are making good progress. It is in
striving to reach that goal that we, the citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, need each other the most. I
would like once again to emphasize that only citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and not the Office of the
High Representative nor the international community,
can create a future based on compromise.
In my opinion, the following lesson has been
learned in Bosnia and Herzegovina: the international
community's engagement in post-conflict countries is
not just needed but necessary, but it must be precisely
defined and limited and have a clear exit strategy.
Otherwise, sooner or later, that engagement will
become counterproductive.

At the same time, one should bear in mind that
every crisis in the world has its own specificities and
should therefore be approached analytically, taking into
account the roots of the crisis and the culture, history,
civilization, religion and customs of the people living
there. A successful methodology that has been used in
one place cannot become a mere blueprint for the next,
because there is no guarantee that it will be useful in

other places. Each individual crisis should be
approached without prejudging it and should be
carefully analysed with respect to how and where
particular lessons learned could be applied and where
new, original models have to be developed.

