The President (spoke in Russian): I should like to
inform Council members that I have received a letter
from Ms. Salamata Drame Tanoh-Boutchoue, spouse of
the late Permanent Representative of Cote d'Ivoire, His
Excellency Mr. Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue, addressed
to all members of the Council. As the letter is written
in French, I shall read it out in that language.

(spoke in French)

"As you know, my husband, His Excellency
Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue, passed away on
18 April 2018. He was for each of you a colleague,
a friend, a brother. From the announcement of his
death until the departure of his remains to Abidjan
in cote d'Ivoire, you have never tired in showing
us your solidarity and your compassion. I thank
you infinitely.

"I would like to inform you that the funeral
went well in Abidjan. With the support of the
President of the Republic, His Excellency Alassane
Ouattara, and the Ivorian Government, Bernard
was accompanied with all honours to his final
resting place on 26 May, 2018. He is now at rest
in his native village, Grand Lahou, in the south of
Cote d'Ivoire.

"The children of Bernard - Charles, Thierry
and Marie Fatime - myself and our entire family
in cote d'Ivoire have been deeply touched by your
marks of sympathy.

"Before leaving New York, I wanted to express
our deep gratitude and appreciation on behalf of the
Tanoh-Boutchoue family.

"You should know that Bernard had great
admiration and consideration for each of you. I
know that he would have liked to say to you: 'Look
at the life I am starting and not that which I have
finished, because I fought the good fight. I finished
the race. I kept the faith'.

"In closing, I would like to urge you to continue
fighting the good fight for a more just world, a
world of peace."

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Mali

Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2018/541)

The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2018/639, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by France.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/54l, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, C6te
d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, France,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru, Poland,
Russian Federation, Sweden, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America


