Mr. Santos Maraver (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Dominican Republic, a country
that, as both an island State and a Caribbean country,
is exposed to climate-related natural disasters, for
organizing this debate. The Dominican Republic has
a long and rich tradition of environmental policies.
Its experience therefore contributes to promoting
the need for the Security Council to incorporate the
climate dimension into its peace and security strategy,
in particular in the context of strengthening its
preventive function.

As is well known, Spain is a country very vulnerable
to the impacts of climate change. That is why we attach
great importance to considering the effects of climate
change on the maintenance of international peace and
security. We promoted this debate during our recent
term in the Security Council, in 2015 and 2016, when
we co-organized Arria Formula meetings with Malaysia
and Angola and promoted a briefing on desertification
with Egypt. We have noted with satisfaction the
attention that the Council has devoted to the issue in
recent years.

Scientific evidence warns us repeatedly, most
recently in the latest report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, of the intolerable effects
that rising temperatures will have in the form of
uncontrollable natural disasters, persistent droughts,
irreparable destruction of natural habitats and rises in
sea level that many cannot bear. In turn, those changes
seriously compromise food security, access to drinking
water, and the health of billions of people - changes
that could force massive migratory movements. In
short, climate change has the capacity to generate
serious political, economic and social repercussions
that will inevitably affect international peace and
stability. There is an urgent need to act, and to do so in
the area of security.

Spain has made the fight against climate change
one of its national priorities. The creation ofa Ministry
for Ecological Transition clearly expresses our firm
commitment to addressing the effects of climate
change, and the need for a complete transformation of
our system in order to adapt it to the requirements of
true sustainable development. In that context, last week,
the President of the Government of Spain announced an
energy and climate plan that will mobilize €235 billion
over the next 10 years.

But we are aware that national efforts are useless
if they are not combined with essential international
cooperation. It is with that conviction that, here at
Headquarters, Spain joined the Carbon Neutrality
Coalition, which is committed to the net elimination of
emissions by 2050. And it is with the same conviction
that we await with anticipation the climate summit to be
convened by the Secretary-General.

We support the introduction of climate issues into
the deliberations of the Security Council. To confine
climate change to the realm of sustainable development,
or to ignore that it is a multiplier of the factors of
instability, would show a serious lack of responsibility.
The Council needs to equip itself with a system of risk
assessment and strategies that integrate the impact
of climate change into its analysis and into conflict
prevention and peacekeeping.

Spain has incorporated the relationship between
climate and stability in its national security strategy
approved in 2017, which expressly states that "the
effects of climate change function as structural causes
of armed conflicts". In short, it affirms the intrinsic
relationship between climate and security. If this reality
is getting its due at the national level with greater
justification and urgency, it should also have it at the
multilateral level that the Security Council represents.

