Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the Po1ice
Commissioners for their briefings. It is quite inspiring
to hear about the work that they do and the challenges
that they face every day in completing their mission. It
is clear to us that police work is a crucial part of United
Nations peacekeeping.

I also want to thank Italy for putting forth the
resolution that we adopted today, resolution 2382
(2017). It is truly an important step towards improving
the performance of United Nations police.

One of the key elements of our efforts to make
United Nations peacekeeping more effective is a clear
exit strategy. The ability of a peacekeeping mission to
complete its work and depart depends on our collective
ability to strengthen the capacity of the State to provide
for the safety of its citizens. Alas, as we have seen
in many countries with peacekeeping missions, host
Governments often not only lack capacity in their
security sector institutions, but basic legitimacy with
the citizens they are meant to protect and to serve.

In those contexts, we must not only build the
capacity of security sector institutions, but redefine the
very notion of what a country's military, political and
justice institutions are meant to achieve. That requires
building an integrated security architecture that seeks
to ensure the safety of citizens rather than the longevity
of the Governments that lack legitimacy with their own
citizens. Police have a crucial role to play in making
that vision a reality.

In the recent transition from the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti to the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti, we have seen the
essential role that United Nations police play in working
with national forces to maintain security and stability
while seeking to build the capability of the Haitian
National Police. We are hopeful that the new Mission
will find a willing and engaged partner in the Haitian
Government, as the Mission begins to implement its
rule-of-law programme.

Likewise, as the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur continues its planned
reconfiguration, the role of the mission's police forces
will take on even greater importance in building
local capacity.

The challenges in Mali are different and great. United

Nations police in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali assist Malian
authorities in addressing the transnational crime and
drug trafficking that fuel terrorist movements in the
region, as we saw during our recent Security Council
visit to the Sahel. Such assistance and capacity-building
is a crucial element, as part of a larger package of
assistance, to creating an environment conducive to a
solution to the overall conflict.

Police cannot be second-class citizens in United
Nations peacekeeping. The United Nations bureaucracy
must model the same level of integration among military,
police and justice components that we seek to develop
in host nations through peacekeeping operations.
Police expertise must be consistently integrated into
the mandates and decision-making structures of United
Nations peace operations - both peacekeeping and
special political missions. We welcome this resolution's
emphasis on strengthening United Nations police
doctrine and its implementation, as well as the call
to define clearer standards for personnel, equipment,
operations, performance and assistance to host State
police services.

We also welcome efforts to collect, manage
and analyse data on peacekeeping operational
requirements and unit field performance to support
performance-based decision-making. Over the past 14
years, the United States has demonstrated its strong
commitment to improving the performance of United
Nations police by investing more than $40 million to
directly train or support 16,000 from 15 countries. We
see the partnerships called for in today's resolution as
crucial to continuing to build capacity to deploy well-
qualified, well-trained police to peacekeeping.

Ultimately, we recognize the essential role of
the United Nations police in building the capacity of
host nations to ensure the safety of all their citizens
and creating the conditions for successful mission
conclusions. Today's resolution is an important step
towards ensuring that United Nations police are able
to help secure lasting and sustainable peace in United
Nations peace operations around the world.

