Mr. Riecken (Austria): Austria is grateful to
Lithuania for convening this important and timely
meeting of the Security Council. The concept note
(S/2015/306, annex) prepared for this meeting clearly
delineates the problem and is highly useful for guiding
the discussion.

Austria fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered today on behalf of the European Union (EU).

The human cost of the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons is indeed appalling. The problem transcends
national boundaries, making it absolutely imperative
for States to cooperate with each other in order to
effectively mitigate the situation. Austria's position on
the issue is, of course, in full alignment with European
Union policies, based on the 13 January 2006 EU
strategy to combat illicit accumulation and trafficking
of small arms and light weapons and their ammunition.

For Austria, a chief concern around small arms
and light weapons has always been the impact of their
unauthorized spread on the humanitarian cause of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. That concern
has been acknowledged by this very body. For instance,
in operative paragraph 29 of resolution 1894 (2009),
which Austria initiated, the Security Council noted:
"the excessive accumulation and destabilizing
effect of small arms and light weapons pose a
considerable impediment to the provision of
humanitarian assistance and have a potential
to exacerbate and prolong conflicts, endanger
civilians and undermine security and the confidence
required for a return to peace and stability".

All exporters of small arms bear a particular
responsibility to promote the cause of effective small
arms and light weapons control nationally, notably by
implementing strict and effective export controls, as
well as at the international level. Therefore, Austria
is an active participant in the use of the important
international instruments in the area, such as the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, along with the concomitant
International Tracing Instrument; the Protocol against
the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Their Parts and Components and Ammunition,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime; the Wassenaar
Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional
Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies; and most
recently, the Arms Trade Treaty.

Hosting both the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, which assists States in the implementation of
the Firearms Protocol, and the Wassenaar Arrangement,
the Austrian capital Vienna has become a focal point of
international expertise on issues with a direct bearing
on small arms and light weapons control. Incidentally,
let me say that this is a strong point in favour ofVienna's
current bid to accommodate the future secretariat of the
Arms Trade Treaty.

At the practical level, the Austrian Ministry of
Defence is currently engaged in a number of long-
term assistance projects in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Moldova and Senegal. At the regional level, the
Austrian Ministry of Defence also supports a number
of respective activities in South-East Europe and East
Africa. These cooperation activities aim at capacity-
building and knowledge transfer with regard to the
management of national stockpiles, based on the
International Small Arms Control Standards, as well as
on the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines
and on the reduction of surpluses of small arms and
light weapons and corresponding ammunition.

Austria is keenly aware that despite considerable
efforts at the national and international levels, the
illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse
of small arms and light weapons continue to pose a
serious threat to international peace and security. It is
therefore right to put the pressing issue on the agenda of
the Security Council. We call upon the members of this
body to use this debate as an impulse for further work,
which is urgently needed.

