Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Botswana is pleased
to see you, Sir, personally presiding over the business
of the Council today. We have no doubt that, under
your presidency, the Council will surpass all
expectations in the conduct of its work.

My delegation wishes to associate itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Bangladesh on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Botswana attaches great importance to the
promotion of post-conflict peacebuilding. In that
connection, we welcome your initiative, Mr. President,
to hold this Security Council open debate on the
subject. Let me also commend you for inviting the
eminent persons who were with us for the major part of
the morning and who are with us today, all of whom
have unrivalled knowledge and experience in the
subject matter of today's debate.

We were also pleased and satisfied to take note of
the presence of the Secretary-General here this
morning, as well as the Ministers from Afghanistan,
Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste. Their presence here
demonstrated the great importance of the subject
matter under discussions, as well as that of the issue of
comprehensive peacebuilding to prevent the recurrence
of conflict. Let me also recognize the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Germany, Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, whom I wish to commend
for his effective stewardship of that body.

Botswana maintains that it is important to ensure
collaboration and synergy in the programmes and
activities of the various United Nations entities - such
as the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council - in the broad area of
peacebuilding and the management of conflict. This
open debate is a perfect example of such coordination
and collaboration.

We all agree that peace, safety and stability are
prerequisites for the achievement of sustainable
development. The causes of conflict, particularly in
Africa, include the absence of political tolerance,
democracy, good governance and the rule of law, as
well as the inequitable distribution of revenue earned
from natural resources within States. Botswana
therefore wishes to emphasize the significance of
supporting the democratization process and
institutional development as crucial measures for the
prevention of conflict and the laying of the foundation
for sustainable socio-economic development.

In order to leave a positive mark where
peacebuilding interventions are made, we must ensure
effective coordination between the United Nations,
host Governments, bilateral donors and civil society so
that the delivery of all well-intended international
assistance encourages national ownership and observes
strict procedures to minimize the unintended
sponsorship of conflict. Botswana also believes that
investing in the reconstruction and rehabilitation of
physical infrastructure, as well as in social and
economic programmes, is a vital part of post-conflict
reconstruction.

Addressing the needs and challenges of such
vulnerable groups as youth, children, women, the
disabled and the injured should be an integral part of
effective peacebuilding. That is all the more significant
because those groups of victims usually play little or
no role at all in the incitement, planning and execution
of violent conflict, but suffer the most from its effects.
Peacebuilding initiatives should therefore be
accompanied by relief efforts and the provision of
infrastructure such as schools, water reticulation
systems, primary health care and related services, and
the revitalization of key economic sectors.

Botswana believes that post-conflict
peacebuilding can succeed if we place a high premium
on the national ownership of not only actual
reconstruction activities, but also in determining the
development priorities for which international
assistance is being provided.

We are pleased, Mr. President, that you have
convened this open debate at a time when we are
preparing for the mandated review of the
Peacebuilding Commission this year. It is very
important that the ideas generated during this debate be
allowed to feed into the review process. In that regard,
Botswana supports the adoption of the draft
presidential statement at the end of this open debate.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
Botswana's commitment to the realization of global
peace and security as a prerequisite to development,
dignified human existence, effective governance and
the pursuit of prosperity. We cannot overemphasize the
need for cooperation at the regional, bilateral and
international levels, as well as cooperation among the
various United Nations entities, in order to attain long-
term peace, stability and development through
processes accepted by all at the strategic, operational
and institutional levels.

