Mr. Al-Jaafari (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to express my appreciation to you, Sir, for
convening today's meeting in the light of the serious
threat we face not only in Iraq but throughout the whole
world. I also value the presence of my colleagues, the
Foreign Ministers of friendly countries, whose presence
here today proves the gravity of the threat we face. We
also wish to thank the United States for convening this
meeting with a view to mobilizing international support
to face up to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) and its affiliated organizations. I would also like
to welcome the briefing by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq.

Iraq reaffirms its determination to face up to
terrorism as an international scourge that must be
eliminated. It is extremely important that there be
coordination and cooperation among all parties. The
influx of terrorist fighters from all over the world to
establish a state under ISIS is a grave danger not only
to Iraq and Syria but to the entire region. Fighting those
terrorists in Iraq and sparing the Iraqi people their evil
is in the interest of the entire world. This war is being
launched against the people of Iraq, who are fighting on
behalf of all other peoples. They have violated our land
and the dignity of humankind. All the Iraqi people -
Christians, Yazidis, Turkmen, Shiites, Sunnis and
Kurds - are united in spirit against that evil.

We would like to restore peace and stability so that

we can restore public services to the people, especially
in the affected areas. The action of ISIS has led to the
displacement of more than 1.8 million Iraqis towards
Kurdistan and other areas in the south. However,
in spite of the political and security challenges, the
newly elected Government has cooperated with United
Nations agencies in Iraq to alleviate the suffering of
the people and to enable security forces to restore their
control over the entire territory of Iraq and to assist
displaced persons to return to their homes.

In spite of those challenges and the continued
threats, the Iraqi people have been able to hold their
national elections, followed by the formation of a unity
Government that pays interest to the concerns of the
entire people of Iraq in all its factions and that has
committed itself to implement the main principles in
the document of political agreement among Iraqi blocs,
signed on 8 September, to enhance national unity and
social cohesion and to take the necessary measures to
face up to terrorism. We have as a nation agreed on the
formation of a national Government that includes all
sectors of society. Mobilizing all efforts internationally
and regionally to face up to terrorism is an effective
way to deal with other challenges that face the region.

We believe that the main responsibility for fighting
ISIS and the other terrorist organizations on our
territory belongs to us and the Iraqi armed forces, the
Peshmerga forces and the national guard. However,
assistance from friendly nations is required for aerial
support.

We have taken every step to enhance national unity
and to take unified action. We had previously warned
that the situation in Syria would eventually affect Iraq
and that this major threat should be removed, not only
from Iraq but from any other country. On 25 June, Iraq
called on the Security Council for assistance from the
international community. I should therefore like to
state the following.

Military, economic and financial assistance to
Iraq should continue to support its counter-offensive
against ISIS. Removing the threat of Daesh requires the
removal of all its fighters, including in neighbouring
countries. Any military actions against ISIS should be
done in coordination with the Iraqi armed forces.

Humanitarian assistance should be provided
urgently to alleviate the suffering of more than
1.8 million people, including women and children.
We call upon States Members of the United Nations to
remain committed to the implementation of the Human
Rights Council resolutions and Security Council
resolutions in that regard, with a view to drying up the
sources of financing and military support to ISIS and
to preventing ISIS from dealing in natural resources in
the areas that it controls.

The United Nations strategy against terrorism has
stressed those points, and we would like to emphasize
that this threat will not be removed unless we fight the
extremist ideas that support it. The advocates of such
extremist ideas should be prevented from public speech
and should be countered at all levels. The people and
the Government of Iraq appreciate the roles played by
the United Nations, European nations and other nations,
including Arab brotherly countries that have assisted in
providing for the needs of the displaced and in assisting
people in affected areas where fighting has been severe.
We all face a grave danger that has no respect for
human rights or humanitarian aspects. We should all
work for the opposite culture of love, prosperity and
cooperation.

Finally, we would like to express our appreciation
for the assistance provided by the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, particularly the
humanitarian assistance to displaced persons, and to
reaffirm our appreciation and thanks to Mr. Mladenov
and his team for their dedication in assisting Iraq in
this crisis.

