Mr. Shinyo (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my thanks and appreciation to Mr. Karel de
Gucht, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium, as well
as the Belgian delegation, for having taken the
initiative to organize this timely debate on natural
resources and conflict. Let me also express our
appreciation for the diligent and expert preparations
undertaken in advance of this meeting through the
holding of seminars and the drafting of a concept paper
(S/2007/334, annex).

We are aware that this is the first time that the
Security Council has held a thematic debate on this
topic. We recognize that the proper management of
natural resources is a very significant issue relating to
the various phases of conflict, including conflict
prevention, conflict management, post-conflict
peacebuilding and recovery and reconstruction. With
that in mind, we appreciate the fact that the concept
paper has been organized in such a way as to present
the necessary viewpoints to the problem while
incorporating the direct and indirect influence of
natural resources on conflicts.

With regard to the appropriate approach to
addressing this issue, I would like to point out the
following three elements.

First, several initiatives are already under way in
this area in the international community in order to
address various issues, in particular efforts aimed at
improving governance from different perspectives.
Many stakeholders, including international
organizations, Governments, businesses and civil
society, are involved in those initiatives. In order for
such efforts to be more effective, it is essential for each
of those sectors to take a serious approach to this
problem and study it in a systematic way.

Secondly, we must promote better use of existing
initiatives. To that end, it is necessary to encourage the
participation of a greater number of countries,
including those with emerging economies, in such
initiatives as the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative and the Kimberley Process. In that regard, we
should also give due attention to the efforts of the
International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO),
which has been implementing measures to halt illegal
logging and providing support for better governance in
tropical forest regions. Last month, Liberia expressed
its intention to be reintegrated into the ITTO, and we
look forward to expanded participation in the ITTO by
other nations. With particular regard to the issue of
governance in post-conflict countries, we believe that it
is important to make the best use of existing
international organizations that have the requisite
knowledge and experience in this area.
Thirdly, given the fact that, in many cases,
conflicts in Africa have a regional dimension, it is
important as well to emphasize regional undertakings.
Proceeding from that point of view, if countries in the
Great Lakes region were to demonstrate an enhanced
commitment to the ongoing regional process, it might
become a touchstone for the solution of this problem.

Now I would like to discuss ways in which the
Security Council might conduct its own actions. First,
as mentioned earlier, in considering a variety of
initiatives, the Security Council should consider which
items are worthy of discussion, taking into account the
purpose for which each initiative was launched or
established.

Secondly, as indicated in the concept paper, while
the Security Council has various options available to it,
such as commodity sanctions, the establishment of
groups of experts and the creation of peacekeeping
operations, it is critical for the Security Council to give
careful consideration to when and how the Council can
suitably transform the sanction-driven approach to a
development-based approach. In such cases, the level
of commitment of the Government concerned becomes
the crucial basis for the decision. In this regard, the
case of Liberia provides an instructive example. In
Liberia, forestry reform and participation in the
Kimberley Process have been promoted through the
Security Council's presentation of clear conditions for
the lifting of sanctions.

Thirdly, although sanction measures may be
effective tools to restore international peace and
stability, it is necessary to consider what kind of
sanction measures will be effective by taking into
account the specific situation at hand.

Fourthly, the reinforcement of relations between
the Security Council and other relevant bodies is
required. This is especially true with regard to the
Peacebuilding Commission. The various undertakings
of the Security Council should be reflected seamlessly
in the Commission's activities, including in the
elaboration of an integrated peacebuilding strategy.

For the Security Council, it is essential to follow
up the outcome of today's debate. In this connection,
we would appreciate it if the Council would consider
ways to enhance the effectiveness and coherence of its
actions.
Japan participates actively in the international
framework, having taken part in the Kimberley Process
from its inception and serving as host to the ITTO.
Additionally, in the bilateral context, Japan has been
providing significant support to African countries in
the area of capacity-building through its programmes
for technical training in Japan. This issue also has been
taken up in the Group of 8 (G-8) process, and as chair
of the G-8 for 2008 and co-organizer of the fourth
Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD IV), which is also scheduled for
next year, Japan intends to continue its active
engagement in this problem.

