Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): Iwould like
to thank Ms. Sandra Honore, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), for her
briefing on MINUSTAH's work in Haiti.

The context of the establishment of MINUSTAH
is complex - from the very precarious sociopolitical
situation to the 2010 earthquake and the ravages of
hurricane Sandy, which left more than 500,000 dead and
thousands of wounded, as well as 1.2 million internally
displaced and major physical and psychological damage.
Under those conditions, reconstruction and stabilization
is slow and painful. Stabilization will only be possible
with the will and efforts of the Haitians themselves.
We commend the work of the United Nations team and
their commitment to support Haitians.

Chad notes with satisfaction the progress made in
the national dialogue that began in January under the
auspices of the Episcopal Conference of Haiti.

We are pleased at the consensus that all the parties
reached in order to hold free, transparent senatorial and
local elections. We thank the Mission for the technical
support to strengthen the instruments needed for
holding the upcoming elections.

On the security front, the Mission has effectively
completed its mandate to strengthen the capacity of the
Haitian National Police. Chad actively contributes to
the Mission with six trainers of trainers. We are pleased
that there has been a greater inclusion and promotion of
women in the police force with the objective of leading
to a further decrease in the high crime rate, trafficking
and the networks of organized crime in Haiti.

The humanitarian situation continues to be of
concern, with more than 600,000 people needing
humanitarian and food assistance, as well as aid in the
areas of housing and basic sanitation. We are pleased
that MINUSTAH has chosen to pursue lasting solutions
and the creation of income-generating opportunities so
that those people can be reintegrated into social and
economic life of Haiti.

Immigration is another sensitive element in Haiti's
development. Owing to the great number of immigrants
in the region, promoting regional dialogue will be
important for more humane and effective management
of migration issues. We also encourage the Government
of Haiti to invest in the diaspora, as it is a factor in
encouraging and energizing the country's development.

Chad commends the progress made by the Haitian
Government and MINUSTAH in terms of human
rights. We note with satisfaction the efforts made
by the Haitian justice system to bring to justice the
perpetrators of abuses and violations committed under
the previous regime, which has made it possible to reduce
impunity considerably and to give more legitimacy and
independence to the Haitian justice system.

In conclusion, I would like to say that MINUSTAH
has carried out its mission. However, the holding of
elections continues to be an essential challenge on the
path to the democratic stabilization of Haiti. We call on
all parties to continue the dialogue and to work for the
social and economic stabilization of Haiti. Chad calls
on the international community, through the Security
Council, to provide all the necessary humanitarian
assistance to the vulnerable population to bring about
the stabilization of Haiti.

