Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
briefing on the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/1105)
on progress made in the political process in Mali and
the activities of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

Before I go on, I wish to hail the presence among
us of His Excellency Mr. Tieman Hubert Coulibaly,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the
Republic of Mali. I ask him to accept the Ivorian
delegation's welcome and its congratulations on his
new assigment to lead the Malian diplomatic corps.

Mr. Lacroix's briefing described a situation of
contrasts that calls for the Council's ongoing vigilance
and strengthened support for MINUSMA in the
implementation of its mandate. My country attaches the
highest importance to developments in the situation in
Mali, in particular the political process, and welcomes
the efforts and resolve of the Government to promote
the comprehensive and inclusive implementation of
the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
which is the sole framework for resolving the crisis in
that country. My delegation shares the conclusions of the
Secretary-General on the need for the Malian parties to
step up their implementation of the Agreement, which
has been delayed significantly. This could threaten the
holding of upcoming local and presidential elections.
Time is running out and the implementation of the
peace agreement by the next elections will be key to
ensuring a peaceful and credible electoral process.

With MINUSMA's support, focus should be
placed on the redeployment of the Administration;
decentralization; security sector reform; and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. In
that regard, we encourage the Agreement Monitoring
Committee to fully play its role and to lead the Malian
parties to resolutely assume ownership of the Algiers
road map. The presence of Algeria, the leader of the
international mediation efforts, and the presence of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General as
observers in the Agreement Monitoring Committee is
an important step forward and a sign of openness that
will strengthen the Committee's effectiveness.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the Malian Government's
determination to involve neighbouring countries, in
particular Algeria, in implementing the Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. In this connection,
the Council should encourage the region and the
neighbouring countries of Mali to work closely with
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif to reach a definitive
solution to the crisis in Mali.

My delegation welcomes the cessation of hostilities
agreement signed on 20 September 2017 by the various
signatory movements of the peace agreement and
encourages the stakeholders to ensure its effective
implementation in order to contribute to improving
the security situation in the country. However, Cote
d'Ivoire is worried about the serious deterioration
of the security situation in the centre of the country
and the real risks of the terrorist attacks spreading to
the south. In this regard, my delegation calls for the
operationalization of MINUSMA's rapid reaction
force as soon as possible and for the fulfilment of the
Mission's need for helicopters.

Cote d'Ivoire also calls on Member States to
make available to MINUSMA appropriate means
to secure the camps and convoys against attacks by
terrorists groups, which have cost the lives of too
many peacekeepers deployed in Mali. Furthermore, my
country urges MINUSMA and the partners of Mali to
support the efforts of the Government in the context of
the deployment of Malian defence and security forces,
in particular to the north and centre of the country.
We must ensure that the Government of Mali has the
necessary support its army needs in order to protect
the people and territory of Mali. The presence of these
forces will prevent a the armed groups from becoming
permanently entrenched and, as a result, it will prevent
to the perpetration human rights Violations. It will also
facilitate the redeployment of the Administration and
essential social services.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the signing on 8 November
2017 of the agreement memorandum with the Malian
Government in order to ensure MINUSMA's support
for the Malian armed forces, in particular in the area
of strengthening logistical and operational capabilities,
exchanges of information and intelligence, medical
evacuations and the deactivation of explosives and
munitions. Peace and security and in Mali will be
lasting only if terrorist groups and criminals are
neutralized. For this to happen, it will depend on the
effectiveness of the force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-S Sahel) in its war against the terrorist groups.

Cote d'Ivoire is delighted about the convergence
of Views and the unity of action of Council members
regarding the support of MINUSMA to the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force and calls on the Council to go even further
in ensuring its support so that we can make sure that
MINUSMA does not continue to be the target of
terrorist attacks. Cote d'Ivoire hopes that, in accordance
with resolution 2391 (2017), the technical agreement
between the United Nations, the European Union and
the G-5 Sahel countries will be signed.

The Ivorian delegation welcomes the progress
achieved in the implementation of MINUSMA'S
mandate in an increasingly complex environment.
However, we would like to express our serious concerns
about the ongoing serious human rights violations, in
particular in the north and centre of Mali, as well as
the increasing asymmetric attacks against MINUSMA
personnel.

Looking beyond the security situation, my country
commends the commitment of MINUSMA and the
Government of Mali to the implementation of the road
map in order to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals, in particular by reducing inequalities and
eliminating poverty in order to improve the living
conditions of the people of Mali. Cote d'Ivoire agrees
with the Secretary-General that it is necessary to address
the root causes of the conflict to build a foundation for
peace and security.

In conclusion, my country would like to reiterate
that there can be no military solution to the crisis in
Mali and that the parties should commit themselves
resolutely to implementing in good faith the Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation, which is the solution that
was chosen by the people of Mali themselves. Cote
d'Ivoire believes in the capacity of all the parties to
overcome their differences in the interest of the people
and nation of Mali.

