I wish to thank the Dominican Republic for convening today's important meeting and for making it as open and inclusive as possible under the current circumstances engendered by the coronavirus disease pandemic. I also thank the Secretary-General for his thoughtful remarks and for his first-ever report on youth, peace and security (S/2020/167). I would also like to thank the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth and the briefers for sharing their perspectives and bringing the voices of youth to us from across the globe. We align ourselves with the statement made on behalf of the European Union and wish to make some additional remarks in our national capacity. As we celebrate the anniversary of resolution 2250 (2015), Hungary remains committed to strengthened cooperation in fully implementing the youth, peace and security agenda. More than ever, we see the power of youth shining through the insecurity caused by the pandemic worldwide. More than ever, we see young people stepping up all around the globe, using creative means and new technologies to gather and disseminate information, inspire and guide action and create a narrative of shared responsibility. More than ever, they are leading the world in terms of interconnectedness, flexibility and readiness to take action. More than ever, we see the power of peer-to-peer education and advocacy, which is inspiring us also to follow. However, the global health crisis has not swept away existing challenges, conflicts and inequalities, but rather amplified and exacerbated them. Now more than ever, we need to invest in, encourage the involvement of and ignite action for young people, in order to accelerate progress on the youth, peace and security agenda. First of all, we need to invest in youth. What this health crisis teaches us is that it is not always possible to predict breakdowns, or even prevent them. Success therefore lies in building robustness and resilience to respond to breakdowns. Building resilience is possible by investing in young people. As UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore highlighted recently, what we give the next generation today is not charity or a donation; it is an investment. Peace is not merely the absence of war: peace starts with inclusion, opportunity, empowerment and resilience. In order to build resilience, we have to take a holistic approach, reinforce all three pillars of the United Nations and use every tool at hand. This approach includes upholding human rights and fundamental freedoms and getting on track with implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Beiing Declaration and Platform for Action - and the list goes on. We should start with foundations, namely, with high-quality and affordable education and skills development, especially the development of the digital skills of young people. We are aware more than ever of the changing digital environment and the pressing digital divide, which can become a defining issue for a student's future. Innovative solutions and a new system of Government instruments are needed to best seize the opportunities presented and tackle the risks children and young people are exposed to online. In recent years, my Government has established and developed a digital child-protection strategy and a digital-education strategy aimed not just at youth, but also at teachers, parents and youth officers. These strategies have become all the more timely in the current global health crisis. Besides education, investing in youth should ensure their physical and mental health and well-being and protection from violence, discrimination and marginalization, which requires upholding the rule of law, good governance, access to justice and opportunity to participate in all aspects of life. We should equip youth not only with knowledge, but with the values and critical thinking that will be their compass as they strive to counter exclusion, intolerance and incitement to hatred and violence. Our approach should be intersectional and pay particular attention to those who are at risk of being left furthest behind, be they young women, adolescent girls, minorities, persons with disabilities or others. Secondly, we need to involve youth. Youth does have a voice. We just need to give young people the space and attention to raise that voice. Young people do have educated opinions. We need to listen to and act upon them, as their perspectives are the perspectives of the next generation. We need to support youth-led and youth- focused organizations by building capacity and agency and by ensuring safe and ample civic space, including for young peacebuilders and human rights defenders, who are often at the forefront of peace efforts. Moreover, we need to involve youth organizations as partners in decision- making processes and institutionalized mechanisms and bring them together with civil society organizations, Government entities and other partners. The United Nations system, both at Headquarters and in the field, should interact on a regular basis with youth groups. In Hungary, the National Youth Council serves as a forum to represent young people and youth organizations, shape youth policies and engage in exchanges with national and international partners. Hungary's participation in the United Nations Youth Delegate Programme also gives direct representation and voice to Hungarian youth at the United Nations and in national machineries. Participation is all the more important when a nation is fighting for its future and for peace. It was the youth in Hungary who took to the streets and ignited the 1956 revolution against oppression. It was the youth in Hungary who raised their voice and catalysed democratic transformation in 1989. But revolutions and ceasefires can be washed away: only inclusive peace can be sustainable. Young people need to participate meaningfully and inclusively in mediation, peace processes and wider decision-making structures, and in implementing ceasefires and peace agreements. Through its resolutions, the Security Council should give clear mandate to ensure their inclusion. Young people also have a key role to play in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. In this regard, Hungary welcomes and congratulates the peace and disarmament education efforts undertaken by the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs. We are eager to see the innovative programmes designed to involve young people in these crucial efforts. In addition, the United Nations Youth Champions for Disarmament is an excellent initiative recognizing and giving visibility to real heroes. The young generation includes many such heroes who are worthy of being recognized. Thirdly, youth should ignite cooperation for peace. As torches give light to one another, youth voices for peace have to be amplified across borders and regions so that they can cooperate and exchange, not only internationally but also transnationally, horizontally and regionally, to create networks that cut across sectors, social groups and religions. Let me finish by conveying the message of the Hungarian youth delegate for the open debate, who said that: "Creating peace has always been a cardinal issue in the history of humankind because it is only in peacetime that countries can thrive and people can live a balanced, happy life. I believe that today, young people play a key role in defining the social atmosphere. With an education appropriate for the twenty-first century, they will find it easier to understand and appreciate their differences, be they of religion, gender, race or physical or mental ability. This attitude is indispensable to avoid conflict and create a more tolerant society."
