Mr. Owada (Japan): I am very grateful for this
opportunity to express the Views of the Government of
Japan on this item, to which Japan attaches great
importance. Before doing so, however, let me express my
pleasure, Sir, at seeing you guiding the work of the
Security Council as its President for the month of May. I
wish also to take this opportunity to pay tribute to your
predecessor, the representative of the Czech Republic, for
the admirable manner in which he discharged his grave
responsibilities as President of the Council last month.

The Palestinian track of the Middle East peace process
is now approaching a crucial phase, particularly as
preparations are about to get under way for the elections to
the Palestinian Council. At this critical juncture, it is of
Vital importance that the parties concerned should act with
the utmost responsibility and self-restraint so that nothing
may stand in the way of resolving the many and difficult
challenges that they are faced with. Only if all work
together to foster relations of mutual trust and cooperation
can peace and security be established throughout the Middle
East, and can all the peoples of the region pursue their lives
in harmony and tranquillity.

It is precisely from this point of view that Japan
cannot help feeling deeply alarmed about the situation
created by the recent measures taken by the Israeli
authorities in relation to East Jerusalem. Everyone is aware
that any question concerning Jerusalem is extremely
delicate, particularly since negotiations on the ultimate
status of the West Bank and Gaza are to begin a year
from this month. Under such circumstances, it is of
critical importance that all parties concerned refrain from
taking any action that could jeopardize this negotiating
process.

A relationship of mutual trust between the Arab and
Israeli peoples is the sine qua non for any satisfactory
settlement of the problems in the Middle East. In this
sense, the recent action taken by the authorities of Israel
has to be looked on with great concern by the
international community. In the worst case, it could
irreparably undermine the very foundation of the peace
process. Whatever may be the background for this action,
it is imperative that Israel recognize the danger inherent
in this course and that it be keenly aware of its
responsibility to the international community. At the same
time, Japan would stress that this action must not trigger
a deterioration in the peace process, which is based on the
desire of all the parties concerned to consolidate peace
throughout the region.

Japan has decided to avail itself of this opportunity
once again to urge all parties to renew their commitment
to the achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in the region and to take action towards that end.
For its part, Japan has supported the peace process by
actively participating in multilateral negotiations and by
extending financial assistance to the Palestinian Interim
Government. Moreover, it is ready to renew its
commitment to engage actively in our joint efforts for the
realization of peace in the region. Japan stands ready to
redouble its efforts, in cooperation with all the countries
involved, to establish a durable peace throughout the
Middle East.

