Mrs. Khoudaverdian (Armenia): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to make a
further statement to address the provocative statements
made by the representative of Azerbaijan.

We regret that another attempt has been made
by that delegation to mislead Member States by
misrepresenting the causes and consequences of the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict and the history of those
years.

Again, to refresh the memory of the delegation of
Azerbaijan, it might be curious, but according to the
then Azerbaijani President Mutalibov, the responsibility
for the slaughter of the civilian population of the mostly
Azeri city of Khojalu, near the capital of Nagorno
Karabakh, Stepanakert, fully falls on the Azeri
opposition group, the Azerbaijani National Front. In
the days following the event, President Mutalibov, in an
interview with Czech journalist Dana Mazalova, said:
"The militia of the Azerbaijani National Front
obstructed and actually prevented the exodus of the
local population through the mountain passages
which had been specifically left open by Karabakh
Armenians to facilitate the flight of the civilian
population".

While the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan
and his delegation are busy falsifying information in
order to make their propaganda machine even stronger,
there is an abundance of statements and testimony
that in fact point to the Khojalu incident being not
an Armenian war crime but, rather, a twisted, self-
inflicted Azeri atrocity. An Azeri human rights activist
wrote: "The town and its citizens were deliberately
sacrificed for a political goal"; that reference appears
in Azerbaijani newspapers dated 1992.

Additional testimony comes from the chairs of
the Supreme Council of the Republic of Azerbaijan,
who stated that "the tragedy was committed by the
Azerbaijani authorities, specifically by a top-level
official". That reference appears in an article in the
newspaper Muhalifat dated April 1992.

Even former President Heydar Aliyev admitted
that the former leadership of Azerbaijan was guilty in
connection with the Khojalu events. According to the
Bilik Dunyasi news agency, in April 1992 President
Aliyev followed up with a shocking statement: "The
bloodshed will profit us. We should not interfere with
the course of events".

Without further engagement in polemics, I would
suggest that the representative of Azerbaijan seek the
truth in his own country, with the participation of
political parties and civil society, in order to shed light
on the events of those days.

Last but not least, regarding the Security Council
resolutions in which the parties concerned were urged
to immediately resume negotiations with a view to the
resolution of the conflict under the peace process of
the Minsk Group and through direct contact, I would
like to stress that Azerbaijan itself was in violation
of the provisions. The Azerbaijani representatives
systematically refused to acknowledge the fact that the
measures taken by Armenia met exactly the request
made in those Council resolutions, namely, to use its
good offices with the authorities of Nagorno Karabakh
in order to contribute to a peaceful resolution of the
conflict.

