Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), contained in document S/2012/275.
I also welcome and thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his detailed
introduction of the report.

We believe that the United Nations plays a crucial
role in guaranteeing stability and neutrality in Kosovo
and the region. We express our total support for the
Mission and for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and encourage them to continue to
carry out their mandate in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999).

I should like to make a few comments on the
report before us. First, we welcome the new progress
made by Belgrade and Pristina in the dialogue
facilitated by the European Union. However, we also
take seriously the observation that tension and
confrontation on the ground continue to pose tangible
risks to peace and stability in Kosovo and the region.
We are concerned about the growing perception
referred to in the report that it continues to be difficult
to reach a definitive solution to underlying issues of
the conflict. In that regard, we urge the parties to seek
broad and lasting solutions in line with resolution 1244
(1999), especially to resolve the issue of future
elections in Kosovo, reduce tension overall and support
conditions for constructive dialogue.

Secondly, we note that the situation in north
Kosovo continues to be extremely sensitive when it
comes to development of the political situation
between Pristina and Belgrade. We are following the
situation with regard to the expected operationalization
of the agreement on integrated management of the
crossing points, as well as with regard to the
normalization of free movement.

With regard to security in general, we are
concerned about criminal incidents that primarily
affect minority ethnic communities, including incidents
involving intimidation, acts of aggression, robbery,
arson, vandalism and damage to Serbian Orthodox
churches and the looting of private homes. We support
the work done by UNMIK to encourage Kosovo
authorities to take specific preventive measures to
attempt to reverse this trend. We urge Pristina and
Belgrade to take responsibility for reducing tension, as
well as to continue to use positive language in their
communications.

Thirdly, we note that there is a continuing
downward trend in voluntary returns to Kosovo.
According to the Secretary-General's report, the
number of returns during the first quarter of this year
decreased by 48 per cent as compared to the same
period in 2011. We therefore support the Secretary-
General's call for scaling up political will and attention
in order to reverse this trend.

We also regret that there continues to be a certain
degree of resistance to measures intended to protect
Serb cultural and religious sites in Kosovo. We urge
Kosovo authorities to redouble their efforts to bridge
the gap between commitments and activities
undertaken in this regard.

Fourthly, we are following with interest the work
of the Special Investigative Task Force to look into
allegations of inhuman treatment of persons and organ
trafficking in Kosovo. The report of the Secretary-
General barely touches on this important issue. We are
pleased that the Task Force has enjoyed support and
cooperation to date. Nevertheless, this is a complex
investigation that covers various jurisdictions. We hope
that every allegation will be thoroughly investigated
and that those responsible will be brought to justice.
We therefore continue to believe that it would be
desirable to arrive at an arrangement that could involve
the United Nations in the process of addressing the
allegations.

Lastly, we take note of the report on the work of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission that is
appended to the report of the Secretary-General. We
believe that it is important to consolidate efforts to
promote the rule of law in Kosovo. A passage from that
report drew our attention, namely, the announcement of
a reconfiguration of the Mission in the light of
developments concerning the rule of law. Although the
report states that structural changes will not impact the
Mission's goals, we would like to have more
information in that regard.

