Mr. Kim (Slovenia): In addition to associating
ourselves with the statement delivered yesterday by the
representative of Greece on behalf of the European
Union member and acceding countries, we wish, in our
national capacity, to add a few points.

We welcome the opportunity of having an open
debate of the Security Council on such an important
issue. In so doing, we remain committed to the relevant
conclusions of the European Council, including those
of 17 February and of 20 March 2003.

Slovenia has continuously held the view that the
Security Council is the body holding primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. It is urgent to reaffirm and restore
the Council's credibility and authority as the body
addressing and resolving crises threatening
international peace and stability.

Slovenia continues to support all efforts of the
international community to curb the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. It has been and continues
to be our position that Iraq was obliged to fully and
unconditionally comply with international norms, and
specifically with the requirements of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 1441
(2002). We would have strongly preferred that the
disarmament of Iraq and its verification had been
achieved without resorting to use of force. We regret
that unanimity could not be reached within the Council
on ways to resolve the Iraqi crisis by ensuring
compliance with its previous resolutions in accordance
with the United Nations Charter, other norms of
international law and the relevant Council resolutions.

We wish to use this opportunity to express our
appreciation for the work of the inspections process,
and specifically to both chief inspectors Dr. Blix and
Dr. ElBaradei and their teams for their work and
reports submitted to the Council.

At the current time, it is vital to ensure full
respect for the norms of international humanitarian law
and universal human rights. We salute the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for its courageous
work. During this time of war, ICRC's unimpeded
access in crisis areas is of vital importance. As a
concrete gesture in support of its work, Slovenia will
provide a donation to ICRC's activities in Iraq.

Every effort must be engaged to minimize the
effect of the war on Iraqi civilians. Our combined
special attention should be particularly addressed to the
vulnerable population, and especially to the Iraqi
children. Slovenia, as a member of the Human Security
Network, is deliberating a possible contribution to that
effect.

Slovenia hopes that the oil for food programme
can be resumed as soon as possible. We support the
Secretary-General's proposals in this respect. In current
deliberations over the extension of the programme, we
should always bear in mind that the majority of the
Iraqi population is critically dependent upon the
programme.

The resolution of the Iraqi crisis and dealing with
its consequences should be restored to the United
Nations framework. We further hope that political and
security conditions can be created for the return of
United Nations personnel to affected areas to provide
urgent humanitarian assistance.

Slovenia is willing to contribute its share in
addressing the major humanitarian needs of the Iraqi
people and affected neighbouring States arising from
the conflict, and will respond favourably to the appeal
to be issued by the United Nations to meet
humanitarian needs in and around Iraq. Slovenia will
also try to contribute to the best of its abilities to the
post-war rehabilitation and reconstruction of Iraqi
society.

In conclusion, Slovenia appeals for the
restoration of the unity of the international community
as soon as possible in resolving the Iraqi crisis in the
framework of the United Nations and the Security
Council. We join in the call of the Secretary-General to
the Security Council to reunite around a new resolve to
uphold the principles of the Charter.

