The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Kuwait.

At the outset, I would like to congratulate all
Muslims around the world on the occasion of Eid
Al-Fitr Al-Mubarak. We pray that all the peoples of
the world would can continue to celebrate it in safety
and security. I would also like to thank everyone for
their congratulations on Kuwait's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
to commend the representative of Indonesia and his
team for their successful and distinctive presidency of
the Council in May. Like everyone who has preceded
me today, I would like to thank Mr. Francois Lounceny
Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA), for his valuable briefing and
to commend the efforts and activities of the staff of
UNOCA in implementing its mandate.

I will focus on three basic aspects of the issue
under discussion. First, on the security and political
fronts, the Secretary-General's recent report on the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of UNOCA
(S/2019/430) gives a detailed picture of the latest
political, economic, social and security developments
in the region and their impact on peace and security in
Central Africa, as well as of the countries in the region
that are dealing with a number of challenges.

On the political front, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo witnessed a first peaceful transition of power
on 24 January. In the wake of major efforts by many
stakeholders, the Central African Republic witnessed
the signing in February in its capital, Bangui, of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
between the Government and 14 armed groups, under
the auspices of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation and with the support of the African
Union and the United Nations. We look forward to
other political developments in the region, including
local elections in Angola and presidential elections in
Burundi in 2020. We hope that they will be held on time
and include all political parties, with the participation
of international observers and free of violent incidents.
We want to emphasize that the holding of inclusive,
free and credible elections and the implementation of
political processes in any country in Central Africa are
important steps towards ensuring the maintenance of
peace and security that will contribute to the stability
of the whole region. That also includes conducting a
dialogue between Governments and all political parties,
including opposition parties.

We want to point to the importance of cooperation
between the Governments of the region and regional
and international organizations such as the United
Nations, the African Union, the Economic Community
ofCentral African States, the Central African Economic
and Monetary Community, the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, the Gulf of Guinea Commission and other
relevant active organizations. The aim is to achieve
progress on the political, economic and security fronts,
which is a significant challenge facing the countries of
Central Africa.

With regard to the security situation, we are very
concerned about the violence and armed conflicts in
the region that have tragically claimed the lives of many
innocent civilians. It is vital to work to find radical
solutions to such conflicts and to hold the perpetrators
accountable. We also firmly condemn criminal acts,
suicide bombings and recurring armed attacks, as
well as the robberies and kidnappings carried out
by Boko Haram and the Lord's Resistance Army in
the region, all of which are obstacles to progress on
the political, security and development fronts. It is
everyone's responsibility to address those attacks and
destructive acts through cooperation among the United
Nations, the Security Council, regional and subregional
organizations and all of the countries of the region.

We share the concerns of the Secretary-General
about the deteriorating security and human rights
situations in the North-West and South-West regions of
Cameroon. We urge the Cameroonian Government to
continue cooperating with regional and international
organizations and to redouble its efforts to alleviate
humanitarian suffering, prevent violent acts and armed
conflict and stop the flow of refugees, in line with
its obligations under international humanitarian law.
We stress our respect for Cameroon's sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity and for
non-interference in its internal affairs. We call on
all parties in Cameroon to cooperate and settle their
differences through dialogue and to ensure unobstructed
humanitarian access to all people in need.

Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian
situation, we deplore the rise in the numbers of people
in need of urgent humanitarian assistance, refugees
and those internally displaced as a result of violence
and spreading epidemics such as cholera and Ebola. We
call once again for cooperation among the countries
of the region and regional organizations in order to
address the various threats and make progress on the
humanitarian front so as to alleviate the suffering of the
peoples of the region.

Thirdly, with regard to cooperation with UNOCA
and other organizations, Central Africa is dealing
with a number of issues, including conflicts related
to transhumance, climate change, armed conflict and
the spread of small arms and light weapons, as well
as economic and social problems, all of which are
challenges that require serious cooperation among the
Governments of the countries of Central Africa and all
the relevant regional and international organizations
if they are to meet the aspirations of the peoples
of the region to security, stability and well-being,
especially considering that the region has a wealth of
natural resources.

In conclusion, I would like to once again
thank Mr. Fall and the staff of UNOCA for their
extraordinary efforts.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

The meeting rose at 4.50 pm.
