Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to discuss the
situation of the Middle East in an open format.
Developments in different parts of the region make it
imperative that the broader membership can express
itself on the action needed from the Security Council
in order to meet the responsibilities it discharges on
behalf of the entire membership.

The repeated failure of the Council to act on the
most serious crimes in Syria appears in particularly
sharp light as attacks with chemical weapons continue
unabated, in blatant disregard of the most fundamental
rules ofinternational law and with horrific consequences
for the Syrian people. We deplored the discontinuation
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM), whose investigative capacity and preventive
dimension continue to be urgently needed.

At the same time, we underline that accountability
must, and can, be provided through other means,
in particular through the Syria accountability
mechanism - the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 - whose
mandate clearly encompasses the use of chemical
weapons by any perpetrator. We call on all States to
fully cooperate with the Independent Mechanism
by sharing relevant information and evidence and by
providing it with the political and financial support
necessary for it to implement its mandate. In that
regard, Liechtenstein supports the French initiative to
forge a partnership to ensure accountability for the use
of chemical weapons in Syria. We welcome in particular
the specific commitment by the partnership countries
to support the work of the Mechanism.
The Security Council has a crucial responsibility
to protect civilians from the most serious crimes under
international law, including the deliberate targeting of
civilian populations and infrastructure and preventing
the delivery of urgently needed humanitarian aid. The
humanitarian catastrophe in Yemen, evolving under
the watch of the Council, has reached unprecedented
dimensions, with more than 20 million people in need of
assistance. The United Nations system and humanitarian
actors on the ground, in particular the authoritative
voice of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
continue to sound the alarm about the suffering of the
Yemeni people and to remind us of the preventable
nature of this single largest humanitarian crisis.

We call on the Council - and in particular its
nine members that have signed the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group Code of Conduct
on mass atrocity crimes and that together constitute a
procedural majority in the Council - to address the
situation in Yemen with the attention and the urgency
it deserves.

Liechtenstein shares the concern expressed by many

that an already fragile peace process in the Middle East
has been further jeopardized by recent developments
and that a two-State solution - as the only promising
avenue to achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace - is becoming increasingly difficult to achieve.
We express our continued support for a two-State
solution and the international legal framework in which
such a solution can be achieved, including applicable
international humanitarian law and the relevant
resolutions of the Council - in particular resolutions
478 (1980) and 2334 (2016), which continue to be
binding on all of us. We support the call of the General
Assembly for an intensification and acceleration of
efforts aimed at achieving a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East. The Council remains
a key actor in ensuring that any such efforts will be
guided by applicable international law.

