Ms. Dunlop (Brazil): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of August, and
thank Ambassador Rugunda for ably steering the
Council in July. I thank you for organizing this open
debate. The fact that the Security Council is holding
two debates on the future of peacekeeping in a span of
a few weeks shows its commitment to a strengthened
dialogue with the membership and the Secretariat on an
extremely crucial issue.

I also thank Under-Secretary-Generals Alain
Le Roy and Susana Malcorra for their informative
briefings and the considerable efforts their
Departments have made in producing the non-paper
entitled "A new partnership agenda: charting a new
horizon for United Nations peacekeeping".
Furthermore, I want to thank General Martin Luther
Agwai, Force Commander of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, for his valuable
comments from the perspective of realities on the
ground. I note with satisfaction the presence at this
meeting of almost all of the commanding officers of
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

The Secretariat's non-paper highlights the
challenging gap between the magnitude and complexity
of modern United Nations peacekeeping and the
resources - human, institutional and material -
available to it. Addressing this gap is vital not only for
international peace and security, but also for the
Organization. Its long-term legitimacy and prestige
will be influenced by how effectively we manage
peacekeeping in the coming years.

That is why we need a true partnership among the
Security Council, the wider membership, in particular
troop-contributing countries, and the Secretariat. In
order to be fully productive, our cooperation must be
all-encompassing in making strategic decisions on the
future of peacekeeping as such; in assessing, in
concrete cases, whether there is a peace to keep or
whether peacekeeping is appropriate; and in defining
sustainable drawdown and exit strategies.

As noted in the non-paper, our success will
ultimately depend on the commitment and political will
of Member States, which will be easier to obtain if the
decision-making process is - and is perceived to be -
as fair, objective and inclusive as possible.

Today, my delegation wishes to comment on but
one substantive issue discussed in the Secretariat
non-paper, namely, the relationship between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. As an increasing
number of missions have been sent to developing
countries, where conflict is often related to one form of
deprivation or another, we have started to better
understand the linkages between peace and
development. Many of us believe that, just as
peacekeeping becomes a mere crutch in situations
where political actors do not commit to reconciliation,
peacekeeping cannot fully succeed when the
socio-economic roots of many conflicts are not
successfully addressed.

That does not mean that peacekeeping missions
should replace United Nations funds, agencies and
programmes in development assistance, or that the
Security Council should act in matters beyond its
competence under the Charter. Rather, it means that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, although distinct,
have synergies that must not be overlooked or denied.
On the contrary, without prejudice to the functions
proper to peacekeeping missions, we must actively
look for such synergies and, in each case,
pragmatically choose the best available response to the
concrete needs of a given conflict or post-conflict
situation.
Quite often, especially in early recovery
scenarios, some tasks are crucial to the short- and
medium-term sustainability of fragile peace: rebuilding
indispensable infrastructure, including that associated
with or enabling law and order functions; resuming
basic services and generating peace dividends that will
ensure the support of the population for the difficult
political decisions usually required for making and
keeping agreements.

When confronted with such situations and others
with similar needs, we must ask ourselves whether
peacekeepers might not be part of our response.
Sometimes they are the only or main United Nations
presence on the ground and directly face a population
reeling from the effects of conflict. They often have the
institutional, logistical and human capabilities needed
to perform some of those tasks, at least on an
emergency basis.

Why should we not tap those resources, at least
while other parts of the system and its partners get
ready to make a meaningful contribution on the
ground? Even when they are present or in later-stage
post-conflict scenarios, peacekeeping missions may, in
some cases, be in a position to help close critical gaps.

In addition to assisting the host country, an active
contribution by peacekeeping operations to
peacebuilding is advantageous to the missions
themselves and the United Nations at large. The first
see public support for them consolidated; the latter sees
its name associated with concrete gains in the living
standards of many people.

Exploring synergies between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding may also have systemic benefits to the
Organization and its Member States. It may help to
expedite an early transition from one to the other and
thereby reduce the demand for peacekeeping, with
gains for the efficiency of the system as a whole.

In sum, in pursuing international peace and
security, we should be pragmatic and flexible, while
maintaining full conformity with the Charter. Clarity of
functions and priorities should not give way to
compartmentalized thinking that does not maximize
scarce resources and prevents the United Nations from
delivering as effectively as possible.

As to the other important issues discussed in the
Secretariat's non-paper, Brazil stands ready to give
them full consideration in the coming months both in
the General Assembly, especially its Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, and, to the
extent possible, in the Council. A series of thematic
discussions in the Special Committee in the fall might
be a productive way to address the many crucial
aspects raised by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support. The
Council can count on Brazil's active participation.

