Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I join in
the warm thanks to Under-Secretary-General Vieira de
Mello for his important and wide-ranging briefing. The
United Kingdom welcomes his involvement in this open
meeting. We are strong supporters of his role as
Emergency Relief Coordinator, and I would like to pay
tribute to the success of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs as an essential unit in the United
Nations structure under his leadership. I hope this will be
the first of many occasions on which we will be able to
hear his Views and on which we will be able to address
human security issues.

As we all noted, we continued to see gross violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights law in
many bitter current conflicts. Such Violations often feed
the hatred of parties to the conflict and perpetuate the
cycle of violence. How do we break that cycle?

I agree with Ambassador Turk on many things that
he said, but particularly that one key issue here is the
state of the existing body of international humanitarian
law. Is the problem that we need to implement existing
law much more effectively? Or are there loopholes which
need to be addressed in the body of law? Does the United
Nations system, including the Security Council, need new
instruments to ensure compliance with international law?
The establishment of the International Criminal Court is
a vital step, but it is not enough on its own.

As Mr. Vieira de Mello has pointed out, the Council
has a role in humanitarian issues. It seems to us that we
have seen some encouraging trends in recent years. The
Council needs to continue to ensure that peacekeeping
operations support the development of local law-and-order
capabilities, the restructuring of armed forces on a
constitutional basis and the restoration of economic
activity through properly planned infrastructure
programmes. Civilian police components, demining
programmes and the reintegration of former combatants
will often be essential elements of future
multidimensional peacekeeping operations. Beyond this,
we need to look at how best to strengthen civil society,
build local democratic institutions and ensure that the

 

rights of men, women and children are protected. Does Mr.
Vieira de Mello feel that more can be done in this area,
particularly after a conflict may have died down?

I fully understand the accent he has placed on the
effects of conflict on innocent civilians. We seem to have
become inured to a series of horrific stories. Kosovo is one
source, Sierra Leone is currently another. I read in my
papers this morning of a visit which a British diplomat has
just paid to Freetown. He talked to the Minister responsible
for broadcasting the views of the elected Government of
Sierra Leone, and this Minister told the British High
Commissioner that he had to stop those broadcasts because
on the outskirts of Freetown, when the rebels heard the
voice of the Minister on the radio, they were so angry at
hearing the sound of his voice that they went out in the
streets and killed the first civilians that they found. How do
you reach people who do that sort of thing?

Mr. Vieira de Mello said, "The gulf between existing
international norms and respect for them on the ground has
never been so wide." (supra) As a response to that, verbal
outrage is just not good enough. How can we both ensure
higher humanitarian standards and fulfil our Charter
obligations to respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States, especially when they are led by
murderous regimes, and in the worst case when those
regimes have used chemical weapons against their own
people? What is the overriding priority here? I agree with
Ambassador Lavrov on this point, that this is an area which
needs further analysis and may require changes.

The United Kingdom has worked a great deal with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
International Committee of the Red Cross, the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and non-
governmental organizations to promote protection of
civilians, and particularly of children, in armed conflicts.
Does the Under-Secretary-General have ideas on how the
Security Council can address the important issue of
coordination with bodies such as these in this important
area. Ambassador Lavrov, among others, has rightly drawn
attention to this. The Security Council has a partial and
rather ill-defined responsibility for an extremely complex
area. Are we approaching the issue of cohesion between the
Security Council and the rest of the United Nations system
with sufficient seriousness?

I am sure that the Secretariat will have been pleased
to see the adoption last November of resolution 1208
(1998), which addresses the need to maintain the civilian
and humanitarian nature of refugee camps. Does the
Under-Secretary-General have further ideas on what
special measures might be considered for the protection
of such camps, in particular given the vulnerable
segments of the population they often house, such as
children?

A further area which I agree must be highlighted is
the physical security of humanitarian workers. The United
Kingdom is working with non- governmental organizations
in particular to study options for protection of
humanitarian agencies and their personnel. I would like to
ask whether the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs has done any further thinking in this
area, and if so, what practical conclusions are being
drawn.

Finally, I would like to commend you, Mr.
President, for the excellent initiative of holding this
meeting. It is important that the Council should follow up
and find answers to some of the questions I have raised,
as well as ways of implementing the specific suggestions
made by Mr. Vieira de Mello. The United Kingdom fully
supports the use of this effective and transparent format
and hopes that it will be taken up by other Council
presidencies in the future on this and on other subjects.

