Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation abstained in the vote on the
draft resolution for the following reasons.

The Syrian Arab Republic does not see any
necessary justification for renewing resolution 1422
(2002) this year. Last year we voted for the resolution,
and the Council adopted it unanimously. Our vote this
year is based on the conviction that articles 16 and 17
of the Rome Statute respond to the preoccupations and
problems involved in the renewal of resolution 1422
(2002). The Secretary-General referred to this matter in
his statement this morning.

Eleven months have passed since the adoption of
resolution 1422 (2002), without any need arising that
requires the reaffirmation of the importance of
continuing to give permanent immunity to
peacekeeping forces of those States that are not parties
to the International Criminal Court from coming before
the Court and having its Statute implemented against
them.

Secondly, we are fully confident that
peacekeeping forces and those working in international
forces established by the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security in
many parts of the world are assumed to be above all
form of suspicion vis-a-vis crimes that come under the
jurisdiction of the ICC as war crimes or crimes against
humanity or genocide. Peacekeeping forces are sent by
the Security Council, whether or not they belong to
States parties to the Court - it is the same - and they
do not go to areas of conflict in order to commit war
crimes and crimes against humanity and genocide.
Their function is to bring peace to those areas and to
maintain international peace and security to those
regions, in accordance with the jurisdiction authorized
by the Council.

In the event that they perpetrate crimes breaching
the Rome Statute, then they can be surrendered to their
Governments, who will try them before their national
courts in accordance with article 17 and with the
principle of judicial complementarity, as mentioned in
article 1 of part 1, on the establishment of the Court.

Thirdly, when resolution 1422 (2002) was
adopted last year, the ICC was in its first days of
establishment. Today, the Court has been in existence
for 11 months. It has become a concrete reality, and
Judges were elected from among qualified judicial
persons. The Court has become almost universal, since
the number of States ratificating the Rome Statute has
reached 90 and there are 140 signatory States. Hence,
we believe that the adoption of this resolution would
result in gradual weakening of the Court's role in
persecuting those who have perpetrated the most
heinous crimes that come under its jurisdiction.

As my country supported the establishment of the
Court and participated in drafting its Statute, it has
signed the Statute and is about to take the legislative
procedures necessary to ratify it.

Fourthly, we have full confidence in international
criminal justice. We would like to affirm the
importance of upholding the principles, objectives and
purposes of the United Nations Charter and respecting
international law and international humanitarian law,
particularly the Geneva Conventions, which govern
crimes perpetrated during wartime and armed conflict
by all parties.

