Mr. Serrano: The candidate countries Croatia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Montenegro; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia; as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.

This debate comes at a time when the
international community is faced with a number of
challenges in the Middle East region. Nevertheless, the
Arab-Israeli conflict remains a focal point and the
events across the Arab world, while historic in their
own right, mean that we must increase our efforts to
address this problem with the utmost priority.

The European Union (EU) firmly believes that
the transformational moment we are witnessing is
actually an opportunity not to be missed. The parties
and the region have waited long enough. Their hopes
and aspirations have been dashed too many times. We
have invested a great deal of effort in the Quartet in
recent weeks, and will continue to do so, because it is
our conviction that by complementing and supporting
United States efforts, the European Union, the United
Nations and Russia, has a contribution to give to the
negotiated solution we all hope will be achieved. We
also recognize the crucial importance of an active Arab
contribution building on the Arab Peace Initiative.

The European Union affirms that unilateral actions
by either party cannot prejudge the outcome of
negotiations. We must continue to make concerted

efforts towards a negotiated solution. The European
Union reiterates that settlements in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, are illegal under international
law, constitute an obstacle to peace and threaten to make
a two-State solution impossible. All settlement activity,
including in East Jerusalem, should cease immediately.
New construction plans should be abandoned.

Trust between the parties has been seriously
undermined. That is why our efforts have been aimed
at promoting a credible framework for the resumption
of negotiations between the parties on all final-status
issues that should lead to a two-State solution by
September 2011.

This is an opportunity for the European Union to
recall its positions in this regard. We believe that the
following parameters could serve as a basis for a
resumption of negotiations between the parties: first,
an agreement on the borders of the two States, based
on the 4 June 1967 lines, with equivalent land swaps as
may be agreed between the parties; secondly, security
arrangements that, for Palestinians, respect their
sovereignty and show that the occupation is over, and,
for Israelis, protect their security, prevent the
resurgence of terrorism and deal effectively with new
and emerging threats; thirdly, a just, fair and agreed
solution to the refugee question; and fourthly,
fulfilment of the aspirations of both parties for
Jerusalem. A way must be found, through negotiations,
to resolve the status of Jerusalem as the future capital
of both States.

The European Union has a strong track record as
a supporter of and large contributor to Prime Minister
Fayyad's State-building programme. At the recent
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee meeting on 13 April,
hosted by European Union High Representative
Catherine Ashton in Brussels, there was a unanimous
acknowledgment that the Palestinian Authority's State-
building effort has gained renewed momentum in the
past two years as the international community has
coordinated its efforts to support the plans to build a
sustainable economy and to strengthen State
institutions. The European Union welcomes the
assessment of the United Nations and the international
financial institutions that the Palestinian institutions
are above the threshold for a functioning State in the
key sectors they studied and compare favourably with
those in many established States, despite the
continuing occupation and the divide between the West
Bank and Gaza.

The European Union strongly supports this
institution-building process. In this regard, the
European Union welcomes the organization of a
second international donors conference for the
Palestinian State this June in Paris. The European
Union has further increased the component devoted to
institution-building assistance, which this year amounts
to €75 million out of €300 million earmarked for the
occupied Palestinian territory. However, the significant
achievements of the Palestinian people will be
sustainable only if there is a political breakthrough.

The European Union regrets the renewed
violence witnessed in the past weeks. European Union
High Representative Catherine Ashton has made clear
statements condemning mortar and rocket attacks out
of the Gaza Strip, in particular the recent attack on a
school bus, which resulted in the death of a student,
and has called for these attacks to stop immediately
and permanently. She has also deplored the loss of
civilian life in Gaza and called on Israel to show
restraint. The lives of civilians must be protected
everywhere and in all circumstances. The European
Union urges full respect for international humanitarian
law. The announced ceasefire must be fully respected
by all sides if there is to be any hope of a genuine
peace process. The European Union calls on those
holding the abducted Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit to
release him without delay.

The European Union firmly reiterates its calls for
the full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009)
calling for the immediate, sustained and unconditional
opening of crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and persons to and from Gaza,
including goods and persons from the West Bank. The
European Union calls on all international supporters to
make use of the existing land crossings to channel their
support to Gaza.

Increased and accelerated imports of construction
materials are another crucial component of Gaza's
recovery. Despite some progress following the decision
of the Government of Israel in June 2010 regarding
Gaza access, further efforts are needed to achieve a
fundamental change of policy that allows for the
reconstruction and economic recovery of Gaza and
improves the daily lives of the population while
addressing Israel's legitimate security concerns.
The European Union reiterates its readiness to
contribute substantially to a comprehensive and
sustainable solution, with the State of Israel and an
independent, democratic, contiguous and viable State
of Palestine living side by side in peace and security.

