Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): Thank you,
Mr. President, for the background paper and for the
initiative of organizing this open meeting and thus
helping keep Central Africa at the forefront of the
Council's attention.

The United Kingdom supports the statement by
the presidency of the European Union. We welcome the
presence of the Ministers here and their contributions
to the debate. Like the previous speaker, I am very
pleased to see the President of the Economic and Social
Council, Mr. Simonovie, here today.

As earlier interventions have borne out, we see
today's meeting as essentially about making effective
operational linkages. My delegation has said on many
occasions how important the United Kingdom
considers it to be to have greater coordination between
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council. This coordination is important in itself and an
illustration of what I think is now a commonplace in
our theory, if not always our practice: peace, security
and economic development are fundamentally linked
and must be addressed in parallel.

This linkage is certainly a reality that the people
of many African countries experience in their daily
lives and that African Governments have encapsulated
in two of the key initiatives of the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD), in the areas of peace
and security and of political and economic good
governance. It is unsurprising that the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community
(CEMAC) are redefining their roles to take account of
collective security, because the economic development
of the region cannot be addressed without tackling
conflict.

There is another set of linkages that we need to
consider i those between subregional, regional and
international efforts to address conflict and
development. I think there is a two-way exchange to be
had here. Efforts at the sub-regional level can give
substance and shape to the NEPAD initiative, and
effective sub-regional organizations will be building
blocks for an effective African Union. In the other
direction, NEPAD and the African Union can provide a
context for subregional and national efforts, as well as
a framework for international support. The United
Kingdom would also welcome direct input from the
region to the work of the Security Council and
ECOSOC working groups on Africa. At the same time,
we need to be sure that each part of the system is
playing to its strengths and not duplicating. The
Central African subregional organizations need to
define their role according to where they can best add
value. How can they feed into the NEPAD initiatives
and into the NEPAD peer review mechanism, and how
can the different subregional organisations interact?

The Council has welcomed efforts by the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community
(CEMAC) to address the tension between the Central
African Republic and Chad by deploying an
international observer force. This is a very concrete
demonstration of political will. We hope that the force
will work closely with United Nations mechanisms on
the ground.

Above all, we welcome efforts to revive
cooperation in the Central African region, because the
problems and the potential of the countries of the
region are so clearly inter-linked. But expanding
regional mechanisms or broadening their remit cannot
help unless there is a real common purpose
underpinning such mechanisms. In too much of the
region, neighbourly relations are still seen as a zero
sum game - my neighbour's economic or security
gain must be my loss. Looking at the lack of economic
and physical security of so many of the people of the
region, this is patently untrue. But it will take more
than just new structures to break the cycle of mistrust
and narrow opportunism.

What Central Africans needs first and foremost is
a vision, a vision of the mutual benefit that could come
from peace and cooperation and of the potential impact
of just and far-sighted strategies for the development of
the region's vast natural resources. This must form the
glue of regional cooperation. It is then that we can look
at how the international community can best assist.
International input must also be coordinated, across
national boundaries and different functions. There is an
important leadership role here for the United Nations,
especially through the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General.

Within Central Africa, it is perhaps in the Great
Lakes region that we see most clearly the appalling
waste of conflict, the waste of human life and of a
beautiful, diverse and resource rich region. Peace
agreements have been signed, and step-by-step we are
seeing implementation. But I fear that the mentality of
conflict - of mistrust, blame and competition -
remains. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Burundi, the first steps must be to end armed conflict,
while in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
establish transitional Government, and in Burundi to
strengthen it. But peace-building will depend on wider
regional cooperation. The United Kingdom supports
the proposal for an international conference on peace,
security, democracy and development in the Great
Lakes. This can help provide the framework. The will
to change course, however, must come from the
Governments in the region. If they are listening to their
people, it will.

