Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
on options for the prosecution of persons involved in
piracy off the coast of Somalia (S/2010/394). I am
grateful also for his and the Legal Counsel's briefings
this morning. I would also like to acknowledge the
presence ofAmbassador Duale of Somalia.

The United Kingdom appreciates the contributions
of the United Nations and its agencies to international
efforts to combat piracy, in particular those of the
Office of Legal Affairs, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and his team.
We also welcome the Secretary-General's intention to
appoint a new adviser on legal issues around piracy off
the coast of Somalia.

The United Kingdom remains gravely concerned
by the threat of piracy and armed robbery at sea off the
coast of Somalia. Even though the proportion of
successful attacks continues to fall, the total number of
attacks continues to be very high. Pirates are now
willing to venture further out to sea in search of their
prey. We should not, therefore, underestimate the
significant challenge we face in finding a long-term
solution to this problem.

But, almost by definition, piracy is an issue in
which the Security Council has shared interests and a
common vision. Our task is to turn that common vision
into effective policy formulation. The international
community has shown unity and resolve in taking
action at sea to contain the threat of piracy, including
through the European Union's Operation Atalanta.

But to effectively address the problem of piracy
in the region, we need a comprehensive approach
which recognizes that the root causes of piracy are on
land. The instability that continues to plague Somalia
must be addressed. We need to support the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia in developing
effective political and security structures. Yesterday's
appalling attack in Mogadishu was a stark reminder of
the terrorist threat to the TFG. The Security Council
rightly condemned it. I would like to thank African
Union Mission for Somalia (AMISOM) - and Uganda
and Burundi, its two troop-contributing countries -
for their outstanding efforts to support the Government
against those terrorists.

The effective prosecution and imprisonment of
those responsible for acts of piracy and armed robbery
at sea is only one part of the solution, but it is a very
important part. The analysis of the seven options
presented in the Secretary-General's report makes a
very useful contribution to our ongoing efforts to
address this complex issue. Of the options presented in
the report, the United Kingdom believes that the best
prospect for sustainable results will come from further
enhancing the international community's efforts to
build the capacity of regional States to prosecute and
imprison those responsible for acts of piracy.
Prosecution at the national level is most likely to
provide adequate capacity for the efficient judicial
handling of possibly large numbers of suspects.

By contrast, the United Kingdom continues to
have doubts about the viability of establishing new
international or regional mechanisms for prosecuting
pirates. It risks being a waste of limited resources if we
divert them into supporting new systems which would
not be sustainable or offer long-term benefits.

Significant work in the field of capacity-building
has already been undertaken by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the UNODC,
with the support of the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia. That work has helped develop
judicial and penal systems in Somalia, Kenya,
Seychelles, Mauritius and Tanzania so that they can
prosecute and imprison suspected pirates in a manner
consistent with international human rights standards.
Intensifying such measures should provide the region
with a sustainable and long-term capability for dealing
with the problem of piracy.

We pay tribute to Kenya for its leadership within
the region in taking forward the prosecution and
imprisonment of pirates. We also welcome the
agreement by the Republic of Seychelles to accept
pirate suspects for trial and detention and the first
completion of a piracy trial there.

Mauritius, Tanzania, the Maldives and courts in
Somalia itself are currently participating in the
UNODC assistance programme, which is another
important step forward. But it is important that those
States do not stand alone in this difficult task. They
must be given adequate support by the international
community. We stand ready with other partners to
provide assistance to the signatories of the Djibouti
Code of Conduct who have undertaken to enact
national legislation to enable prosecution of pirates and
combat piracy in the region.

We agree with the Secretary-General's
assessment that sentence enforcement arrangements for
convicted pirates is a critical issue. It needs urgently to
be addressed, given the potential long-term burdens on
prosecuting States. In Kenya, pirates have been
sentenced to prison terms of up to 20 years.

We commend the UNODC and UNDP for their
work reconstructing and refurbishing correctional
institutions in Somalia. The UNODC has also done
important work in facilitating the negotiation of
repatriation arrangements which will enable Somalis
convicted of piracy in the courts of foreign States to
return to Somalia to serve their sentences within reach
of their families.

We are committed to continuing work with
partners through the Contact Group in addressing
piracy and its root causes on land. But piracy is just
one of many symptoms of the instability in Somalia. It
is vital that all parties redouble their efforts towards a
more peaceful and stable Somalia. The Somali people
have suffered for far too long.
