It is my honour to deliver this joint statement on behalf of Viet Nam and Indonesia, the two Security Council members from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). We thank the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya, Ms. Stephanie Williams, for her briefing. We also welcome the Permanent Representative of Libya, Ambassador Taher Elsonni, to this meeting. Based on this morning's briefing, Viet Nam and Indonesia would like to make the following points. First, we welcome the political and security progress in Libya, including the signing, on 23 October, of the agreement for a complete and permanent ceasefire in Libya as well as the Libyan parties' intensified face-to-face interactions to pursue its implementation. We also commend the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) for facilitating the 5+5 Joint Military Commission and its efforts to establish a ceasefire monitoring mechanism. We urge the relevant parties to fully respect and adhere to the ceasefire agreement and support its implementation. That must include the unwavering commitment to upholding the arms embargo, in line with relevant Council resolutions on Libya. We further welcome the launching in Tunisia of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum and the agreement of the Libyan parties to move forward towards presidential and parliamentary elections next year. Those positive developments clearly demonstrate that the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process is the only solution for long-term peace in the country. It is essential to preserve this positive momentum, including by actively supporting UNSMIL. To that end, we reiterate our joint call for the appointment of a new Special Envoy for Libya. That is long overdue. Secondly, Viet Nam and Indonesia support the role of neighbouring countries and regional organizations in promoting peaceful dialogue in Libya. As two South- East Asian nations, we fully understand the importance of regional and subregional cooperation. ASEAN's One Vision, One Identity, One Community is the result of the sustained efforts of all countries in our region over many decades. With shared goals and responsibility to our peoples, we have been able, and will continue, to achieve a lot together, including ensuring regional peace, security, stability and prosperity. Based on that conviction, we recognize and commend the neighbouring countries, particularly Tunisia, Morocco and Egypt, for hosting the Libyan dialogues. We also recognize the efforts of the African Union and the League of Arab States to resolve the crisis in Libya. Thirdly, the humanitarian situation must be prioritized during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We urge all relevant parties in Libya to fully respect international humanitarian law, immediately stop targeting civilians and civilian objects, ensure the safety of health-care workers and allow unhindered humanitarian access. Further measures must be taken to protect vulnerable groups - particularly women, children, migrants and refugees - from the negative impact of both the conflict and the COVID-19 pandemic. In that regard, we express our deepest condolences to the families of the victims of the tragic incident off the coast of Al-Khums, Libya. We call on all international partners to continue to provide technical and financial support to countries in the region through bilateral and multilateral frameworks. We also commend the efforts of UNSMIL and the United Nations Mine Action Service in addressing the humanitarian challenges in Libya. History has taught us that only through dialogue, not military scenarios, can peace be achieved. As we move to the next chapter in Libya, allow me to conclude with a quotation from Martin Luther King, Jr: "Peace cannot be kept by force; it can only be achieved by understanding. Darkness cannot drive out darkness; only light can do that. Hate cannot drive out hate; only love can do that."
