Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank Mr. Vieira
de Mello for his comprehensive and encouraging
briefing. We also welcome the presence of Mr. John
Howard, the Prime Minister of Australia, and thank
him for his important statement. We also welcome the
Senior Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
East Timor, Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, for his presence at
the Council's meeting.

Since our last meeting on the situation in East
Timor, more progress towards independence has been
made. The East Timorese Public Administration
continues to play an increasing role in running the
daily affairs of the country. The defence and police
forces are developing according to schedule, and the
security environment is improving.

After the Constituent Assembly announced that
the formal declaration of independence would take
place on 20 May 2002, Mr. Vieira de Mello announced,
a few days ago, that the presidential election will be
held on 14 April. We hope and believe that, like the
election of the Constituent Assembly last August, the
presidential election will also be held in a free, fair and
orderly manner and that the outcome will be accepted
by all sides, which is extremely important for a smooth
transition and for lasting peace and stability after
independence.

We noted with satisfaction that the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), in the light of the development of the
situation, has reduced its presence there in a planned
manner.

We appreciate the huge amount of work done by
Mr. Vieira de Mello and UNTAET under his leadership
in helping the people of East Timor achieve
independence. We also admire the tireless efforts of the
people of East Timor aimed at controlling their own
destiny.

On the other hand, as pointed out by the
Secretary-General in his report, the situation in East
Timor is by no means all peace and prosperity. As a
nation State, it has only a very limited pool of
professional and administrative expertise, and it still
has some security problems. East Timor's development
in all its aspects will continue to require international
assistance. Therefore, in order to ensure continued
stability and development in East Timor and the
successful completion of the United Nations Mission, it
is necessary to maintain an appropriate presence in
post-independence East Timor and to devise a
comprehensive and sophisticated exit strategy. This is
the consensus reached by the international community,
including the members of the Security Council.

The Secretary-General in his report has provided
a detailed description of the post-independence
international presence, which includes three
components: military, police and civilian. It proposes a
framework for UNTAET's successor mission. We are
of the view that the Secretary-General's analysis is
based on an objective assessment and that his proposals
are practical, since they provide us with a good basis
for our future work on the mandate and the
configuration of the successor mission. We support the
relevant proposals of the Secretary-General. We also
agree with his view that the successor mission needs to
ensure that all operational responsibilities are fully
transferred to the East Timorese authorities as soon as
is feasible without jeopardizing the stability and
progress achieved.

Finally, we can agree with the Secretary-
General's recommendation of extending the present
mandate of UNTAET until 20 May 2002. We are
looking forward to the specific ideas and
recommendations of the Secretary-General regarding
the successor mission.

