Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): First, I would like to
thank Mr. Roed-Larsen for his lucid and
comprehensive briefing.

It was not very long ago that the international
community assisted the parties to the conflict in
Palestine to adopt the Quartet's road map, which
contained a clear objective: an end to occupation; a
permanent settlement of the conflict on the basis of
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002);
and, ultimately, the establishment of an independent
and viable Palestinian State living in peace with its
neighbours. The achievement of that objective is now
threatened by a new, indefensible cycle of violence
emerging against the backdrop of the continued
violation of the human rights of the Palestinian people
by the occupation forces.

Pakistan is deeply concerned at the situation in
Palestine, particularly after the Israeli decision to
remove from Palestine Chairman Arafat, the
legitimately elected President of the Palestinian party.
Concerns on that score have further heightened since
the latest statement by a member of the Israeli Cabinet.
We believe that any action to remove President Arafat
will only complicate the peace efforts in the region,
further contribute to mistrust between the parties and
seriously undermine the implementation of the road
map. It will spur, not stem, the rising tide of violence
in which innocent civilians invariably suffer the most.

One must not forget that the current situation in
Palestine is a sad corollary of incessant disrespect for
international humanitarian and human rights law,
which has engendered frustration and anger and has
resulted in the unfortunate killing of innocent people
on both sides. Pakistan regrets those killings and
condoles with the families of the victims.

While the occupation of the Palestinian territories
is itself illegal, warranting immediate corrective
measures, persistent violations of fundamental human
rights of the Palestinian people - including closures,
blockades, curfews, targeted assassinations and the
construction of illegal settlements and of a separation
wall - have added to the misery of that besieged
people. Several delegations noted earlier that those
activities are intended to create new realities on the
ground before the start of negotiations on a final
settlement. Security Council officials earlier urged a
permanent end to all those measures, yet such
violations continue unabated.

Those and other actions have dissipated
confidence among Palestinians and have contributed to
scepticism about the international community's ability
to be resolute in achieving the objectives of the road
map. We must neutralize these obstacles by showing a
stronger international commitment to a negotiated
settlement of the conflict. We must help bring an end to
Palestinian dispossession and must facilitate the
realization of their right of self-determination.

Israel must realize that peace cannot be durable if
it is imposed through the use of force. Nor can lasting
peace be achieved by liquidating duly elected leaders
and interlocutors. Peace cannot come with one side
literally dictating its terms. Removing President Arafat
will not bring peace or security for anyone. Israel must
cease all hostile actions against the Palestinian people
and their lawful Government.

The present deteriorating situation in Palestine
warrants urgent attention by the international
community. We must act, and act with determination,
to prevent the situation from descending further into
chaos - a chaos in which neither side can realize its
hopes for peace with security. Violence and
provocations beget violence and reprisals. We must act
now to break the cycle, to stop further provocations
and to bring the parties back to the track of
negotiations to facilitate the implementation of the road
map. We fully agree with Mr. Roed-Larsen that there is
no alternative for the parties but to recommit
themselves to the road map. We look forward to the
Council's action, as well as to the Quartet's next
meeting, to salvage the present situation and to move
back to the larger and nobler goal of a just and lasting
solution in line with the two-State vision.

