Ms. Mueller: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
humanitarian situation in South Sudan.

Following the briefing provided to the Council on
7 December 2017 by the Emergency Relief Coordinator
(see S/PV.8124), humanitarian partners launched the
2018 Humanitarian Response Plan for South Sudan.
Under the plan, humanitarian partners are seeking
to assist 6 million people with life-saving aid and
protection, which is more than half of the entire
population of the country, even after more than 2 million
South Sudanese already fled the country as refugees.
An additional 1.9 million people are displaced within
the country.

This highly prioritized humanitarian response
plan requires $1.7 billion. Leveraging new funding
in the coming weeks will be critical. Only through
timely, adequate funding will the United Nations
and humanitarian partners be able to procure and
pre-position supplies during the ongoing dry season
to ensure that we can prevent an already critical
humanitarian situation from worsening.

According to the most recent food security analysis,
5.1 million people are currently estimated to be severely
food insecure. That is an increase from the October
to December period, and an increase when compared
to this time last year. Some 1.5 million people are in
emergency-level food insecurity, just one step away
from famine, and around 20,000 people are already
in famine conditions. The next lean season, which
begins in March, is likely to see food security worsen,
and could see famine conditions spread to several new
locations across the country.

Women and children are particularly vulnerable
to food insecurity and their situation is projected to
deteriorate. An estimated 250,000 children will be
affected by severe acute malnutrition in 2018, requiring
urgent life-saving interventions. The new Executive
Director of UNICEF, Henrietta Fore, underscored
that point during her recent visit to South Sudan. The
alarming levels of food insecurity and malnutrition are
closely linked to people's inability to plant or harvest
due to the ongoing conflict and constraints upon their
freedom of movement. Cultivation continues to be
severely limited by widespread violence, displacement
and destruction of assets. Last year, the traditionally
surplus food-producing areas of Greater Equatoria
and Western Bahr el Ghazal saw a significant decline,
producing between 30 and 50 per cent less cereal than
in 2016. Ongoing clashes surrounding food production
are of serious concern this year.

I am also deeply disturbed by the continued high
rates of sexual violence. In 2018, humanitarian partners
estimate that 1.8 million women and girls are at risk of
gender-based violence. In response to such staggering
figures, partners are aiming to scale up support services
to reach nearly 400,000 more vulnerable people than
last year.

Since the last briefing to the Council on this topic
(see S/PV.8132), violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights violations and abuses have
continued to be perpetrated by both the Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA) and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition. Civilians
have continued to be killed and forcibly displaced by
clashes between the parties, including in Yei River state
and Lasu in Central Equatoria and Northern Liech in
Greater Upper Nile. Several thousand people have fled
to Ethiopia and Uganda just this month.

The implementation of the Republican Order
for the Free, Unimpeded and Unhindered Movement
of Humanitarian Assistance Convoys, issued by the
President in November, has been inconsistent, and
the humanitarian access situation across South Sudan
remains highly complex and unpredictable. However,
there have been some positive developments. Last
week, the International Organization for Migration
announced that, for the past month, it has been able
to provide consistent primary health care in Greater
Baggari, an area south of Wau that was cut off from
assistance by the SPLA for more than a year. In
Western Equatoria, a humanitarian convoy delivering
assistance to Congolese refugees in Yambio County was
completed safely for the first time this month without
force protection.

Yet, overall, access challenges have continued
to delay and interrupt the humanitarian response.
Last month, in Unity state, truck drivers delivering
humanitarian supplies by road from Juba reported a
total of 66 checkpoints controlled by SPLA and different
non-State actors, with some charging fees. This month,
in the Upper Nile region, the SPLA and the national
security mounted a new roadblock along the Aburoc-
Kodok road, demanding payment for commercial and
humanitarian vehicles. I would also like to highlight that
in December, humanitarian organizations relocated 65
aid workers due to fighting, bringing the total number
of relocations for 2017 to over 600.

Unfortunately, such access challenges follow a
long-established pattern. In 2017, at least 28 aid workers
were killed in the line of duty, and over 1,100 incidents
were reported, the highest annual count since the start
of the conflict. Those incidents included killings,
kidnappings, attacks against humanitarian assets and
bureaucratic impediments. An example of the latter
is the increased fees for work permits for foreign
nationals - from $100 to as much as $4,000 - imposed
by South Sudan's Labour Ministry.

The challenging operating environment is
restricting the ongoing dry season prepositioning of
supplies and overall programme delivery. Health,
nutrition, food security and the provision of other
life-saving assistance and support are regularly
interrupted and hundreds of thousands of people are
without access to assistance for extended periods of
time. Obligations under international humanitarian law
remain in effect for as long as the armed conflict lasts.
Ijoin the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission in calling upon the parties
to the conflict to adhere to international humanitarian
law and to ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian
access, as specified in the 21 December agreement on
the cessation of hostilities.

Despite the challenges, the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners reached more than 5.4 million
people in South Sudan last year. Over 5.1 million
people received food assistance and emergency
livelihoods support. More than 2.5 million people
received emergency health kits, and some 900,000
children and pregnant and breastfeeding women
received emergency nutritional assistance. More than
2.1 million people benefited from water and sanitation
programming; 900,000 people were provided with vital
emergency items, including blankets and mosquito
nets; more than 390,000 children benefited from
educational programming; and over 560,000 people
received services addressing gender-based violence. In
2018, humanitarian partners hope to assist even more
people to avert a further deterioration in humanitarian
conditions. That includes providing protection services
to 4 million people and food security and livelihood
support to 5.5 million.

In conclusion, I call upon the members of the
Security Council to help mobilize timely investment
in the 2018 humanitarian response plan to ensure
that life-saving assistance reaches those most in
need; to use their influence to ensure that the parties
to conflict comply with all their obligations under
international humanitarian law; to ensure that the
parties to the conflict respect and protect civilians,
including humanitarian workers, and civilian objects,
including humanitarian assets, and to make sure that
the parties to the conflict meet their obligations to
allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage
of impartial humanitarian relief for civilians in need.
Such obligations were acknowledged and restated in
the President's decree on access and in the cessation
of hostilities agreement. Humanitarian workers need
to be able to safely deliver aid, when and where it is
most needed. The people of South Sudan deserve
nothing less.

