Mr. Osorio (Colombia)(spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
November and for your initiative to convene this debate.
I would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Director-
General of the International Committee of the Red
Cross for their briefings, which are of great importance
and help to shed light on our debate.
I would like to emphasize the resolve and
commitment of the Government of Colombia to protect
civilians in armed conflicts and to guarantee their
rights throughout the world. We are convinced that
respect for the life and integrity of all people is the
foundation of democracy. At his recent inauguration,
President Juan Manuel Santos underlined that respect
for these commitments reflects the most important
democratic, ethical and human convictions.

The Government and Congress of my country are
currently drafting three bills with a view to continue
strengthening the State's institutional capacity and
promoting the social and economic prosperity of our
people. These bills address the issues of victims and
land restitution, royalties from natural resources, and
corruption.

The State has the primary responsibility to protect
civilians in armed conflict. Respecting this principle is
essential to strengthen the State's capacities and to
identify long-term solutions, with the cooperation of
the international community, when required. Our own
experience has shown that strong democratic
institutions help to achieve the goals of progress and
overall well-being. This has been shown by the results
obtained in Colombia in recent years.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2010/579) is an
important contribution to the intergovernmental
consultations taking place in the General Assembly and
the Security Council on the protection of civilians. We
reiterate that the analyses conducted and actions adopted
should take place in observance of the United Nations
Charter, international and national law, and in the
framework of the principles of neutrality, impartiality,
humanity and independence. Special attention should be
paid to holding consultations with the Governments of
concerned countries and to recognizing the specificities
of each case under consideration.

Regarding observations concerning the possible
engagement of humanitarian actors with illegal armed
groups, my Government reaffirms that such
engagement must enjoy the explicit consent of the
concerned State and comply with national and
international humanitarian law. The lack of information
on and knowledge of specific realities on the part of
international actors could have a negative impact on
the actual protection of civilians.

My delegation wishes to emphasize the need to
establish effective controls over the illicit traffic in

small arms and light weapons as a key element for
better protection of the civilian population. Today in
Bogota, a parliamentary forum on small arms and light
weapons will be attended by parliamentary
representatives of 50 countries, who will discuss the
threat posed by the proliferation of such weapons to
development, democracy and security in many parts of
the world.

Colombia reaffirms its commitment to the
Cartagena Action Plan adopted at the Second Review
Conference of States Parties to the Mine Ban
Convention in December 2009. Colombia also supports
the initiative of the Secretary-General concerning the
establishment of indicators for assessing progress in
protecting civilians in the context of peacekeeping
operations. This initiative should be developed taking
into consideration each operation's mandate and should
not be based on theoretical formulas looking for
universal solutions. My delegation will participate
actively in the discussions on this matter and will
contribute to its advancement in the various organs and
entities of the United Nations.

