Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (spoke in French):
The delegation of Gabon has carefully studied the
Secretary-General's report on the evolution of the situation
in Sierra Leone. It has also listened most carefully to the
complementary presentation Under-Secretary-General
Bernard Miyet has just made to the Council.

Like the Secretary-General, we welcome the
progress made in the implementation of the Lorne
Agreement, including, inter alia, the return to Sierra
Leone of the leaders of the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF) and of the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council
(AFRC), as well as the establishment of a Government of
National Unity and the recent increase in the number of
former combatants that have joined the programme of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
Nonetheless, it is regrettable to have to note that
recently some parties have yet again resumed the
hostilities, casting doubt on their genuine willingness to
contribute positively to the restoration of peace and the
rebuilding of the country.

The delegation of Gabon condemns the continued
acts of aggression against civilians, international civil
servants and humanitarian personnel committed by the
former rebel elements. We therefore call on all those who
have yet to lay down their arms and who are behind the
resurgence of violence to stop fighting immediately so as
to facilitate the distribution of humanitarian aid and the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme now under way, as well
as the other tasks envisaged under the Lome Agreement.
By the same token, it would be desirable for the rebel
leaders to undertake an information campaign among their
fighters to make them aware of the terms of the DDR
programme. Such a campaign might encourage them to
participate in the programme. Now is also the time to
accelerate the full deployment of the 6,000 United
Nations Blue Helmets envisaged under resolution 1270
(1999).

We take this opportunity to thank those countries
that have already provided or pledged to provide troop
contingents or financial and logistical contributions. We
cannot praise enough the work of the Economic

 

Community of West African States Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG), which has allowed the restoration of peace in
Sierra Leone.

The success of the peacekeeping operation in Sierra
Leone clearly depends on the firm will of the people of
Sierra Leone to respect the commitments they made under
the Lorne Agreement. It also depends on the continuation
of the assistance of the international community.

We thank Mr. Okelo for the efforts that he has made,
which have made it possible to achieve the results that we
have seen, and we encourage the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to continue this
work so as to allow the Government and the people of
Sierra Leone to again enjoy concord and national unity.

