Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank
Mr. O'Brien for his briefing.

In the 30 days since the previous Security Council
meeting on the humanitarian situation in Syria (see S/PV.7931), we have heard about ongoing difficulties
and continuing tragedies, but at the same time we have
also received some positive news, even if, as I said, the
overall situation continues to be dire. On the political
side, Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura convened the
sixth round oftalks in Geneva. In the area ofthe cessation
ofhostilities, the three guarantors ofthe Astana process
agreed on the memorandum of understanding on the
four de-escalation zones. With respect to humanitarian
access, the United Nations inter-agency convoy
delivered food and medical items to eastern Ghouta,
which was a much-awaited development.

In addition to the developments I just mentioned,
the International Syria Support Group (ISSG) has been
regularly exchanging information and seeking solutions
that are possible in the short term. As a member of the
ISSG and as the humanitarian co-penholder, Japan has
been making efforts to convince the Syrian Government
to provide facilitation letters and allow access to
United Nations inter-agency convoys. Unfortunately,
these individual efforts cannot overcome the fact that
humanitarian access is neither systematic nor consistent.

Mr. O'Brien noted two months ago that successful
access has always been the result of humanitarian
workers' patient negotiation and use of one or two
influential channels. We are aware that the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent has been such a channel and has pushed
for expanded access. However, it is essential that the
Security Council itself together with the ISSG undertake
serious and coordinated efforts to expand discrete work
into truly effective action that results in full and good
faith implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Japan will continue to seek solutions to the
pressing humanitarian situation, in cooperation with
the other humanitarian co-penholders. We ask that
all actors, especially in the Security Council and with
political influence, do the same.

The Astana process guarantors are attempting to
reduce the fighting in the four de-escalation zones,
which include the besieged and hard-to-reach areas
where most of the people are located, as Mr. O'Brien
pointed out today. Our expectations on this front are
high because so much of the humanitarian crisis is
concentrated in these areas. Expanded information and
coordination with United Nations humanitarian actors
and the Security Council by the guarantors are needed
in order to make these efforts as effective as possible.

