Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): On behalf of my
delegation, I express to Mr. Gusmao and to Mr. Ramos-
Horta a warm welcome to this open meeting, and I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his
briefing. Let me add that it was a pleasure and a
privilege to listen to the incisive inputs and ideas on
this very important topic. My delegation appreciates
the fact that East Timor has continued to make progress
on the path to independence. We commend the able
guidance and direction of Mr. Vieira de Mello and the
good work of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) in this
regard.

From the report of the Secretary-General it is
clear that remarkable progress has been achieved since
the renewal of the UNTAET mandate in January of this
year. The promulgation of the regulation on the
election of the Constituent Assembly on 16 March
2001, the civil registration, the development of the
national civic education framework, the launching of a
comprehensive voter programme and the development
and training of the East Timor Lorasa'e Police Service
are indeed positive steps.

The efforts to facilitate the development of a
dynamic market economy in East Timor will help
create a business environment that welcomes domestic
and foreign investment. We commend the UNTAET
initiative in this regard. We welcome UNTAET'S
efforts to accelerate the Timorization process through
the various training and recruitment programmes in the
key sectors of administration and services. We
appreciate the fact that in preparation for upcoming
elections to the Constituent Assembly UNTAET has
begun a programme designed to bring more women
into the political process. We hope that civil society
organizations all over East Timor, and the United
Nations Fund for Women, will continue collaborating
with UNTAET in this respect.

We welcome the meeting between the
Government of the Republic of Indonesia and
UNTAET/East Timor Transitional Administration, held
on 15 May 2001 in Denpasar, when many important
issues were discussed and clarified.

We are particularly pleased by the news that the
United Nations team has been disseminating
information to the refugees about security and the
political situation in East Timor as well as about the
assistance provided to returnees. We believe that this
will dissipate all doubts in the minds of those who are
keen to return to their homeland but are discouraged
either by lack of information or by disinformation put
out by the representatives of the pro-integration groups.

In this regard, we welcome the request by Mr.
Vieira de Mello to all journalists in East Timor to
adhere to the highest standards of professional
integrity, refrain from hate-mongering and avoid bias
in their news coverage. We believe that Radio
UNTAET has a crucial role to play in the forthcoming
elections by educating people and informing them of
the mechanisms put in place for a free and fair election.

In the history of the Organization, United
Nations-sponsored agreements to monitor elections
have proved successful in a number of conflicts.
However, just as there are successes in United Nations
election monitoring, there are also "half-successes" and
even failures. As the need for impartial election
monitoring grows, the United Nations must learn from
past mistakes in order to fulfil its primary goal of
fostering peace and security in the international
community. The fact is that the people of East Timor
have not known independence for nearly three
centuries, and therefore any lacuna in the preparation
for the elections on the part of the international
community will add to their frustration. We believe that
no effort should be spared in order to ensure that there
is maximum participation in the elections. It is also
important to ensure that the outcome of the elections is
really credible.

While the report refers to many positive
developments, certain issues of concern are also
mentioned. The continued influx of refugees into urban
areas, which is adding to the growing unemployment
problems; the disinformation and negative propaganda
campaigns carried out by the pro-integrationist groups;
the widely shared fear that the political process may
not remain peaceful; and, above all, the uncertainty in
respect of the date of independence need to be dealt
with as early as possible.

My delegation believes that political and
constitutional developments in East Timor are matters
of the utmost importance to the international
community, as well as to the East Timorese people.
Although much has been said about the process
towards full and effective independence, what the East
Timorese require is the peaceful transfer of power to
the hands of the East Timorese, who must take
responsibility for their destiny and continue the
developmental process within the framework of
democracy, freedom and justice.

It is axiomatic to say that for any democratic
process to succeed it must first of all adopt an inclusive
approach to accommodate the entire population of the
country, without discrimination. We are happy to learn
that over 42 per cent of the East Timorese population
has already registered to vote. We echo the views of
other delegations that the returnees should be treated as
an integral element of the broader process of
reconciliation and popular democracy in an
independent East Timor. We hope that in the short time
frame that now is available to UNTAET, this issue will
be given the consideration it deserves. We appreciate
the decision of the Indonesian authorities to conduct a
one-day re-registration of East Timorese refugees in
West Timor in June. However, if necessary the
registration exercise should be extended to provide a
longer period so as to make it more successful and
reliable.

Two important matters that we now need to
address relate, first, to what kind of relationship the
elected Constituent Assembly would like to maintain
with UNTAET after the election on 30 August; and,
secondly, to the mode of international presence that
will be required after independence in order to ensure
the effective continuation of the democratic process
that is put in place.

From past experience, it is clear that the exit
should be steady and planned, taking into account all
the possibilities for extending the support and help that
may be required. In this regard, the Security Council
must ensure that UNTAET's mission has been
successful and that there is the real possibility of
timely and quality donor participation in the post-
election period for financing of administrative and
other constitutional mechanisms that will invigorate the
Timorization process and guarantee the people full and
effective participation in the day-to-day affairs of their
own country.

My delegation supports the observation in
paragraph 24 of the report of the Secretary-General in
this regard - that is, to maintain the military
component essentially in its present form until the East
Timorese Government has established itself. We
believe that the process of developing and training the
Timor Lorasa'e Police Service should gather greater
momentum and that it should not have to wait until the
end of April 2003 before reaching full strength.

The international community must also see to it
that the political will of the East Timorese leadership
for a solid society based on the rule of law and precepts
of human rights is not warped by unnecessary
pressures.

Finally, my delegation is optimistic about the
mission that the international community is
undertaking in East Timor. We hope that East Timor
will achieve the status of nationhood and join the
family of United Nations Members in the very near
future. Independence for East Timor will mean a lot in
terms of peace and security in the region, and will
usher in a new era in the popular participation of the
people in the progress and development of East Timor.

