Mr. Ahamed (India): At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Madam President, for having organized
this timely debate. Your initiative will be significant in
determining the relevance and effectiveness of not only
the Council but also of the larger United Nations
system in the decades to come.

I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Judy Cheng-Hopkins and the Chair of the
peacebuilding configuration for Guinea, Ambassador
Sylvie Lucas, for their useful briefings. Our sincere
appreciation also goes to Ambassador Gasana for his
able stewardship of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC).

The idea of peacebuilding essentially emanates
from experience in peacekeeping distilled over
decades. The United Nations has made enormous
investments in manpower and resources in
multidimensional peacekeeping operations. In such a
scenario, the Council would do well to effectively
consult major troop- and police-contributing countries,
both individually and through the instrumentality of the
PBC, when formulating and revising mandates of
United Nations missions.
India's excellence in peacekeeping is a result of
our long partnership with United Nations missions. Our
consolidated contributions are bigger than the
magnitude of current peacekeeping operations. Our
peacekeepers have invariably also been early
peacebuilders. India has also shared its experience and
expertise with a range of countries that have embarked
on the path of transition from conflict to peace.

India will happily continue to make our capacities
available to societies emerging from conflict situations
and will partner with the United Nations in its
peacebuilding endeavours. As a member of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, India has actively partnered with the PBC
since its inception in December 2005 and has
contributed to the Peacebuilding Fund.

Peacebuilding is a cooperative and coordinated
venture. Peacebuilding strategies must first be
harmonized within the United Nations system. The
existing structures and networks need to be
consolidated as we explore alternatives elsewhere.
Harnessing the capacities of the global South will
energize our peacebuilding enterprise. It is also
important to keep in mind that national ownership is
the critical determinant of success in peacebuilding. It
is the duty of the international community to ensure
assistance for capacity-building to national authorities.

Security is, of course, the key pillar for
peacebuilding. However, it is equally important that we
focus on economic opportunity, particularly for the
youth, in tandem with political and social stability.
That demands a holistic approach. It is also important
that there be an effective two-way dialogue between
countries on the PBC agenda and the Commission
itself throughout all phases. Let us also acknowledge
the fact that the lack of funding constitutes a major
impediment to the success of peacebuilding initiatives.

It goes without saying that other elements such as
human resources, technical assistance, managerial
assistance, assistance in kind and other programmes of
assistance through provision of appropriate
technologies are also important. Predictable and
appropriate resource levels over an extended period
will guarantee the sustainability of peacebuilding
initiatives.

Enhancing civilian capacity will have a major
impact on staffing and resourcing and the peacekeeping
missions themselves. Those are essential, but they
should neither dilute nor detract from the requirements
of peacekeeping. It is also important that civilian
capacities are sourced with the requisite measure of
ground experience. In that context, priority should be
given to obtaining secondment capacities from the
Governments of developing countries.

My delegation is hoping for constructive and
meaningful discussions on the substance of the
Secretary-General's report on civilian capacity in the
aftermath of conflict (S/2011/527). It is essential that
such discussions take place in intergovemmental
settings and involve the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee.

