Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): It is a great
pleasure for me and my delegation to take part in this
debate on "Peace-building: towards a comprehensive
approach". We commend you, Mr. President, for taking
the initiative to organize this debate and also for
circulating the background paper (S/2001/82), which
we find very useful. We are grateful to the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for a very focused opening
statement, which put the issue in perspective.

Throughout the decade of the 1990s - starting
with the first Security Council summit, in 1992,
followed by major United Nations conferences
covering issues of the environment, human rights,
population, women's issues and social development -
the overarching theme of peace and its multifaceted
relationship with development has influenced our
thinking. All these years, keeping the peace has been a
major and recurrent preoccupation of the United
Nations as conflicts kept breaking out and as
peacemaking succeeded or failed. I want to make some
general observations in relation to the concept of
peace-building, its current pattern and the role of the
United Nations, the international community and other
actors, as well as some remarks on specific points.

In numerous forums, both inside the United
Nations and outside it, the concept of peace-building
has been addressed during discussions of conflict
prevention and peacekeeping. We note a convergence
of Views in these discussions: that peace-building is
closely linked with peacekeeping and conflict
prevention, a View which Bangladesh fully shares. In
"An Agenda for Peace" (S/24lll), the then Secretary-
General termed it as the counterpart of preventive
diplomacy, which seeks to avoid the breakdown of
peaceful conditions. The validity of the concept was
then affirmed in the Secretary-General's supplement to
"An Agenda for Peace" (S/l995/1). We share the
perception that peace-building may be Viewed as a
stage in a continuum, embracing a series of activities
aimed at sustaining peaceful conditions in order to
prevent, on the one hand, the recurrence of conflict
and, on the other, to construct a new environment,
restoring a sense of confidence and well-being among
people.

This brings me to the second point about the
pattern of peace-building activities that we see today.
The supplement to "An Agenda for Peace" mentions
demilitarization, the control of small arms, institutional
reform, improved police and judicial systems, the
monitoring of human rights, electoral reform and
supervision of elections, social and economic
development, et cetera. In addition, facilitation of
humanitarian assistance, return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, release of prisoners of war
and detainees, determination of the fate of missing
persons and demining have been covered in other
cases. It goes without saying that the demands of the
situation must be a determining factor in designing
such activities.

Thirdly, there is a need for a comprehensive
approach. Clearly, many of these activities fall within
the operational jurisdiction of various programmes,
funds, offices and agencies of the United Nations
system. It is evident that, among the major organs, the
General Assembly and the Security Council will also
have to engage in greater coordination. This
exemplifies the need for a comprehensive and
integrated approach. We believe that such coordination
has to be borne in mind from the very beginning of
planning a peacekeeping operation, which would also
augur well for a smooth transition from peacekeeping
to peace-building and, when normalcy is restored, for
transfer of responsibilities to other entities mentioned a
moment ago.

In our debate last year on the item entitled "No
exit without strategy", we emphasized setting clear
political objectives for a peacekeeping operation,
which is a task for the Council. But it is also a task that
the Council can accomplish only if it employs a clear
and objective assessment of the situation and of its
various linkages. Along with this, knowledge about the
in-house expertise in the Secretariat and the
comparative advantages of other actors are important
inputs for the Council's decision making. I will
elaborate further on this point a little later.

On the need for local ownership of peace-
building activities, Bangladesh believes it is important
constantly to bear in mind the issue of advancing a
sense of confidence and well-being in the target
population. In designing and executing peace-building
projects, it is important from the outset to instil in them
a sense of ownership of these activities. We must
engage the community and the local stakeholders in a
consultative mechanism and explore local skills and
expertise in order to enhance their acceptability.

Bangladesh believes strongly that special
recognition must be given to the role of women in the
peace-building process, particularly in the post-conflict
phase.

Bangladesh attaches high importance to catering
to the immediate needs of the stricken population.
Among other elements, poverty eradication and
employment generation are critically important in this
regard. Effective and high-Visibility projects that make
a real difference should be given priority on the list of
peace-building activities. In a welcome development,
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo has made arrangements to put in place a
microcredit programme, and efforts are under way to
do the same in East Timor. We would like to renew our
emphasis on such initiatives.

Recent experience shows that such external actors
as regional or subregional organizations, international
financial institutions and non-governmental
organizations play a crucial role in peace-building
activities. Establishing mechanisms for regular contact
and coordination with them will help the United
Nations in its peace-building activities. In that regard,
we welcome the meetings with regional organizations
that will take place over the next two days. One could
cite here the important role that the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has played
in Kosovo, in particular in providing assistance in the
training of the police and the judiciary. Such expertise
and experience should be used by the United Nations.
We believe that a regularly updated repertoire of
relevant civil-society organizations should be
maintained and that the Council should use the Arria
formula in keeping in touch with them.

We cannot overlook the role of the international
community and the media. They should assume a
supportive role by creating an environment for
maintaining the momentum of peace activities and
should generate public opinion in favour of social and
financial investment in the peace-building efforts of the
United Nations. That alone can prepare the ground for
concerted international action by State and non-State
actors.

As evidenced by recent statistics, it is the
intrastate conflicts, with all their attendant
complexities, that have increasingly been the United
Nations preoccupation. It is likely that this pattern will
continue, requiring the United Nations to undertake
complex tasks, such as building state institutions,
maintaining law and order and raising a security or
defence force. We believe that it would be important
for the United Nations to undertake pro-active
networking with entities with proven expertise and to
develop strategic partnerships through judicious
burden-sharing on the basis of comparative advantage.

I should not conclude without underscoring an
oft-repeated statement that the United Nations is what
its Members want it to be. Individually and
collectively, we must demonstrate the necessary
political will to take hard decisions, at least in order to
show that we are capable of learning from our past
mistakes. There is no need to argue that there have
been mistakes in the past and that not much political
will has been shown to learn from them.

