Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the presidency of the United
Kingdom for convening today's very important
debate. We also thank the Secretary-General and
The Most Reverend and Right Honourable Justin
Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury, as a member of the
Secretary-General's High-level Advisory Board on
Mediation, for their briefings.

As the Security Council knows, in April 2009,
under the presidency of Mexico, the Council considered
today's subject and adopted a presidential statement

(S/PRST/2009/8). Since then, considerable progress has
been made in strengthening United Nations capabilities
in mediation and peaceful dispute settlement. I would
like to underscore in particular that one of the three
pillars of the Secretary-General's action plan, borne out
of the review of peace operations, is placing conflict
prevention and mediation at the core of the work of the
United Nations. We therefore commend the fact that
the strengthening of mediation is part and parcel of the
Secretary-General's reform proposal under the peace
and security pillar.

The plethora of examples of successful mediation
amid recent tensions demonstrates the invaluable
contribution of that tool - the very essence of
preventive diplomacy - to reducing the potential
for the deterioration and resumption of conflict,
alleviating human suffering and creating conditions
for sustainable peace. The role of Member States
and international organizations in mediation must
respond to the new challenges posed by contemporary
conflicts and crises. Beyond traditional patterns in the
field of mediation, comprehensive, multidimensional,
innovative and timely approaches are needed today to
create conditions that are conducive to sustainable peace.

Mexico has historically spoken in favour of the
prevention and peaceful settlement of disputes, and
remains convinced that the genuine strengthening of
the United Nations role depends, to a large extent, on
the efficient use of the tools provided for in Chapter VI
of the Charter of the United Nations.

Mediation and other mechanisms for the peaceful
settlement of disputes have been key to the prevention
and resolution of political, ideological, natural,
territorial and border disputes in Latin America. Mexico
has played an important role in some of those efforts.
For example, together with Colombia, Panama and
Venezuela, we created a mediation mechanism called
the Contadora Group to achieve the easing of tensions,
political understanding and cooperation in Central
American. The consensus achieved through the Group
is a clear example that in a changing reality political
dialogue must be an essential tool for understanding
between States.

In the case of El Salvador, Mexico's participation
with the so-called Group of Four - Colombia, Spain,
Venezuela and Mexico - formed the so-called Group
of Friends of the Secretary-General, which offered
ongoing support to and facilitated the negotiation
efforts of the United Nations. There are many examples
in our region, but I would especially like to mention
that, within the Organization of American States,
Mexico has contributed, together with other countries,
to the regional mediation and cooperation efforts to
resolve the current crises in Venezuela and Nicaragua.

The Security Council should continue to encourage
and support the inclusion of mediation efforts in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
To that end, the Council may wish to consider the
following measures.

First, the Council should adapt its approach
to mediation in the light of the changing nature of
conflicts and the increase in the number and diversity
of actors in the field, including through a focus on the
gender perspective.

Secondly, it should encourage the Secretary-
General to proactively engage in the prevention of
conflicts by providing his good offices to the parties
and drawing the attention of the Council to situations
that endanger international peace and security, in
accordance with Articles 98 and 99 of the Charter.

Thirdly, it should build prevention and mediation
capacities at local, national, subregional, regional and
international levels. That is particularly important,
considering that the peaceful settlement of disputes is a
primary responsibility of Member States.

F ourthly, the Council should include in the mandates
of peacekeeping operations and special political
missions activities that contribute to local, national and
regional mediation efforts to ensure conflict resolution,
avoid polarization and underpin sustainable peace.

Fifthly, the number of women who participated as
mediators in peace processes between 1990 and 2017
make up only two per cent of all mediators, which is
why it is still necessary for the United Nations High-
level Advisory Board on Mediation to address that
under-representation and expand the list of potential
high-level envoys and mediators. The Council should
continue to promote the gender perspective and
systematically integrate the Board's recommendations.

In conclusion, the international situation is beset
by a series of crises and conflicts that are intertwined
and converge with voices that incite the exacerbation
of hostilities, hatred, racism and xenophobia. We must
continue to value the role of mediation and preventive
diplomacy, because it is up to us to make the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations a reality.
Mexico considers it irresponsible and contrary to
the principles that guide the Organization to call for the
stigmatization of nationalities, religions or ethnicities.
That should not have a place within the Member States
of our Organization. It is not in line with the highest
values of the United Nations, and constitutes acts that
we all must condemn.

