Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
by congratulating Mexico on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June 2010.

The use of children in situations of armed conflict
is an abhorrent practice that militates against the
fundamental principles of humanity. There can be no
excuse for subjecting children to the depravity and
ravages of armed conflict.

I am participating in this debate today because
the Secretary-General's latest report on children and
armed conflict (S/2010/18l) mentions instances of the
recruitment and use of children and systematic attacks
on schools by Maoist armed groups in some parts of
central and eastern India. At the outset, I should make
clear that the violence being perpetrated by those
groups, although completely abhorrent and
condemnable, certainly does not make it a zone of
armed conflict, as defined by international law. We
therefore cannot accept the reporting of those incidents
as falling within the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict.

Having made that specific point, I would like to
state that the Government of India is seized of such
abhorrent acts targeting innocent children by those
armed groups. We strongly condemn the despicable
acts of Naxal violence and are fully committed to
controlling such diabolical activities.

The Government of India, along with the
concerned state Governments, has developed a holistic
strategy to address Naxal issues by focusing on
security, development, administration and public
perception. We have initiated awareness-raising
programmes through media and mass contact,
including by the police through their community
policing programmes. The entire Government
machinery has been dutifully implementing the
existing laws, including laws that prohibit child labour.

India is a State party to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols. We are,
of course, fully committed to meeting our obligations
under those instruments.

