Mr. Thallinger (Austria): First, I would like to
express Austria's appreciation to the United States for
organizing today's thematic debate. By adopting the
landmark resolution 1738 (2006), the Security Council
recognized the importance of protecting journalists
and media professionals in situations of armed conflict.
Press freedom and the right to freedom of expression
are pillars of democratic societies and the rule of law,
and the Council in its own work depends on independent
and accurate information from conflict zones.

Although we have witnessed an increase in targeted
killings ofjournalists in recent years, both in conflict
situations and in times of peace, the Security Council
has not been consistent in addressing these threats.
We therefore think that today's debate is very timely
and were pleased to hear from the Deputy Secretary-
General, as well as from journalists sharing their
experiences and ideas. We fully align our remarks
with the statement just made on behalf of the European
Union.
While Syria has, sadly, been leading the charts of
deadliest countries forjournalists this year and in 2012,
data show that the majority of attacks against journalists
take place in situations that cannot be qualified
as traditional or typical armed conflict situations.
Journalists reporting, for example, on organized crime,
corruption, the activities of drug cartels, protests and
popular uprisings can easily become targets of assault,
arbitrary arrest, harassment or intimidation. It is against
that background that Austria has defined the protection
of journalists as one of its priorities during its current
membership of the Human Rights Council.

Together with a cross-regional group of Member
States, we introduced a resolution in the Human Rights
Council in September 2012, the objective of which is
to ensure accountability for attacks against journalists
and to promote a safe and enabling environment in
which journalists can work independently. Time and
again, impunity for those responsible for attacks has
been recognized as the biggest obstacle to the effective
protection of journalists. Therefore, we also introduced
the issue in the Commission on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice at the United Nations Office in Vienna
earlier this year. We recall that the Security Council has
not only reaffirmed its strong opposition to impunity
for attacks against civilians, but also underlined its own
role in ending it, including in resolution 1894 (2009), on
the protection of civilians.

We commend the leadership of UNESCO Director-
General Bokova, who consistently advocates for press
freedom and calls for the thorough investigation of
attacks. Human Rights Council resolution 21/12,
adopted by consensus, requests the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to prepare
a compilation of good practices in the protection of
journalists, the prevention of attacks and the fight
against impunity. The compilation will be presented to
Member States in September, and Austria will continue
its work on the issue in the Human Rights Council.

Let me further highlight the important work done
by the United Nations in that field. The elaboration,
under UNESCO's leadership, of the United Nations
Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue
of Impunity provides an important tool for ensuring the
coherence of United Nations measures and will lead to
new synergies. At the same time, I would underline the
important continuing contribution made in that regard
by several of the Human Rights Council's special
procedures, and in particular Frank La Rue, who - in
his capacity as Special Rapporteur on the promotion
and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and
expression - has devoted considerable work and
attention to journalists, including citizen journalists,
and has made a number ofinteresting recommendations.

We are of the View that the Council could benefit
from the expertise and information provided by relevant
Special Rapporteurs, such as Frank La Rue, including
by inviting them to participate in discussions like
today's. The Special Rapporteur has also emphasized
the responsibility of news organizations and journalists
themselves in enhancing safety, and we note that
a number of media organizations have formulated
guidelines and useful recommendations to that end.

Last but not least, let me express Austria's hope
that the Secretary-General will include more detailed
information on the situation of and threats against
journalists, both in his next report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, due in November this year,
and in country-specific reporting. The provision of
timely and accurate information on threats to journalists
in conflict situations is an essential prerequisite for the
Council to address the topic in a more coherent manner,
not only in thematic statements and resolutions but
also in country-specific deliberations, including on
peacekeeping operations.

