Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I would like to thank
the Indonesian presidency for organizing this timely
debate. We also thank the Secretary-General and the
briefers for their insightful statements.

Armed conflicts take a massive toll on people's
lives. Trapped in wars, millions of civilians are forced
to flee. They are tortured, abducted, forcibly displaced
and denied access to basic rights and services. Attacks
on schools and hospitals further exacerbate the already
dire conditions in armed conflicts. The situation of
civilians in Syria, the occupied Palestinian territory,
Yemen, Libya and many other parts of the world is
becoming increasingly precarious.

Last month marked the eighth anniversary of
the start of the Syrian crisis. Over 5.6 million people
have fled Syria, seeking safety in Turkey and other
neighbouring countries. There has been an increase in
the regime's violations of humanitarian law over the
past few weeks. Syrians have been targeted, which will
have humanitarian and security repercussions for the
region and beyond.

Turkey continues to be the main corridor for the
United Nations cross-border humanitarian operations
into northern Syria, with 80 per cent of all cross-border
operations being conducted via the Turkish border,
which amounts to the movement of 31 per cent of all
international humanitarian assistance into Syria. Safe,
timely and unimpeded access to recipients of that
humanitarian assistance is crucial.

International humanitarian law is an important
backdrop for protection. Since the signing of the Geneva
Conventions, 70 years ago, joint efforts to maintain
compliance with international humanitarian law are
required as the nature of warfare has been ceaselessly
changing, including the need for neutral and impartial
humanitarian action.

Over the last 20 years, the Security Council has
established a sound normative framework for the
protection of civilians by adopting various resolutions
and presidential statements. The Council should
maintain that practice and act to stop serious violations
of international humanitarian law. Preventing and
addressing the root causes of conflict should also be
at the top of our agenda. On the other hand, Member
States have their own experiences and best practices,
and that should be duly reflected in the work of the
United Nations.

The Security Council should be mindful of the
increasing number of international humanitarian
law violations and make sure that resolutions in this
area, in particular resolutions 2286 (2016) and 2417
(2018), are fully implemented. That includes United
Nations peacekeeping missions implementing their
protection mandates. The task of protecting civilians
is indispensable, as armed conflicts are becoming
increasingly brutal.

It has been estimated that 40 million people have
been internally displaced in their own countries as a
result of armed conflict and violence, while the number
ofrefugees and asylum seekers has reached 28.5 million.
We hope that the 2018 Global Compact on Refugees
will make a real difference in the lives of refugees and
improve responsibility-sharing among States.

This week marks the third anniversary of the
first-ever World Humanitarian Summit, which put
strong emphasis on protection. If we are sincere about
living up to the commitments made at the Summit, we
should devote more energy and resources to protection.
Protecting civilians, saving lives and restoring dignity
should remain at the centre of our efforts. That is our
duty as we seek to help the millions who are suffering
deeply from aggression, oppression and discrimination,
in their own lands and beyond.

