Lieutenant General Gyllensporre: It is a great
honour for me to have this opportunity to address the
Security Council today and give a Force Commander's
perspective on the interaction among the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the troop-contributing
countries (TCCs).

Let me initially anchor my arguments with some
words on the situation on the ground. Mindful of
course that the Council recently deliberated on Mali
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) (see S/PV.8568), I will be very brief.

Our forces are deployed to support the signatory
parties in the implementation in northern Mali of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
including supervising the ceasefire agreement. As
a secondary priority we are to improve the security
situation in the central region, where we have dedicated
efforts to protect civilians against a melange of threats
that manifest themselves in frequent and brutal attacks
against women and children. That challenging situation
is perpetuated by threats against our personnel. Indeed,
we are targeted and exposed to frequent direct and
complex attacks on our bases, as well as improvised
explosive device attacks against our logistical convoys.
Sadly, the lives of too many peacekeepers have been
lost in this effort.

Indeed, it is a very complex and challenging
situation that goes beyond my earlier experiences
in Afghanistan, for instance, and far from what is
envisaged in traditional peacekeeping. Yet here we are,
and we have to find different and new ways to operate
and deliver on the mandate. The force must be more
agile and more unpredictable, react faster, be more
mobile and use the rules of engagement to their fullest
extent. Steps have been taken in that direction. Over
the last reporting period the operational tempo was
increased by more than 100 per cent. More important,
we are changing the mindset of the peacekeepers to
become more proactive, flexible and robust.

Against that backdrop of demanding peacekeeping,
it is reasonable to assume that all actors affiliated
with United Nations efforts will be challenged
and that cooperation arrangements will become
increasingly important. In my opinion, that calls for
strengthened cooperation and consultation mechanisms
between the field and Headquarters. I understand
that sentiment is also reflected in the Secretary-
General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative and the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations.

In reference to triangular cooperation, let me
elaborate on the TCCs. It is important for the mission
that the Secretariat and Member States continue to
support TCCs from the very beginning, including
predeployment and subsequent in-mission training,
with equipment and associated training efforts. That
is of particular relevance for TCCs going to high-risk
missions like in Mali. It is key to have clearly defined
goals and standards for our traditional troop- and
police-contributing countries on what the expectations
of the United Nations are, and increased support for
training during predeployment in addition to in-mission
training requirements. Those requirements must be
adapted to reflect the changes in security situations on
the ground and also the changes in operational profiles.

As the Council knows, there are some TCCs that
pay a higher price in casualties than others. Those
nations must be prioritized for training, equipment and
support measures of other kinds. Force protection is
also about giving the commanders freedom of action
to the extent possible by, for example, minimizing the
number of caveats and giving them unfettered ability
to deploy and employ all forces within the mission
to advance the mandate, without any - or at least
minimal - national constraints.

Let me now shed some light on what we do in the
Mission and within the force in that regard. As Force
Commander, I have close interaction and dialogue with
the TCCs through their senior national representatives

in order to provide information, get their opinions
and create and guide confidence among the troop-
contributing nations. For me, it is an important forum
to exchange views and convey my priorities.

Secondly, I value arrangements and dialogue with
the representatives of nations when they visit us in Mali
or when they have an opportunity to engage with the
Chiefs of Defence, as they will when they participate
at this week's conference here in New York. It provides
an opportunity to reach out and maintain dialogue
and for us and the capitals to provide and receive
candid feedback.

Thirdly, I report to the Secretariat on the
deficiencies and challenges for TCCs. I also illustrate
the good examples, great leadership and robustness
that some TCCs demonstrate, so as to ensure that the
Secretariat has the best possible picture of what we
experience on the ground.

Allow me to offer some final recommendations. To
me, strategy is a balanced and carefully considered mix
of ends, ways and means. The mandate provided by the
Security Council defines the ends and objectives for us.
The way we operate is codified and issued in a military
concept provided by the Secretariat. The resources
and means are, of course, provided by the TCCs.
Those are the units that will complete the mission at
the end of the day. Clearly, close cooperation within
the triangle is key in order to set the conditions for an
effective implementation of our mandate, in particular
in demanding missions with security challenges.

As a Force Commander, I can contribute to
ensuring - and rely on the fact - that the triangle has
as good an understanding as possible of the situation
within the Mission and that the TCCs get candid and
relevant information directly to their capitals. I welcome
the continued possibilities for further dialogue and
encourage capitals to plan field visits in order to further
understand what their units face in the environment in
which they operate.

In order for us to meet the high expectations that
exist, TCCs must deliver on their mandate, rules of
engagement, the body of United Nations policies and
manuals, as well as the statements of unit requirements,
memorandums of understanding and so on. That is
our planning assumption when we receive units on
the ground. The United Nations should continue to
increase and revise its mechanisms for evaluating units
and ensuring accountability.

Let me conclude by expressing my gratitude to the
Member States that have participated or are currently
participating in MINUSMA with troops or staff
officers. It is honour and privilege to serve at the helm
of the military force of MINUSMA.

