Mr. Prosor (Israel): As this is the first time that I
address the Security Council in the new year, let me
congratulate the five new Council members on their
election. I wish each of them the best of luck in
navigating the sometimes stormy debates of the
Chamber.

As we gather in the Chamber, an alarm bell is
ringing. Never has it been so clear that Iran is seeking
to build a nuclear weapon. That is the single greatest
threat to the security of the entire world. Now is the
time to act. Tomorrow is too late. The stakes are too
high. The price of inaction is too great.

The latest International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) reports prove beyond any doubt that Iran has a
nuclear weapons programme, which it is rapidly
advancing. Iran recently announced that it would
enrich uranium to 20 per cent at its nuclear facility in
Qom. There is no plausible civilian justification for
that action. It blatantly violates numerous resolutions
of the Council and will bring Iran significantly closer
to producing weapons-grade, highly enriched uranium.
12-21354
Each and every Member of the United Nations -
particularly those of the Council - should lie awake at
night thinking about what would happen if the regime
in Tehran gets a hold of the most dangerous weapon on
Earth. Only the pressure of a united international
community can stop Iran from continuing its march
towards nuclear weapons. The political and economic
price that Iran will pay must be clear. Israel commends
the recent steps taken by the United States, the
European Union and others in that regard. Although
those are very important steps, we must judge them
based on their results. It is time for the rest of the
international community and the Council to join those

efforts.

We come together today after a year of turmoil in
the Middle East. Great challenges lie on the horizon.
People are demanding dignity and seeking liberty after
generations of oppression. Extremism threatens fragile
societies. Human rights continue to be trampled.
Unrest has shaken the foundation of the political order
from the Strait of Gibraltar to the Persian Gulf to the
Caspian Sea. And what issue has the Council deemed
to be the most pressing in its monthly debate on the
Middle East? Surprise, surprise - it is the status of
municipal building applications in the West Bank. In
the last two monthly briefings by the Secretariat,
barely a square inch of Jerusalem or the West Bank has
been left unexamined. Yet entire Middle Eastern
countries where people are being killed, repressed and
tortured daily continue to go without mention. That is
logic turned on its head. Let me be clear - perfectly
clear. Resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
important on its own merits, so that Israelis and
Palestinians alike can lead peaceful, secure and
prosperous lives. But the misallocation of the Security
Council's time, energy and resources erodes its
credibility.

How many times have members of this Council -
and many others - repeated the statement that the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the central conflict in the
Middle East and that if we solve that conflict we solve
all the other conflicts in the region? Today one would
ridicule that statement. It is obvious that Yemen, Syria,
Egypt, Bahrain and other conflicts in the Middle East
have nothing to do with Israel. The constant repetition of
the statement does not make it true. How many times
have members of this Council- and many others -
repeated that settlements are the primary obstacle to

peace? Similarly, repetition of that statement does not
make it true.

The primary obstacle to peace is not settlements.
The primary obstacle to peace is the so-called claim of
return. Let me repeat that. The major hurdle to peace is
the Palestinians' insistence on the so-called claim of
return. No one will ever hear Palestinian leaders - not
even here in this Chamber - say "two States for two
peoples". If anyone ever hears them say "two States for
two peoples", I would ask them to phone me at my
office immediately - to and call me collect, in the
event of such an unprecedented occurrence. No one
will hear them say "two States for two peoples"
because today the Palestinian leadership is calling for
an independent Palestinian State but insists that its
people return to the Jewish State. That would mean the
destruction of Israel.

The idea that Israel will be flooded with millions
of Palestinians will never be accepted. The
international community knows it, the Palestinian
leadership knows it, but the Palestinian people are not
hearing it. To substantiate that, in a poll conducted by
the Palestinian Center for Public Opinion last
November, 90 per cent of Palestinians said that they
would not give up the claim of return. That gap
between their perception and reality is and will remain
the major obstacle to peace.

Since the Palestinian leadership refuses to tell the
Palestinian people the truth, the international
community has the responsibility to tell them the truth.
It has the responsibility to stand up and say that the so-
called claim of return is a non-starter. Yet many around
this table who never miss an opportunity to tell Israel
what it has to do for peace conveniently lose their
voices when it comes to telling the Palestinian people
about the basic compromises they will have to make
for peace.

The Palestinian refusal to recognize Israel's right
to exist as a Jewish State goes hand in hand with a
culture of incitement in mosques, in schools and in the
media. Day after day, children are taught to pursue
violence and to hate, vilify and dehumanize Israelis
and Jews. Let me be clear. I am talking not only about
Hamas in Gaza, but also about the Palestinian
Authority in the West Bank, where one cannot turn a
corner without seeing terrorists and terrorism glorified.

This month, on 9 January, as Mr. Fernandez-
Taranco mentioned - and I will go into it because he

mentioned it only in passing - Palestinian Authority
television broadcast the proceedings of an event
celebrating Fatah's forty-seventh anniversary. It
featured a sermon by the Authority's most senior
religious leader, Mufti Muhammad Hussein, who
presented the killing of Jews as a sacred goal for all
Muslims. His comments were deeply disturbing. But
what was even more disturbing is that no one from the
Palestinian leadership stood up and condemned his
comments, denounced his actions or dissociated
themselves from his message. Not only did they not
condemn his words, they even broadcast them on
public Palestinian television channels. The Palestinian
leadership said nothing - and its silence speaks
volumes.

The path to peace is clear. The international
community must tell the Palestinians unequivocally
that unilateralism is a dead end and that direct
negotiations are the only way forward. Recent talks in
Amman are a positive step in this regard, and I would
like to take this opportunity to thank King Abdullah
and everyone else for helping to facilitate those
meetings. Now Israelis and Palestinians must take the
next step towards peace together. It is time to stop
negotiating about negotiating. It is time to stop meeting
about meeting. It is time to stop talking about talking.
Yet instead of taking steps toward peace with Israel,
President Abbas continues to flirt with the dangers of
unity with Hamas.

Hamas is another subject that has not been
mentioned here. Hamas is a terrorist organization
funded, supported and trained by the Iranian regime. It
has diverted nearly every resource in Gaza to
oppressing its own people or attacking ours. Women
are subjugated, political opponents are jailed and
murdered, and children are used as human shields and
suicide bombers. That is the reality on the ground in
Gaza today, as we speak, yet we did not hear one word
or even syllable about it in today's briefing.

The Quartet has long applied three principles that
Hamas must adopt to become a legitimate actor in the
peace process. It must renounce violence, recognize
Israel and abide by prior Palestinian agreements. The
bar could not be set any lower, yet at no point has
Hamas satisfied those conditions or indicated any
intention to do so. It says no to negotiation, it says no
to recognition of Israel and it continues to carry out
violence against Israel day after day. Any who suggest
that Hamas is a partner for peace should take a trip to
the Gaza Strip. The area remains a launching ground
for constant rocket attacks targeting Israeli cities and
civilians. Last year, some 700 rockets were fired into
Israel. That is an average of almost two rockets fired
every single day.

Let me state clearly what I have said in numerous
letters to the Security Council and in previous debates.
The situation in Gaza is very serious. One spark could
ignite a dangerous escalation. The Security Council has
an obligation to act boldly and immediately. Yet the
Council still has not found the time or the will to utter
a single syllable of condemnation against the attacks,
and the silence is deafening.

No people should be expected to live under such
terror. No Government should be expected to stand idle
in the face of such violence. Later this month, the
Secretary-General will visit Israel and see the threats
we face with his own eyes. Let us hope that his trip
brings a bit of new perspective to this Organization
about the real obstacles to peace and security and the
real issues of extremism, terrorism and incitement in
our region.

The challenges facing the Middle East are
growing every day. They stand clearly before the
Council. They threaten all of us. It is on the Council's
shoulders to confront them with courage and with
leadership. Tired rhetoric and misplaced focus have too
often characterized this debate. They will no longer
suffice. As Iran inches closer to acquiring a nuclear
weapon, as extremists spread terrorism and hate, and as
the enemies of peace test the resolve of the
international community, silence is not an option.

Confronting these fundamental threats will not be
easy. It will require struggle and sacrifice. As Winston
Churchill once said, "We must be united, we must be
undaunted, we must be inflexible". At this critical
moment, for the sake of our children and our common
future, the world has no other choice.

