The President (spoke in Spanish): Now I will
give a briefing in my capacity as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999). Since the responsibility of
chairing the committees is a personal one, I am
presenting this report as have Ambassadors Kolby and
Ryan, who spoke before me.

In the last two years I have had the opportunity of
chairing the 1267 Committee, previously known as the
Committee on Afghanistan. The name change is
significant for this Committee because it reflects the
developments that have turned it into an instrument of
global scope in order to tackle the terrorist network that
is one of the greatest challenges to international peace
and security today.

I will begin by talking about the dedicated efforts
of all the members of the Committee as well as for the
support work provided by the Secretariat. The report on
the work I carried out in 2001 was published under
document S/2002/ 101. The report on this year's work
will be published in the coming days. I would also like
to mention the reports of the Monitoring Group, the
last of which was submitted to the Committee last
week and will shortly be distributed as a Security
Council document.

The 1267 Committee has, besides its global
scope, another special characteristic, since it is the only
active sanctions committee established to fight
terrorism, in particular Osama bin Laden, Al Qaeda,
the Taliban and their associates.

The first sanctions against the Taliban were
applied almost two years before 11 September. The
measures were later extended to Al Qaeda. The
different acts of terrorism in the last two years -
among which the events of 11 September of last year
will continue to be stressed - have raised a few
questions on the role of the Security Council with
respect to the challenge of strongly responding to the
danger of these organizations. Was there a lack of
information? Was there no decision? Should the
Council act preventively?

I can assure the Council that we have been
lacking in meeting our responsibilities vis-a-vis the
challenges of terrorism. That is why I now make a plea
to make up for lost time in complying with our duties
as the Security Council and in general as Members of
the United Nations.

In January of this year the Council adopted
resolution 1390 (2002), which extended the scope of
coverage of sanctions to a global level. The
comprehensiveness of the sanctions is a special
characteristic of this regime and one of the main
differences from other current sanctions regimes. This
raises serious challenges for its implementation.

As we have said on other occasions, the fight
against terrorism must be preventive in nature in order
to be effective. Capturing the person responsible for
planting a bomb is undeniably a positive act of justice.
But it is even better to prevent a terrorist act from ever
taking place.

In its activity the Committee has had to deal with
the claims and requests from people who have
allegedly been unfairly affected by the application of
sanctions. In this respect, I must say that this is not an
easy discussion. But in any case, it is clear that neither
the Committee nor the international community can
limit itself to exhausting all the judicial procedures to
sentence someone after a terrorist act has been
committed. Even though we realize that we have to act
with sufficient precautions in order to prevent arbitrary
actions, it is just as true that we must develop very
skilful preventive efforts and make them more
thorough. In this respect, the guidelines adopted by the
Committee on 7 November provide procedures for
including new names on the list, as well as for
excluding names.

The present sanctions regime has three elements:
the freezing of financial resources, travel bans, and
arms embargoes.

With respect to the freezing of resources, it is not
easy to try to have a conclusive assessment of the
results achieved. Nonetheless, as is said in the
Monitoring Group's report, Al Qaeda still has access to
considerable financial and economic resources. We
have to use our imagination in order to come up with
ways to make this measure more effective.

As for the travel ban, thus far we have not
received any information on people on the Committee
list who have tried to travel and have been rejected
because of this measure. Nevertheless, the Monitoring
Group has drawn the attention of the members of the
Committee to the need for the Committee list to be
used in a specific manner by the immigration
authorities of Member countries. For this, the list must
be as accurate as possible.

The experts have also drawn the attention of the
Committee to how easy it is in certain countries to
legally change a name. Additionally, we have to think
about a set of recommendations on what immigration
authorities in any country should do when they find
themselves facing someone who is on the list. Can that
person be arrested? Do they send him back where he
came from? What can they do?

The third measure, the arms embargo, is also
difficult to apply in isolation. The experts'
recommendations are in line with the recommendations
that have come up in various forums where illegal arms
trafficking, in particular in small arms and light
weapons, has been discussed. The different expert
groups that monitor the sanctions regimes imposed by
the Security Council have made similar
recommendations. It would be fitting to have a
discussion on these recommendations, in particular
since they have the advantage of arising from the
concrete experience of the experts in these monitoring
groups in dealing with arms embargoes in specific
cases.

The list of people and entities associated with the
Taliban, with Al Qaeda or with Osama bin Laden is the
main instrument the Committee has. At this point, the
list has 232 individuals and 92 entities subject to
sanctions. It is clear that we have to make additional
efforts to try to make the list more specific and truly
usable.

There is another aspect that needs to be
emphasized. The Monitoring Group has detected at
least 104 names of individuals who are not on the list
and who, according to information from the press or
other sources, have been identified as or accused of
having ties with Al Qaeda. Some of these are even
under arrest. Here, I would like to point out that
Member States have obligations with respect to
providing information to the Committee. This question
should receive special consideration next month, when
we must consider the extension of the mandate.

With respect to cooperation received from
Member States, the results have been moderate. In
addition to the remaining names to be included in the
list, to which I referred a moment ago, 80 reports have
been received from Member States. However, more and
more countries are submitting to the Committee
requests to add names to the list. As mentioned in the
report of the Committee, 59 delegations have submitted
requests of this kind to the Committee.

I have referred on various occasions to the reports
of the Monitoring Group. Those reports contain
recommendations requiring the direct action of the
1267 Committee, as well as other recommendations of
a general nature, to be taken into consideration by
Member States. Next January, in conformity with the
provisions of paragraph 3 of resolution 1390 (2002),
the Council must review the sanctions imposed in order
to evaluate their effectiveness and, if necessary, to
modify or strengthen them.

I wish to stress, as we have done on previous
occasions, that the Security Council must be more
active in its work related to the functions of the 1267
Committee - namely, the activities and work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) - in particular,
by preparing actions and decisions against States,
individuals and organizations directly or indirectly
involved in terrorist activities. In other words, we must
move from a general framework of cooperation to the
implementation of measures by considering specific
cases. To do that, the CTC's mandate will require
review and modification. This is an area in which we
have not yet been able to establish real points of
contact and exchange. In an ideal world of effective
cooperation, the existence of the CTC should
contribute to the effectiveness of the 1267 Committee.
However, it is obvious that there is still a gap between
the framework of cooperation created by the CTC and
effective implementation in specific cases, which is the
domain of the 1267 Committee.

In conclusion, allow me to underline that,
although international terrorism is not a new
phenomenon, after 11 September 2001 it took on the
added dimension of a challenge to international peace
and security. The recent terrorist attacks in Indonesia
and in Kenya, among others, have also had the result of
raising the international community's awareness of the
fact that we are facing a global phenomenon. This
challenge requires us to be more proactive and vigilant
and to find innovative mechanisms to combat it.

I now resume my functions of President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Kishore Mahbubani,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1343 (2001)
concerning Liberia.

