Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me first to express our sincere condolences to
our colleagues from Pakistan for the crash of the
aircraft yesterday. May God have mercy on the souls of
the victims.

My delegation wishes to express the satisfaction
of the Kingdom of Morocco at the fact that, in just one
week, the Security Council has been able to adopt two
important resolutions by consensus concerning Syria
(resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012)). We first
welcomed the initial agreement between the Joint
Special Representative and the Syrian Government on
an immediate cessation of fighting and violence
throughout Syria. However, while violence has
decreased as compared with the immediate past, the
fact that it continues to exists shows that both parties
have not fully committed to their responsibilities. Now
we are calling for a full cessation of all forms of
violence.

The ministerial committee on Syria of the League
of Arab States met this week. Among the meeting's
results were a condemnation of the continuing acts of
violence against Syrian civilians, a demand on the
Syrian Government and all other parties to commit to a
full cessation of violence, a call for close cooperation
with the Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States, and the full implementation
of his six-point plan. The committee also called on the
Council to speed up the deployment of observers to
Syria and to ensure the conditions and means necessary
for the implementation of their mandate.

Today the Council has responded to those calls. It
has unanimously agreed to the establishment of the
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria
(UNSMIS), to be rapidly deployed on the ground at the
discretion of the Secretary-General with the goal of
putting an end to armed violence by all parties and
fully supporting Mr. Annan's six-point plan. We
sincerely hope that conditions will be met to allow for
the deployment of UNSMIS on the ground as soon as
possible.

We are convinced that the deployment of a
United Nations mission will contribute to monitoring
the commitment by all parties to a cessation of all
forms of violence and to the success of the Annan six-
point plan. In its resolution, the Security Council
rightly expresses appreciation for the major efforts
made by countries neighbouring Syria to assist Syrian
refugees. It also expresses gratitude for the assistance
provided by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to countries hosting
refugees until they can return home.

By reaffirming its strong commitment to Syria's
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity, as well as to the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations, today's resolution sends a very
clear message to those who have any doubts as to our
full commitment to a complete cessation of violence in
Syria and to the success of Mr. Annan's six-point plan,
so that work can begin as soon as possible towards a
peaceful political settlement of the crisis in Syria in a
manner that responds to the aspirations of our Syrian
brothers and sisters.

The past few weeks have shown the importance
of unity in the Security Council, as well as the effect of
that unity on the course of events and on the parties'
commitment to their promises. We hope that such unity
in the Council will have an impact on the full
implementation of Mr. Annan's six-point plan and on
the return of stability and a future of democracy for the
Syrian people - one which responds to the aspirations
of all segments.

