Mr. Sahovie (Serbia and Montenegro): I wish
first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency for this month and to thank you for
having convened this very important meeting. I wish
also to express our appreciation to Judge Mase and
Prosecutor Jallow of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).

My delegation would like to thank the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Theodor Meron, for his
comprehensive briefings - yesterday on the referral of
war crimes cases to national jurisdictions, and today on
general aspects of the Tribunal's work, both in the
General Assembly and here in the Council. We
appreciate Judge Meron's assessment that the
cooperation of my country with the Tribunal has
improved, although much more needs to be done. We
are fully aware of that.

We also listened to the statement of Chief
Prosecutor Ms. Carla Del Ponte with great interest and
attention, as always. I must say that I disagree with
some of the points she made, although I do agree with
others. What I mostly disapprove of is the manner in
which the Prosecutor passes judgement, basically of a
political nature, on the authorities of Member States
here in the Security Council. That is not helpful.

I spoke in some detail this morning in the General
Assembly about the report of the ICTY, and I will try
to save the Council's valuable time by limiting my
statement to just a few points.

First, I want to reiterate the position of the
Government of Serbia and Montenegro that the
individual responsibility of all perpetrators of war
crimes committed during the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia should be established in proceedings before
both the ICTY and national courts. In this context, I
would also like to state my Government's full
commitment to implementing Security Council
resolution 1503 (2003).

Secondly, I will now offer a brief update on the
results of my country's cooperation with the ICTY
since the matter was last debated before the Council.

First, the Law on Cooperation with the Tribunal
was amended in accordance with the ICTY Statute.
Article 39 of that law, preventing the surrender of any
accused indicted by the Tribunal after the passage of
that Law, was deleted. All internal legal obstacles to
full cooperation with the ICTY were thus removed.

Secondly, in the past year, Serbia and Montenegro
transferred the following indictees to the Tribunal:
Milan Milutinovic, former President of Serbia, who
voluntarily surrendered on 20 January 2003; Vojislav
Seselj, President of the Serbian Radical Party and
member of the Federal Parliament, who surrendered on
24 February 2003; Franko Simatovic, former
commander of the State Security Special Units, was
arrested and transferred to the Tribunal on 30 May
2003; Miroslav Radic, former officer of the Yugoslav
Army, indicted for crimes in Vukovar, surrendered on
17 May 2003; Jovica Stanisic, former head of State
Security of Serbia, was arrested and on 11 June 2003
transferred to the ICTY; Zeljko Meakic, former
commander of the notorious Omarska camp in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, surrendered on 4 July 2003; Veselin
Sljivancanin, former officer of the Yugoslav Army -
the last of the so-called Vukovar Three - was arrested
and transferred on 1 July 2003; and Mitar Rasevic,
indicted for events in Foca, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
surrendered on 9 August 2003.

Proceedings are under way for the surrender of
Vladimir Kovacevic, a former officer of the Yugoslav
Army indicted for crimes in Dubrovnik.

It is our hope that this list will serve to clarify
possible misunderstandings arising from the data
offered in the ICTY report. Namely, the chapter on the
activities of the Prosecutor states that only one
indictee - Veselin Sljivancanin - had been arrested,
leading to the Prosecutor's conclusion that

"Unfortunately Serbia and Montenegro apart
from assisting with some voluntary surrenders, has
failed to act upon most of the outstanding Tribunal
arrest warrants" (S/2003/829, p. 52).
We do not really understand why the Prosecutor
seems to be saying that voluntary surrenders of the
accused, followed by their transfer to the ICTY, are
somehow of lesser value than arrests leading to the
same transfers. We therefore find it necessary to point
out that the voluntary surrenders are also the result of
decisive efforts on the part of the authorities of Serbia
and Montenegro to cooperate with the Tribunal, and
lead to the same results as do the arrests of indictees.
Hence, with all due respect, the transfer of a former
President, a former head of State Security and several
army officers should not be qualified as a mere
"assisting with some voluntary surrenders".

Thirdly, with regard to access to witnesses and
suspects, 130 individuals - including three former
heads of State - were released of the obligation not to
disclose State, military or official secrets in order to
testify before the ICTY. Proceedings are under way to
release a further nine individuals from the same
requirement. The process will continue.

Fourthly, regarding requests for documentation,
Serbia and Montenegro has, inter alia, handed over to
the ICTY all existing transcripts from the Supreme
Defence Council meetings; verbatim records from all
closed sessions of the National Assembly of the Republic
of Serbia; and 74 confidential documents of the Counter-
Intelligence Service of the Yugoslav Army. Altogether,
we have handed over to the Tribunal more than 7,000
classified documents since the beginning of 2001.

Permit me in this context once again to draw the
attention of the Council to the mention in the report of
the June 5 decision of the Trial Chamber pursuant to
rule 54 bis, granting the prosecution's request for a
binding order requiring Serbia and Montenegro to
produce certain documents to the Tribunal in
connection with the Milosevic case. Serbia and
Montenegro complied with that request, which was
related only to documents of the Supreme Defence
Council. Unfortunately, however, the report failed to
mention the 19 June decision of the Chamber relating
to the same case, rejecting the prosecution's request for
general access to State archives. Therefore, it was the
Chamber itself - not our Government - that limited
this kind of general access to the Prosecutor.
Regardless, Serbia and Montenegro is continuing to
search for modalities to facilitate the Tribunal's access
to the State archives.

I should like to conclude by stating that Serbia
and Montenegro stands ready to cooperate further with
the ICTY. I agree with the Prosecutor that our
cooperation with the ICTY is complex; it is so for
many reasons. However, I cannot agree that our
cooperation is not proactive. My Government is
actively undertaking efforts in various areas of
cooperation, as I indicated earlier. Whether the
cooperation is full or not is a question of perception,
much like the question of whether a glass is half full or
half empty. I want to emphasize that, in the past three
years, we have filled the glass significantly; we will
continue to fill it until it is full. It is a process, and to
complete it successfully, we also need constructive
engagement and understanding on the part of the
Tribunal, especially the Office of the Prosecutor.

