Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Yamamoto, Special
Representative of the Secretary- General for Afghanistan
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), and Ms. Sima Samar for their
briefings and personal contributions to the achievement
of peace and prosperity in Afghanistan.

Despite ongoing efforts at the national, regional
and international levels towards a negotiated peace
agreement, Afghanistan continues to face multiple and
complex difficulties in terms of security, stability and
development. Civilians continue to be the main victims
of the high level of instability and violence affecting
the country, and although the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/493) identifies a 23 per cent reduction
in civilian victims compared with the same period in
2018, we still worry about the high number of civilian
victims claimed by large-scale attacks perpetrated by
anti-Government forces and terrorists, including those
perpetrated with improvised explosive devices and
suicide bombings, although there were fewer of the
latter during the reporting period. Similarly, we are
dismayed by the ongoing recruitment and kidnapping
of and sexual violence against children, as well as
attacks on schools and medical institutions, during the
period covered by the report.

In that context, we condemn n the strongest
terms the deliberate attacks throughout the holy
month of Ramadan, during which civilians were
deliberately attacked by anti-Government elements.
We also condemn the 8 May attack on the staff of
non-governmental organizations in Kabul; the 24 May
murder of a religious scholar in a place of worship; the
incidents of 27 May and 3 June, respectively, directed
at civilian servants; and the attack of 2 June on Shiite
students. We express our solidarity with the people
and Government of Afghanistan for those losses. In
that same vein, we echo the words of the Secretary-
General's call on all parties to comply strictly with their
obligations under international law and international
humanitarian law to take all possible measures to
prevent attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure
and the limitation of humanitarian access.

My delegation welcomes all efforts and initiatives
of the Government of Afghanistan to make progress
in the peace process, such as the formation of a
leadership council for peace and a negotiating team
that includes representatives of the political opposition
and women, and the convening of a loya jirga for peace
in Kabul on 29 April, among others. We encourage
the Government of Afghanistan to pursue its efforts
to achieve a comprehensive peace process, through
direct talks between the parties involved, and inclusive
and comprehensive talks among Afghans, with the
participation of countries of the region. Likewise,
we fully support the efforts of the international
community, the countries of the region and UNAMA to
promote peace and stability in Afghanistan in difficult
conditions. As has always been pointed out in this
Chamber, the strengthening of regional cooperation in
all spheres, including in the political, economic, social
and security spheres, is ofvital importance and benefits
the entire region.

We hope that the new composition of the electoral
commissions - the Independent Election Commission
and the Electoral Complaints Commission - will enjoy
the support of all involved and interested parties. After
the lessons learned from the parliamentary elections
held in October 2018, it is now a priority to ensure
that the presidential elections of 28 September are
transparent, credible and inclusive.

We have taken note of the progress made in
achieving the meaningful participation of women, and
we take this opportunity to celebrate the milestone of
the election of two women as heads of the two electoral
bodies. We have no doubt that with the support they
deserve, they will do an excellent job. In that vein, we
hope that the Government will continue to implement
policies that guarantee the elimination of any persistent
obstacle to the participation of women in all spheres of
public and political life, and that their inclusion will be
a non-negotiable priority.

In conclusion, allow me once again to express
our full support for the efforts of the Government of
Afghanistan to find lasting peace and stability, and
to express our well-deserved praise and support for
the important role that the personnel of UNAMA are
playing, and in particular to Mr. Yamamoto for his
dedication to the promotion of peace and stability
in Afghanistan.

