Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by thanking Ambassador Wittig and Ambassador
Gasana for their very helpful briefings this morning.
We are very grateful to Ambassador Wittig for his
dedicated work over the past year, as well for the work
of the Permanent Representatives of Canada, Belgium,
Brazil, Jordan, Nepal and Switzerland in their roles as
Chairs.

The annual report (S/2011/41) and the review of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) provided useful
opportunities to take stock of the PBC's work. They
described many of the Commission's achievements, as
well as the challenges that the PBC faces. In looking at
the focus of the PBC over the coming months, we
should, in our view, consider three particular
objectives.

The first concerns results and the need for the
PBC to demonstrate clearly its contribution to
addressing critical peacebuilding bottlenecks for the
countries on its agenda. For example, the PBC needs to
focus on galvanizing all those who need to contribute
to the establishment of regional justice hubs in Liberia.
It needs to help galvanize action to support progress in
the implementation of the Economic Community of
West African States road map in Guinea-Bissau. And it
needs to rapidly support the Guinean Government in
taking forward security sector reform.

The second objective concerns advice. We want
the Security Council to seek the advice of the PBC
regularly and proactively. But for that to happen, the
PBC, supported by the Peacebuilding Support Office
(PBSO), needs to generate high-quality analysis on a
particular problem and advice on possible options to
overcome it and on what role different actors might

play.

The third focus concerns the capacity of the PBC
itself and the need for countries to progress off its
agenda. In the past six months, we have had the
welcome addition of two countries onto the PBC's
agenda, and there is a possibility that other high-profile
countries may also seek referral. That will put an
additional burden on the PBSO and on Member States.
We need to explore the steps for graduating a country
off the PBC's agenda or shifting to some lighter form
of engagement.

We also think that the PBC has an important role
to play in championing the civilian capacity review.
For example, the PBC could help to rally support
internationally for specific recommendations in the
review. We would also welcome the PBC's advice
when we take this up in the Security Council later this
year. We further think that the PBC would benefit from
forging greater links with the new grouping of 17
fragile States, known as the g7+. That group provided
useful insights under the Bosnian debate on
institutional capacity-building. We should hear more
from the group. The PBC could provide a platform for
it here in New York.

In conclusion, when we meet to discuss the
PBC's annual report this time next year, we should
look to see whether these objectives - results, advice
and managing the PBC's capacity to best effect - are
being met. The United Kingdom reiterates its
commitment to helping to support their delivery.

