Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the United States presidency of the
Security Council for having taken the initiative of
convening this important meeting. I extend a warm
welcome to the Secretary of State of the United States,
Mr. Rex Tillerson, and to the Secretary-General.

I have the honour of delivering a statement from the
French Minister of Foreign Affairs and International
Development, Mr. Jean-Marc Ayrault, who was held up
at a conference in Europe and could not be here with us
today in New York.
"France is particularly concerned over North
Korea's nuclear and ballistic missile programme,
which fuels the greatly heightened tensions in the
Korean peninsula and constitutes one of the primary
threats to international peace and security today.
Methodically pursuing that path - initiated at
highest level of power - over the course of several
years with a View to obtaining an operational
nuclear arsenal, North Korea has flouted all of the
Council's prohibitions and ignored the repeated
demands of the entire international community to
desist from doing so.

"We are seeing the constant and rapid
advancement of North Korea's proliferation
programmes, which is bringing it ever closer to
reaching operational capacity. That situation is
unacceptable. France has systematically and firmly
condemned each act carried out and has called on
North Korea to abandon its attempts to develop a
nuclear weapon. We once again make that appeal.
This headlong rush forward cannot continue. It feeds
a dangerous and provocative downward spiral and
is an ongoing threat to the non-proliferation regime.
That is why we must react to all such activities and
recall the norm of the non-proliferation regime in
order to avoid sending a message of impunity to
States that would be tempted to follow the same
irresponsible and provocative strategy.

"We are also concerned about the re-emergence
of chemical weapons in the region, the 13 February
attack in Malaysia should alert us to a global context
of chemical weapons resurfacing and to Syria's
continuous and repeated violations of the ban on

the use of such weapons. Let us be clear - the
goal of North Korea is to become a nuclear-weapon
State and to shake up strategic balances in the Far
East and the entire world by directly threatening
the security of all. Tomorrow, all countries could
be in range of North Korean missiles. We must all
be cognizant of the urgency of the situation. We
must meet our responsibilities as members of the
Security Council and show our determination to
combatting those unjustifiable acts.

"We also recall that the development of nuclear
and ballistic programmes is being carried out at
the expense of the people of North Korea, who are
victims of grave violations of human rights and 70 per
cent of whom suffer from food insecurity. Those
systematic and severe violations are the expression
of utter totalitarianism, where the arbitrary use of
power prevails systematically over the rule of law.
The world cannot remain complacent with regard to
that situation, which flies in the face of everything
we have patiently worked to build, especially
here at the United Nations. Confronted with such
a challenge, the commitment of the international
community and the Security Council must be firm,
clear and visible. Our objective must be the total
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

"The Council has taken bold action in response
to the irresponsible actions of Pyongyang by
condemning nuclear tests and ballistic missile
tests, and it has imposed an extensive and coherent
sanctions regime. Those measures have been
bolstered following each nuclear test and, on two
occasions in 2016, resulted in resolutions 2270
(2016) and 2321 (2016). France, which contributed
to their adoption, welcomed those resolutions. As
with the case of Iran, the sanctions are certainly not
a goal in and of themselves, but rather one of the
means to make North Korea see reason and accept
the denuclearization of the peninsula.

"However, we regret the uneven implementation
of those sanctions, which significantly undermines
the effectiveness of the actions of the international
community. France calls on all States without
exception to ensure the rigorous and unconditional
implementation of Council decisions by all actors,
pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations. I am
well aware of the technical and practical obstacles
to their implementation, and it is up to the Council

to continue to provide assistance in that regard to
countries to countries that need it.

"In the face of North Korea's persistent
proliferation efforts and the growing danger it
poses to peace and security, our position must
be resolute and clear. If Pyongyang continues its
provocations, the international community and
the Security Council must be ready to adopt new
measures. North Korea must be aware that the
pursuit of its nuclear programme and the carrying
out of additional tests will be met with strong
action, namely through the imposition of new
sanctions, while its citizens continue to be victims
of its leaders.

"But our action cannot be merely reactionary.
We must be proactive and act urgently before
North Korea obtains an operational nuclear
weapon. The international community must
jointly and immediately coordinate efforts to bring
greater diplomatic and economic pressure to bear
upon North Korea in order for it to abandon its
proliferation activities.The resumption of talks
in order to reach a negotiated solution is also
important, but requires that North Korea first make
a good will commitment to them and abandon its
nuclear objectives.

"France, as a permanent member of the
Security Council and the European Union, is fully
committed to ensuring that the United Nations and
Europe respond appropriately to this unacceptable
threat to international peace and security."

