Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Permanent Representative of
Colombia for his briefing on the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006) during the past 90 days, and to voice my
appreciation for the large amount of work
accomplished by the Committee under his leadership. I
hope that the Committee will continue to push for the
implementation of the resolution in a pragmatic,
appropriate and balanced matter. China has always
attached great importance to the Committee and will
continue to support it in its work.

China has also taken note of the interim report
submitted by the Panel of Experts. We hope the Panel
can continue to comply strictly with the resolution's
provisions and, under the Committee's leadership, to
abide firmly by the principles of impartiality and
objectivity, working in a serious, rigorous, appropriate
and orderly manner in order to play its dual role in
assisting the Council and the Committee in fulfilling
their respective mandates, and in promoting a
comprehensive, balanced and effective implementation
of the relevant resolution.

China believes that all parties are duty-bound to
accurately carry out the provisions of the resolution in
good faith. However, sanctions are not the ultimate
objective of the Council's resolution. The Iranian
nuclear issue can only be finally resolved through
dialogue and cooperation. The situation in the region is
now undergoing profound changes. Against that
background, having all parties commit firmly to
seeking an appropriate solution to the Iranian nuclear
issue through dialogue and negotiation will be of
greater and more meaningful significance for the
maintenance of peace and stability in the Middle East
and avoiding further turbulence in the situation in the
region.

The Board of Governors of the International
Atomic Energy Agency recently adopted a resolution
on the Iranian nuclear issue, aimed at promoting
cooperation between the Agency and Iran and at
supporting the efforts of the E3+3 countries to resolve
the Iranian issue through dialogue. We hope that all
parties can seize this opportunity and act in the best
interests of peace and stability in the Middle East and
of the international nuclear non-proliferation regime,
by making greater efforts diplomatically and promoting
substantive progress in dialogue between the E3+3 and
Iran, as well as in cooperation between Iran and the
Agency. That is what the international community
hopes for and that is in keeping with the fundamental
interests of all sides.

Iran, as a State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, is entitled to its
right to the peaceful uses of nuclear power, and at the
same time must comply with its international
obligations. China hopes that, through dialogue and
cooperation, Iran and the Agency can seek an
appropriate solution to the outstanding issues in order
to strengthen the confidence of the international
community in the peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme. China hopes that all sides can, with
strategic vision, act in a spirit of pragmatism and
flexibility to fully mobilize the positive factors present

11-6467}
and take appropriate measures to promote progress in
dialogue and negotiations.

