The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh,
Canada, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Ghana, India, Jamaica,
Japan, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, South Africa, Spain, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukraine
and Zambia in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion on the item on the
Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Messahel
(Algeria), Mr. Chikoti (Angola), Mr. Chowdhury
(Bangladesh), Mr. Duval (Canada),
Mr. Djagone-Bi (Cote d'lvoire), Mr. Rodriguez
Parrilla (Cuba), Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic ofthe Congo), Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti),
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Eflah-Apenteng
(Ghana), Mr. Sharma (India), Miss Durrant
(Jamaica), Mr. Motomura (Japan), Mr. Jalang'o
(Kenya), Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia), Mr. Fassi Fihri (Morocco),
Ms. Velho Rodrigues (Mozambique), Mr. Apata
(Nigeria), Mr. Gadio (Senegal), Mr. Kamara
(Sierra Leone), Ms. Mabudafhasi (South Africa),
Mr. Arias (Spain), Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia),
Mr. Semakula Kiwanuka (Uganda), Mr. Kuchinsky
(Ukraine) and Mr. Kalumba (Zambia) took the
seats reservedfor them at the side ofthe Council
Chamber.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish
to extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr.
Abdelkader Messahel, Minister in Charge of African
Affairs of Algeria; His Excellency Mr. Georges
Chikoti, Vice-Minister for External Relations of
Angola; His Excellency Mr. Leonard She Okitundu,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
His Excellency Mr. Tayb Fassi Fihri, Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Morocco; Her Excellency
Ms. Frances Velho Rodrigues, Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Republic of
Mozambique; His Excellency Mr. Cheikh Tidiane
Gadio, Minister of Foreign Affairs, African Union and
Senegalese Abroad of Senegal; Her Excellency
Ms. R. T. Mabudafhasi, Minister for Environmental
Affairs and Tourism of South Africa; and His
Excellency Mr. Katele Kalumba, the new Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Zambia.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Council, and on
behalf of the Security Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Amara Essy, Secretary-
General of the Organization of African Unity (OAU)/
African Union, and invite him to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Ivan Simonovic', President of the
Economic and Social Council. I understand that he is
not yet here in the Chamber, but he will take his seat
when he comes.

The Security Council will now resume its
consideration of the item on its agenda - namely, the
situation in Africa. The Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations. I should like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to document S/2002/46, which
contains the guidelines for this meeting.

I now wish to welcome the Deputy Secretary-
General, Her Excellency Ms. Louise Frechette, to this
meeting and invite her to take the floor.


