Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to the African Union,
Mr. Haile Menkerios, for his briefing on the Secretary-
General's report (S/2017/744) on ways to strengthen the
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union on issues of peace and security in Africa.

Uruguay recognizes the progress made over the past
15 years in the partnership between the African Union
and the United Nations on issues related to peace and
security. In our view, that partnership is fundamental
and necessary given the ongoing conflicts in complex
contexts, in which we must face asymmetrical threats
and the spread of Violent extremism and terrorism
and - in many cases - also confront humanitarian
crises and massive Violations of human rights. In that
regard, Uruguay appreciates the enthusiastic efforts of
the African Union to achieve peace and development
in Africa, thereby playing a positive role in the
peaceful resolution of such conflicts. That is why we
encourage the African Union to continue to contribute
constructively to addressing the various conflicts on
the continent.

My delegation welcomes the progress made in
the partnership over the past year, a period covered
by the report under consideration. The signing of the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, the
implementation of the African Union Peace Fund,
the adoption of resolution 2320 (2016) and the recent
meeting between the Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, which was mentioned a
few minutes ago, are concrete steps aimed at further
bolstering the cooperative framework for Africa. We
also share the View of Mr. Menkerios that the United
Nations Office to the African Union continues to play
an essential role. The Office is a fundamental channel
for providing substantive and technical support and
ensuring concerted decision-making, particularly
between the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council. Uruguay appreciates the
ongoing efforts to restructure the Office with the aim
of fulfilling the new dynamics of our alliance, and we
look forward to a comprehensive review of what the
Office needs in order to enable it to meet the demands
on it.

The growing number of regional peacekeeping
and peace support operations shows that the demand
for such efforts in Africa now exceeds what the United
Nations, the African Union or any other regional or
subregional organization can handle individually. This
reality confirms the fact that peacekeeping remains
essential not only because it is a versatile instrument
but also because it is cost-effective. In that regard, my
delegation would like to emphasize three factors that
we believe will be decisive in enabling the alliance
between the United Nations and the African Union to
reach its full potential.

The first relates to the process of planning and
defining the joint mandates of African Union peace
support operations authorized by the Security Council.
We believe that close cooperation on this process is
essential to ensuring the efficiency and effectiveness of
such operations. It is Vital to continue efforts to improve
the organizations' joint work throughout the life cycle of
a mission. Among other things, that includes the initial
assessment of a crisis, a joint strategic assessment, the
implementation of the mission and assessments of its
fulfilment of its mandate and its accountability.

The second factor concerns the financing of
African Union peace support operations. We have seen
that a lack of predictable and sustainable funding and
support for such operations has undermined the African
Union's ability to act and respond to crisis situations.
We believe that the various funding models proposed
in the Secretary-General's May report on the subject
(S/2017/454) offer viable options for Member States
to consider.

The third factor relates to developing the capacities
of African Union personnel deployed in peace support
operations. As a country that has been actively involved
in peacekeeping operations for many years, Uruguay

considers the responsibility of countries that contribute
troop and police contingents particularly important,
since they are the people who do the work on the
ground and have to implement operation mandates. In
that context, we should emphasize that any non-United
Nations force authorized by the Security Council,
including African Union peace support operations,
must comply with the same requirements as United
Nations peacekeeping personnel in terms of capacities,
performance, conduct, discipline and accountability.
We would like to highlight the efforts that the African
Union is making to refine its human rights and conduct
and discipline frameworks in order to ensure that
its peace support operations are conducted in full
compliance with human rights norms and international
humanitarian law, while also ensuring oversight
and accountability.

Lastly, I would like to reiterate our appreciation for
the African Union's mediation and facilitation efforts
in various areas of conflict, such as South Sudan and
the Central African Republic. We are confident that an
even closer alliance with the United Nations will also
help to enhance the effectiveness of those efforts.

