Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I,
too, would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his very detailed report and to add my
voice to the unanimous expressions of satisfaction at
this important event, of which our Organization can be
proud and pleased. It reflects well on, among others,
our Secretary-General, who is honouring us today with
his presence.

While it can be said that there were some
concerns and genuine fears at the possibility of
political violence, we are truly delighted to be able to
note that the democratic process took place peacefully
and without violence. The Timorese managed to
overcome the ghosts of the past associated with the
violence that followed the popular consultation held
two years ago. This shows that the Pact of National
Unity is being complied with.

We would also like to join those who have
congratulated the people of East Timor for the massive
and unprecedented voter turnout of over 90 per cent of
registered voters participated. We would like to
congratulate Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello; Mr. Carlos
Valenzuela, head of the Independent Electoral
Commission of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET); to all the
personnel of UNTAET; and to the volunteers for their
organization of and active participation in this
important event.

A crucial exercise will take place on 15
September, when the Constituent Assembly will begin
work on drafting a new constitution. It will have 90
days in which to do so. Although the East Timor
National Liberation Front won a clear majority, it was
not a decisive one. We hope that, as announced, it will
be able to join forces with representatives of minority
parties in order to craft a constitution that will identify
and support the needs of all Timorese.

We support Mr. Vieira de Mello's proposal to
create a new transitional Government that will have an
all-Timorese ministerial cabinet. As we affirmed
earlier, the election of the Constituent Assembly is a
new step on the road towards national reconciliation. It
is indispensable, however, for the truth and
reconciliation commission to be set up. In order to
secure the viability of the future State, the international
community must continue to support that process. We
therefore hope that, in October, when we receive a
detailed report on UNTAET's proposals, it will be
possible to define how to maintain a United Nations
presence during the post-independence phase.

Finally, we would like to express our support for
the contents of the presidential statement to be adopted
later.
