Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Mr. President, for organizing and presiding
over this meeting, which draws our attention to the
dramatic humanitarian situation in Syria. We regret the
absence of our own Minister for Foreign Affairs, who
had a prior commitment and is on an official mission.
We thank the Ministers of Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon,
Iraq, the United Kingdom, Morocco, Colombia and
Togo for their presence here. We also thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees Antonio Guterres for
their briefings.
It is difficult to separate the humanitarian situation
from the political situation in Syria, an issue which has
been on our agenda for almost a year and which led to
the adoption of resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012)
and to certain well-known subsequent developments.
The internal conflict has given rise to a humanitarian
crisis and that crisis is laying the groundwork for a
worsening of the conflict. The most recent report of
the independent international commission of inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic (A/HRC/19/69) and the
recent attacks in Damascus and Aleppo show that there
has been an increase in acts of violence in the country.
The battles being waged in cities, with little respect for
civilians, including through the use of heavy weaponry,
tanks, helicopters and airplanes, must end. It has been
called easy, but we all know how difficult it has been
to persuade the parties to the conflict to lay down their
weapons.

When that does not happen, we usually appeal, not
only to the Government but also to the armed opposition
to respect the human rights of the civilian population
and to avoid actions that could later be classified as
war crimes, including murder, extrajudicial execution
and torture. The idea of creating buffer zones within
Syrian territory is also being discussed. That entails
some obviously appealing aspects, but also raises legal
and practical questions that have not been considered
by the Council.

While this debate is being held, the number of
Syrian refugees is increasing every day. In that regard,
the efforts that countries such as Turkey, Lebanon, Iraq
and Jordan have undertaken to receive those people are
commendable. The efforts undertaken by the United
Nations, especially by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to meet
the most immediate needs of the affected population,
above all the internally displaced persons, is also
commendable and must be emphasized. Humanitarian
staff have worked heroically under difficult and
dangerous circumstances, often facing the ill will ofthe
authorities and now facing a lack offunds. That situation
is compounded by the increase in the number ofvictims
of violence, most of them women and children.

Therefore, while respecting the norms of
international humanitarian law, the Syrian Government
must allow its population access to humanitarian
assistance. We cannot allow those people to go without
timely access to medical care, assistance, water and
food. That is also why we appeal to the international
community to continue to provide humanitarian
assistance in support to the affected population.

In conclusion, we think that a greater outpouring
of violence in Syria can still be prevented. In our view,
we cannot allow more acts of violence or violations of
human rights to be committed by any of the parties,
much less for such acts to continue with impunity while
increasing in magnitude and brutality. As members
of the international community, it is our obligation to
promote truth, transparency and the responsibility of
all those responsible for those violations. Above all, we
must undertake the greatest possible efforts to prevent
further atrocities from being committed. In that regard,
we would like to publicly thank Kofi Annan for his
devoted service, and we welcome Lakhdar Brahimi, to
whom we extend our full support.

