Mr. Jokonya (Zimbabwe): Mr. Paul Robertson,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Jamaica, we are
delighted to see you in the presidency, although your
presence today leads to the relegation of my friend,
Ambassador Durrant, to the seat behind you. But we
are delighted that you are here, and this is clearly a
demonstration of the seriousness with which your
country takes this debate before the Council.

The subject matter being discussed by the
Security Council today is one to which my delegation,
like many others who have spoken before us, attaches
great importance. We are deeply indebted to you,
Mr. President, for once again bringing this critical issue
to the attention of the Council. It is our sincere hope
that at the end of this exercise the Council will take a
watershed decision that will challenge the international
community to make its best efforts ever in dealing with
the HIV/AIDS pandemic, not only within the context
of United Nations peacekeeping, but in the context of
the most comprehensive solution to this particular
problem.

The battle against AIDS, particularly in
developing countries, entails enormous costs befitting
an international emergency on the grandest scale.

Just last year, the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) released figures
estimating that $2 to $3 billion would be needed
annually to combat the disease. The greatest need is in
sub-Saharan Africa, home of 70 per cent of all people
living with HIV/AIDS. In the face of this emergency,
however, aid from industrialized countries for
HIV/AIDS related activities in developing countries -
home of 95 per cent of people with the disease -
totalled only $302 million in 1998, according to the
recent UNICEF report, The Progress of Nations 2000.
Clearly, the international response to this emergency is
not matching the challenge.

For too long now we have heard allegation after
allegation about a possible conspiracy of silence about
AIDS in many developing countries. Considering the
large-scale awareness campaigns and prevention
programmes launched in many of our countries, the
feeling that there might be an international conspiracy
of silence about effective and fundamental programmes
initiated by Governments in many developing countries
is perhaps justifiable. For how is it possible that since
the campaign against AIDS began, the international
community quotes efforts in, at most, only three
developing countries? If that approach was meant to
highlight the earliest success stories, surely it has
outlived its purpose.

Sterling efforts in too many countries continue to
go unnoticed and be under-funded, with tragic
consequences not only for the countries concerned, but
also for humanity in general. In my own country,
Zimbabwe, our national efforts were greatly enhanced
last year through the enactment of a clear national
AIDS policy when Parliament passed a statute
establishing the National AIDS Council. At the same
time, the fiscus introduced an AIDS levy at the rate of
3 per cent on income and corporate taxes to provide
secure funding for the activities of the Council. I am
pleased to announce that the National AIDS Council
has already begun to receive disbursements of millions
of dollars from the proceeds of the AIDS levy.
However, the magnitude of the challenge demands that
we continue to appeal for international support in
dealing with this international emergency.

With regard to international peace and security,
there is no doubt that the adverse effects of the spread
of HIV/AIDS on all sectors of society - including
individuals, families, workers, political leaders and
uniformed services, including the military - have
weakened the capacity of affected countries to maintain
domestic and regional peace and security. My
delegation welcomes and strongly supports the
recommendations contained in the March 2000 report
of the United Nations Special Committee on
Peacekeeping, which affirmed the need to incorporate
HIV/AIDS prevention training in aspects of the United
Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations
training for peacekeepers.

As a troop-contributing country, Zimbabwe
commends the current efforts of the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to address this
issue through the provision of HIV/AIDS prevention
awareness skills and advice to peacekeepers through its
train-the-trainer courses and materials. We hope that
the Council will support the proposal contained in the
draft resolution before it to request the Secretary-
General to ensure the provision of mission-specific
training for all peacekeepers on issues related to the
prevention of the spread of HIV/AIDS, and to ensure
the further development of pre-deployment and
ongoing training for all peacekeepers on issues related
to the prevention of the spread of HIV/AIDS.

It has taken too long for the international
community to forge a partnership involving all
stakeholders - including Governments, the
pharmaceutical industry and international
institutions - working together to make HIV-related
drugs more widely accessible to developing countries.
It remains painfully clear that the profit motive
continues to take precedence over humanity's medical
well-being. The Secretary-General notes correctly in
his millennium report that

"the world desperately needs a vaccine against
HIV". (A/54/2000, para. 130)

Regrettably, of the $2 billion spent on research for the
treatment of HIV to date, only $250 million has been
spent on creating vaccines. We hope that the Council
and other main bodies of the United Nations can make
decisions and proposals that can stimulate the
desperately needed investments in this area.

