Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution 1810 (2008), and
on behalf of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), it is my
pleasure to submit to the Security Council the
Committee's report on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

Since the adoption of Security Council resolution
1540 (2004) in April 2004, the Committee established
pursuant to that resolution has made considerable
progress in promoting full implementation of the
resolution through its intensive work programmes. That
work includes assisting the Security Council in
monitoring the implementation of the resolution
through the examination of relevant measures taken by
all States Members of the United Nations, the
organization of intensive outreach activities, the
development of deeper and mutually beneficial
cooperation with other Security Council counter-
terrorism bodies as well as with global, regional, and
subregional intergovernmental organizations, the
2
creation of new tools to facilitate assistance and
transparency, and the enhancement of its dialogue with
individual States.

In the present report the Committee expresses the
belief that those activities substantially raised the
awareness of the international community concerning
the dangers associated with the potential nexus
between the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, their means of delivery and related
materials, and non-State actors. Since the adoption by
the Security Council of resolution 1673 (2006), the
Committee's work has placed greater emphasis on
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), facilitating
the efforts of Member States to prepare to address that
nexus.

(spoke in English)

In its present report, the 1540 Committee
identifies a number of specific measures that States
have in place to implement resolution 1540 (2004),
including steps they have taken since April 2006. They
range from developing new institutional means to
incorporate the obligations of resolution 1540 (2004) in
national practices to adopting new legislation and
enforcement measures, executing new policies and
creating new assistance programmes directed towards
implementation of the resolution.

The new reports submitted by a number of States
since 2006 and the additional information received
from other States, or otherwise identified from official
governmental sources, have enabled the Committee to
present a more complete picture of the measures
already in place or planned in the near future. Thus, it
has been possible to demonstrate a qualitative
improvement in progress towards achieving full
implementation of the resolution.

(spoke in French)

Notwithstanding that progress, the Committee
concludes that Member States need to do far more than
they have already done to implement resolution 1540
(2004). Consequently, achieving the goals of the
resolution requires further attention by the Security
Council and more intensive action, particularly on
capacity-building and sharing lessons learned.

Among other recommendations, the Committee
believes that, consistent with Security Council
resolution 1810 (2008), it should strengthen its
clearing-house role for channelling assistance to States
08-46307
in need; increase tailored dialogue with and among
States to identify assistance needs and assistance
projects to meet them; and promote awareness of, make
better use of and consider options for developing
existing financial mechanisms in order to build
capacity to implement resolution 1540 (2004). To those
ends, it should also work more closely with global and
regional intergovernmental organizations and
arrangements, within and outside the United Nations
system, in fostering the sharing of experience, creating
forums for discussion and developing innovative
mechanisms to achieve implementation of the
resolution.

Full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by
all States will take time. Once it has been
accomplished, vigilance and innovation will be needed
to maintain effective policies. That task not only calls
08-46307
for a long-term commitment to the objectives of the
resolution, but also the nurturing of a sense of urgency,
given the gravity of the threat facing the international
community.

