Mr. Yap (Singapore): My delegation would like
to welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Hans Haekkerup, to the
Security Council, and to thank him for his very first
briefing to the Council. It was both informative and
useful. Mr. Haekkerup has taken on a very difficult
undertaking. He must be commended for the good
work he has done in the first two months in his post.
He has set the right priorities for the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for which he needs the backing of the United Nations
and the international community. He can count on
Singapore's support for his and UNMIK's efforts to
fully implement resolution 1244 (1999) in difficult
circumstances.

Kosovo's political status is clear in Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999), and all involved in
charting Kosovo's future should move on. The overall
goal must remain the return of Kosovo to normalcy.
This would benefit not only Kosovo, but the region as a
whole. Unfortunately, violence has reared its ugly head
again in and around Kosovo, and in many forms:
attacks against ethnic minorities and politically
motivated violence in Kosovo, as well as violent acts
by ethnic Albanian armed groups in southern Serbia
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

We welcome the ceasefire that has gone into
effect in southern Serbia, and we hope that all acts of
violence will come to an end. In this regard, we
welcome the plans made and actions taken by UNMIK
and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the Governments of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, as well as other
relevant parties, to put a stop to the violence. We urge
them to do all the more to bring peace and stability to
the affected territories.

The restraint shown by the Governments of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is commendable, and
it should continue. It is not in anyone's interest that the
violence escalate. The solution to an armed extremist
problem is a political one, not a military one. We
therefore call on the Governments of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia to continue to pursue a
peaceful political solution to the problems confronting
them. Key to this are dialogue with the respective
ethnic Albanian leaders and the implementation of
confidence-building measures in southern Serbia and
the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

With respect to Kosovo, we would appreciate Mr.
Haekkerup's assessment of the level of sympathy and
support of the local population for the extremists and
troublemakers. What are they using to gather sympathy
and support from the local people for their actions? It
would also be appreciated if Mr. Haekkerup could give
us his views as to how the efforts of the extremists and
troublemakers in this respect can be counted. Should
UNMIK and KFOR embark on a concerted "hearts and
minds" campaign in Kosovo? What should this entail?

My delegation believes that reconciliation among
the various ethnic groups and building a multi-ethnic,
multireligious and multicultural society in Kosovo is
the key to bringing normalcy to Kosovo. In this regard,
we reiterate our call for the quick resolution of the
detained and missing persons issue. This would
certainly contribute to the reconciliation process. The
amnesty law approved by the Parliament of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the release of Kosovar
Albanians detained in Serbia prisons under that law are
most welcome. However, we share Mr. Haekkerup's
call for the return of all political prisoners to Kosovo,
and we hope that the whereabouts of the missing
persons can be established promptly.

Besides efforts to promote ethnic tolerance and
reconciliation, there should also be an endeavour to
stimulate economic development in Kosovo. The initial
economic reconstruction measures taken and the
progress they have achieved are encouraging. We
support the shift in emphasis now towards developing
economic sustainability. Economic growth would be a
strong inducement for the Kosovo people to work
towards a peaceful, stable and secure environment, so
as to further build the economy.

However, progress in reconciliation and
economic development depends on the Kosovo
political leadership showing their readiness to build a
democratic, multi-ethnic society and a sustainable
market economy in Kosovo as they take on the
responsibility of self-government. The full
participation and engagement of all ethnic communities
in Kosovo in developing substantial autonomy are also
important. My delegation therefore regrets the decision
of the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to withdraw the Kosovar Serb
representative from the Working Group that is
developing a legal framework for the Kosovo
provisional government; this is coming when relations
between UNMIK and the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia are improving and an UNMIK
office is to be established in Belgrade soon.

We would encourage the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to reconsider its
decision. It would be appreciated if Mr. Haekkerup
could shed some light on the concerns of the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
provide us with his views on how these can be
addressed. How can the Security Council help in this?

We would like to reiterate that Kosovo-wide
elections should be held only when all the necessary
conditions are in place, including the establishment of
the legal framework, which we note is a view that Mr.
Haekkerup shares. In stating his intentions to hold
elections this year, Mr. Haekkerup has said that the
election for institutions will be critical in stabilizing
and developing Kosovo. But some analysts have
commented that if the elections are misinterpreted as a
move towards independence for Kosovo, this could
lead to greater tension. We would like to ask Mr.
Haekkerup what his plans are to address this concern.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to thank
Mr. Haekkerup for his participation in this meeting of
the Security Council to brief us and share with us his
views. We wish him and his staff well in carrying out
UNMIK's mandate. They should be given full support
by the United Nations and the international community.

