The Secretary-General: I thank you for your
initiative, Madam President. At the outset, I would
like to sincerely welcome your participation to preside
over the Security Council immediately after your
appointment as Foreign Minister of the Australian
Government. You can count on me. I wish you all the
best and continued good success.

In recent years, the Security Council has
recognized the devastating impacat of small arms on
peace and development. The excessive accumulation of
arms has fuelled insecurity and conflict from Mali to
Afghanistan and beyond. But weapons trafficking has
affected far more than the immediate security situation.
Armed conflict is the main cause ofpeople fleeing their
homes and of food insecurity.

The uncontrolled availability of guns and bullets
threatens peace processes and fragile reconciliation
efforts. It leads to a vast range ofhuman rights violations,
including killing and maiming, rape and other forms of
sexual violence, enforced disappearance, torture and
the forced recruitment of children by armed groups. It
exacerbates inter-community violence and organized
crime. And it undermines our work for social justice,
the rule of law and the Millennium Development Goals.
The world is over-armed and peace is underfunded.

Earlier this year, States took a historic step forward
by adopting the Arms Trade Treaty, which fully includes
small arms and ammunition in its scope. That landmark
measure obligates States to regulate international
arms transfers, including prohibiting shipments to
Governments that fail to use them in conformity with
the Charter of the United Nations. The Treaty will also
help address weapons diversion from Government
stockpiles - a growing and disturbing source of arms
for pirates, rebels and warlords. The Arms Trade Treaty
will complement and strengthen a number of existing
international instruments. I urge all States to sign and
ratify it without delay. Already more than half of all
Member States have signed. I want to thank members of
the Security Council that have helped to lead the way.

(spoke in French)

As I mentioned in detail in my report (S/20l3/503)
presented recently to the Security Council, the absence
of regulation, the ease of access to arms and the great
profitability of the illicit trade in weapons constitute
an explosive cocktail. By way of proof, the pillage
of Libyan arms depots was one of the factors that
contributed to the instability of the Sahel. Similar proof
is evident from the lawlessness that currently prevails
in Guinea-Bissau, the Central African Republic, Iraq
and even on the high seas. Moreover, poor management
of munitions stocks multiplies the risk of explosions,
which would then endanger the lives of people and the
environment.

(spoke in English)

I am pleased that the Council has recognized
that States require additional support in weapons
management. The standards on weapons and
ammunition management developed by the United
Nations can be of great assistance. Innovations such as
weapon-tracking technologies and the personalization
of firearms can help. Arms embargoes are also vital.
Yet unscrupulous brokers are adept at evading such
strictures.

The various monitoring groups of Security
Council Sanctions Committees need more and
better information. My report includes a number of
recommendations that the Security Council may wish
to consider when mandating peacekeeping operations
and special political missions.

In the past year alone, more than a dozen peacekeepers
in Darfur, South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo have been killed in action by small arms.
Peacekeeping missions are addressing the challenge in
a number of ways, including assistance with stockpile
management and the collection and destruction of
weapons. United Nations police observers in Liberia
and Cote d'Ivoire, for example, have developed a guide
to record arms and ammunition. And an embargo-
monitoring capacity has been effectively established by
the United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire.

Small arms remain a big concern. The challenge
lies at the intersection of human rights, security,
development, crime, international trade, public health
and counter-terrorism. Small arms are a source of
crises, conflict and criminality. Member States, the
United Nations system, regional organizations and civil
society have made progress, but much remains to be
done.

I want once again to commend the Security
Council for taking up vital issues of disarmament
and non-proliferation. I urge that to continue. Let us
commit to advance our work together and build a safer
more secure world for all.

