The President: I thank His Excellency Prime
Minister Carlos Gomes Junior for his presentation.

I will now give a briefing in my capacity as Chair
of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

I extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Carlos Gomes Junior, Prime Minister of Guinea-
Bissau, and thank him for his presentation. I also
warmly welcome the Ministers for Foreign Affairs,
National Defence, Justice and for Economy, Planning
and Regional Integration, and other members of the
delegation of Guinea-Bissau. The presence of such a
high-level delegation in this meeting, and in the
meeting of the configuration that we held yesterday, is
a clear signal of the country's commitment to
increasing its cooperation with the international
community.

I commend the Prime Minister of Guinea-Bissau
for the comprehensive presentation he has just made,
which enables us to better appreciate the many
challenges and the opportunities facing Guinea-Bissau.
I also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, for his
briefing and his commendable work in Bissau.

In the past few months the configuration has
focused its work on specific areas, notably security
sector reform, the rule of law, combating drug
trafficking and impunity, addressing concerns of youth
and women and supporting institution-building. We
have not lost sight of the importance of encouraging
job creation and promoting a more vigorous economy
as crucial elements of a peacebuilding strategy.

In a meeting of the configuration on 22
November 2010, members were briefed by
representatives of the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) and the World Bank. Those representatives
highlighted the notable progress made by Guinea-
Bissau in recent years in the areas of macroeconomic
management and public finance, resulting in economic
growth, low inflation and an increase in revenue
collection. It was their assessment that Guinea-Bissau
was on track to reach the completion point of the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative
(HIPC). Building on the discussions with the IMF and
the World Bank, the members of the configuration
were encouraged to support the deliberations of the
Boards of the IMF and the World Bank concerning
Guinea-Bissau.

Last December, the Boards of the IMF and the
World Bank declared that Guinea-Bissau had reached
the completion point of the HIPC Initiative and
decided to support debt relief for the country in the
amount of $1.2 billion. I am confident that the
measures adopted by the international financial
institutions will help lead Guinea-Bissau into a
virtuous cycle, since they will, among other positive
effects, normalize Guinea-Bissau's relations with
external creditors - especially members of the Paris
Club, the International Development Association and
the African Development Fund - possibly leading to
further debt relief; send a positive signal to
international donors and investors; reduce the country's
dependence on budgetary aid; expand its fiscal space
for social programmes; and demonstrate and recognize
the progress that the Government of Guinea-Bissau has
made in macroeconomic management, which will
surely strengthen the civilian authorities and
institutions of the country. A window of opportunity
has reopened for Guinea-Bissau.

As the Secretary-General pointed out in his latest
report (S/2011/73), key economic and public
administration reforms are moving forward as the
Government of Guinea-Bissau seeks to improve fiscal
discipline. Economic growth was expected to reach
4 per cent in 2010, compared to 3 per cent in 2009. The
Government has also succeeded in increasing tax
revenues in the context of fiscal reforms and
anticipates that in 2011 it will have the budgetary
resources to cover spending beyond the payment of
salaries.

It is also worth noting that the Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF) Joint Steering Committee approved the
2011-2013 Peacebuilding Priority Plan for Guinea
Bissau, which identifies priorities for the next two to
three years, notably to strengthen democratic
institutions and the rule of law, to revitalize the
economy and to reactivate basic social services. In this
regard, we welcome the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to allocate up to $16.8 million of the
PBF to the implementation of the Priority Plan.

I am encouraged by the progress that Guinea-
Bissau has made to reverse the negative effects of the
events of 1 April 2010. The release of Vice-Admiral
Zamora Induta and other senior officers is emblematic
of those efforts. I also note in that respect the positive
steps taken by the country's leadership, especially by
President Malam Bacai Sanha and Prime Minister
Carlos Gomes Junior, to demonstrate their renewed
commitment to pursue enhanced dialogue and political
negotiations.

The people and the Government of Guinea-Bissau
are doing their part to overcome the setbacks of the
recent past. The members of the configuration
encourage the leadership of the country to take further
concrete steps in fighting impunity and enhancing the
rule of law and civilian control of the military.

Security sector reform is of fundamental
importance. The members of the Peacebuilding
Commission configuration for Guinea-Bissau
welcomed the road map supported by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries for the
implementation of security sector reform in Guinea-
Bissau and expected its timely endorsement by
ECOWAS. They encouraged the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to fully commit to its implementation.

The fight against drug trafficking is an issue of
grave concern to the members of the Commission.
Fighting illicit drugs effectively requires functioning
State institutions, especially in the areas of justice and
security, as well as firm political will. We emphasize
the importance of a regional approach and the role
played by ECOWAS in this regard.

Both as individual Governments and collectively,
we must all do more and do better to support the
implementation of the ECOWAS regional action plan
and the West Africa Coast Initiative. In this respect, we
welcome the letter of Prime Minister Carlos Gomes
Junior to the Secretary-General of 27 October 2010
expressing the complete engagement of the
Government of Guinea-Bissau in energetically
pursuing the fight against the plague of drug trafficking
and the organized crime associated to it. The signing of
a memorandum of understanding by the Ministries of
Justice, Interior and Finance establishing a
transnational crime unit in Guinea-Bissau is a further
positive step in the right direction. We now look
forward to the designation of the members of the unit
and to discussing ways in which the Peacebuilding
Commission can support such efforts.

International efforts to help consolidate peace in
Guinea-Bissau should not rest solely upon security-
related cooperation. In order for peace to take hold, the
foundations for socio-economic development must be
strengthened. We need to support capacity-building and
assist the country in revitalizing its economy. At the
end of the day, it is a dynamic economy and the
creation of job opportunities that will generate the
revenues needed for the provision of basic services to
the population and allow the State to function in a
sustainable manner.

We must take advantage of this positive
momentum. More than ever, engagement and
cooperation with Guinea-Bissau is necessary to assist
the country in building democratic governance and
effectively addressing key challenges. The
international community should step up its support to
Guinea-Bissau to help enhance national political
stability, promote reconciliation, combat impunity and
organized crime and foster socio-economic
development.

We must persevere in our collective efforts to
support Guinea-Bissau. This requires that national
authorities continue the ongoing efforts to fully restore
international confidence. It also means that
international partners should look beyond the setbacks
of the recent past and support long-term political and
economic stability in the country.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
12

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussions on the
subject.

The meeting rose at 11.25 am.
1 1-243 82
