Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes this debate and resolution 2388
(2017). They are further steps towards more robust
Security Council action against trafficking. I also
thank you, Under Secretary of Sate Amendola, for
your presence at the debate, and I also thank all of
our briefers.

It was just last week that we discussed the security
challenges in the Mediterranean and their consequences
(see S/PV.8106). The trafficking of humans is one of
those most devastating of consequences: not only to
those involved, but also to all of us who value the most
basic of human rights. It was also last week that so many
of us were outraged by that shocking video footage on
CNN of modern slavery in Libya. As we know too
well, the nature of today's conflicts has encouraged
the growth of armed groups, terrorists and powerful
criminal networks. They all thrive in the absence of the
rule of law, and they profit on an unprecedented scale
from the chaos of ungoverned spaces. Such groups prey
on the most vulnerable, many of whom have already
lost their families, their homes, their livelihoods,
to steal the one thing they have left: their freedom.
Such exploitation takes on many forms in conflict
zones, including child labour, slavery and slavery-like
practices, forced labour and sexual exploitation.

Two issues raised in the recent report of
the Secretary-General on trafficking in conflict
(S/2017/939) stood out to me. The first, as others
have noted, was the call for improved data gathering,
evidence collection and information sharing. Improved
data is central to deepening our understanding of the
problem. Evidence gathering allows us to prosecute
perpetrators more effectively, and information sharing
means victims are identified and supported faster.

The second issue was the report's call for a
more coordinated United Nations response. Human
trafficking cuts across all of the United Nations
pillars. It is a security threat, a human rights violation
and a development problem. Therefore, rather than
competing with one another over resources or territory,
we need United Nations agencies coordinating and each
working to their comparative advantage. We strongly
support the Secretary-General's efforts to resolve this
persistent challenge.

After several debates, the Security Council is
now well informed of the problem of trafficking in
conflict situations and, with resolutions 2331 (2016)
and 2388 (2017), we are now well equipped to act. I
would like to draw attention to three issues that merit
greater attention.

First, violent extremists profit financially from this
trade in human misery, and it is vital that we integrate
this understanding into efforts to combat terrorism.
Without the robust use of the full range of existing
mechanisms to counter terrorist financing and oppose
sanctions, it will be impossible to eradicate the use of
slavery as a means to resource and further the aims of
terrorist groups.

Secondly, we must act to ensure that global supply
chains, which often reach into conflict zones, do not
fuel the crime of trafficking. We welcome the fact that
resolution 2388 (2017) calls on the United Nations to
enhance transparency in is procurement and supply
chains. The whole international community can go
further in this area.

Thirdly, just as we understand how trafficking
drives conflict, we should acknowledge how efforts
to address trafficking contribute to peace. Measures
to address trafficking by field missions - whether
through human rights monitoring or capacity-building
for police - should not be seen as add-ens, but as core
to efforts to build stability. More broadly, we should
consider how anti-trafficking features in the sustaining
peace agenda, which is all about using a cross section
of United Nations tools to prevent conflicts and
build peace.

Finally, let us not lose sight of who it is that we
are working for: the victims and the survivors. Those
images on CNN shocked because they showed that this
most degrading form of exploitation is tragically not
a thing of the past; it just happening today and it just
happening on our watch. No matter how we choose to
describe it - human trafficking, modern slavery, forced
labour - let us stand together in our commitment to
end the exploitation of human beings and safeguard the
dignity of those who are most vulnerable. It is only by
doing so that we can hope to succeed in the maintenance
of international peace and security.

