Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): Allow me first of all to express my delegation's
satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, presiding over the Security
Council this month. We have great confidence in your

 

wisdom and experience, which will help us to achieve
tangible results this month. During your presidency, we
would ask you to use your influence to solve and eliminate
as many as possible of the problems inscribed on our
agenda, such as those of Liberia and Rwanda, and others.
You will have the complete cooperation of my delegation.

I should like to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Gambari of Nigeria for the excellent work he
did during his presidency.

My delegation also takes this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for his thirteenth report on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia.

My delegation welcomes the developments in the
situation in Liberia, achieved as a result of the efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
which, through its Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), has
succeeded in maintaining stability and safeguarding the
State of Liberia, despite the paucity of means available to
it. That is why my delegation is proud to congratulate the
Heads of State of the Economic Community of West
African States and ECOMOG on their efforts to solve the
problems of a Member State, without awaiting external
intervention.

The reaction of Africans - that is, to take control -
whenever the international community shirks its
responsibilities is not new. It will be recalled that when the
horrendous genocide began in Rwanda, the United Nations
forces sent to Rwanda to maintain peace were the first to
leave the country when that peace was disturbed - at the
precise time when the defenceless population needed
protection. The international community having been unable
to shoulder its responsibilities, a group of Rwandese,
determined to save their country, managed to bring a halt
to the massacres and to re-establish the rule of law. This
shows that Africa can solve its own problems thanks, on
the one hand, to citizens mobilized and determined to do so
and, on the other, to regional and subregional organizations
which the Africans themselves have established.

My delegation is pleased to note that the Abuja
Agreement is being fully implemented and that the Council
of State of Liberia has shouldered its responsibilities,
particularly through its current efforts to extend the
authority of the National Transitional Government
throughout Liberia.

My delegation supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation on the implementation of a programme to
demobilize combatants, in cooperation with the National
Transitional Government. It is essential that the
demobilized soldiers be given productive work
immediately upon demobilization, because soldiers who
cannot find the means to earn a living could take up
activities that could undermine the restored peace.

Along the same lines, my delegation considers it
imperative and urgent that the refugees, displaced persons
and former combatants be returned to their home
communities in the interior of the country so that the
peace process, still so fragile and in need of
consolidation, will not be stopped.

The Security Council must express its gratitude to
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and, through it, to the ECOWAS Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG), which fulfilled a mission that the
Council, falling into the trap of double standards, did not
wish to undertake. Indeed, the funds necessary for
ECOMOG's operations for one year are less than those
used in one week by the peace-keeping forces in the
former Yugoslavia.

Why the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) and why not ECOMOG? Who in this
Chamber can publicly explain the difference? This is why
Rwanda wishes to reiterate yet again its appeal to the
Security Council and the Secretariat to resolve African
problems only through Africa's own institutions, for the
effect would be greater and the costs less.

In the light of the African continent's economic
situation, regional and subregional organizations need
only material and moral support in order to carry out
better the tasks that States have assigned them.

For more than two years the Council has been
dealing with the subjects of Somalia, Rwanda and Liberia.
These three countries have in common the features of
poverty and instability, two evils that are intertwined and
that cannot be resolved independently of each other. No
one wants to say so, because no one wants to resolve
these problems in integrated fashion.

We cannot ensure peace and stability in Somalia,
Rwanda and Liberia without ensuring economic
development in those countries. This rule is not just for
Africa; it is universal, which is why my delegation invites
the Security Council to take a different approach and turn
its attention to other issues that cannot be skirted if we
are to ensure peace and stability in African countries.

 

A "Marshall Plan" for Somalia, Rwanda and Liberia
is not only possible and feasible, it is necessary and even
indispensable in order to help these countries get back on
their feet. We are not talking here of humanitarian
assistance, but, rather, of economic cooperation. The
national budgets of these countries are smaller than the
budgets of most average-sized cities in the developed
countries represented here. What the international
community needs is good will and fairness.

Neglecting Africa, as is demonstrated by the current
tendency to provide incomplete solutions for the continent' s
problems, may have adverse consequences not only for
African countries but also for neighbouring continents. In
resolving African problems satisfactorily, the other
continents that are Africa's partners will at the same time
be resolving many of their own problems.

My delegation would like to conclude by
congratulating the President of ECOWAS, Mr. Jerry
Rawlings, President of Ghana, and the Presidents of the
States members of ECOWAS for having harmonized and
coordinated their policies regarding Liberia and for having
found an appropriate solution to that country's problems.

