Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation appreciates
the report of the Secretary-General, the briefings by
Under-Secretary-General Prendergast and Ambassador
Fowler, as well as the important statement by the Vice-
Minister for External Affairs of Angola. My delegation
also welcomes the equally important statement made by
the Ambassador of the Russian Federation on behalf of
the troika.

It is particularly dismaying that, although the
humanitarian disaster in Angola is among the worst in
any conflict situation in the world, the current military
hostilities there and their debilitating effects on the people
of Angola have received little international attention. We
agree with the View that the first indispensable element of
the efforts to bring a lasting solution to the conflict is
through the energetic enforcement of the sanctions against
UNITA. We also believe that, for UNITA to re-engage in
the peace process in any meaningful way, Mr. Savimbi -
who is primarily responsible for the continuation of the
war - must be denied any role.

In this regard, we commend the energetic efforts
made by Ambassador Fowler of Canada, Chairman of the
sanctions Committee established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 864 (1993), in respect of the sanctions
against UNITA. Ambassador Fowler has just returned
from his latest visit to Angola. We listened very
attentively to his latest findings on the impact of the
sanctions and will be seriously considering further
measures that the Council could take to tighten the
sanctions so as to lessen UNITA's capacity to make war.

The Organization of African Unity (OAU), and in
particular the countries of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), continue to play
important roles in the final resolution of the conflict, both
in terms of their political support of the peace process as
well as in their cooperation towards a more effective
implementation of the sanctions against UNITA.
UNITA's capacity to wage the war depends on its ability
to export its diamonds and to import its fuel, munitions
and weapons. All of these items of export and import

 

involve both foreign purchases as well as suppliers and
must traverse the territory or airspace of Angola's
neighbours. We are gratified that Ambassador Fowler is
looking into these questions with the help of Governments
and international agencies, whose cooperation and
collaboration are essential to the more effective operation
of the sanctions regime.

However, like other members of the Council, we
continue to believe that sanctions against UNITA are only
a means to an end: to compel the rebel movement to return
to the political process based on the Lusaka Protocol, which
continues to be the most viable mechanism for a lasting
solution to the conflict in Angola. We do not believe that
lasting peace can be obtained by purely military means. The
history of the long conflict in Angola is testimony to this
fact. The fortunes of war may change on the ground, but
the essential nature and deep-seated causes of the conflict
remain.

It is therefore imperative that there be a renewed
process of implementing the Lusaka agreement. Its
credibility and viability will depend on engaging not only
the various elements within UNITA and the Government,
but also civil society. New independent initiatives calling
for peace are an expression of the profound war-weariness
of Angolan society, which can no longer be ignored. These
initiatives have the potential to foster a culture of peace,
which is indispensable for any lasting solution of the
conflict in Angola and which goes beyond the antagonism
and the struggle for power and influence between the two
antagonists. We consider it important that the military
advances against Savimbi should be followed by more
energetic efforts to bring about a lasting solution, with the
full support and participation of civil society. This is
particularly important so as to ensure the success of the
next stage in the peace-building process, which must move
away from reliance on victories on the battlefield and
towards achievements at the negotiating table in the
interests of national unity and reconciliation. In this regard,
we commend the Angolan Government for welcoming the
role and participation of civil society in this process.

Finally, my delegation is pleased to note the
appointment of Mr. Ibrahim Gambari as the Secretary-
General's Special Adviser on Africa, with special focus on
Angola among other issues. Given his vast knowledge of
African issues and his equally vast diplomatic skills, we are
confident that he will be a great asset to the Secretary-
General.

