Mr. Da Silva (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
I would first of all like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the President, Mr. Nelson Messone of

Gabon, a country with which Guinea-Bissau has good
friendly relations, on his assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. I would also like to extend our
warm greetings to the members of this important
international body that oversees peace and security in
the world. I thank them on behalf of the Government
and the people of Guinea-Bissau for having given us
this opportunity to speak at this meeting about
developments in our country's political, institutional
and socio-economic situation.

Similarly, I would like to thank His Excellency
the Secretary-General for his efforts to stabilize the
political and social situation of our country, in
particular through strong and fruitful cooperation
between our national authorities and the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) as regards their
involvement in Guinea-Bissau.

I would also like to welcome the presence among
us of the Secretary of State for Political Affairs of the
Ministry for Foreign Relations of Angola - the
country currently chairing the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP) - as well as of
the Executive Secretary of the CPLP. I wish to
underscore the unfailing support of the CPLP, and in
particular that of Angola, for the speedy provision of
resources to begin the restructuring process of our
country's defence and security forces.

Last February, His Excellency Prime Minister
Carlos Gomes Junior was here in the Chamber (see S/PV.6489) leading an important governmental
delegation, of which I was part, in order to share with
the Council developments in the political and socio-
economic context in Guinea-Bissau. We believe that it
is our duty to come here once again today to share with
the members of the Council information on the
situation in Guinea-Bissau and on the short-, medium-
and long-term prospects that could put my country on
the path to political stabilization, and in which lie the
groundwork for socio-economic development and for
respect of our international commitments, in particular
towards the Millennium Development Goals.

Following the recommendations of the Security
Council, in particular with regard to the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)-CPLP
road map, the Government Council of Ministers met
and agreed on the actions outlined in that road map. At
the same time, it underscored the importance of taking
into account political developments subsequent to the
creation of that road map, with a view to ensuring
complementarity and effectiveness in its implementation.

ECOWAS heads of State and Government
subsequently held a summit-level meeting in Abuja on
24 March, where they adopted the road map. In doing
so, they paved the way for the plan's implementation
by allocating $63 million in support of priority reform
programmes, such as those relating to the pension
fund, demobilization and recruitment, reintegration,
institutional training and support and the setting up of
the technical assistance mission.

At the initiative of the Steering Committee for
defence and security sector reform, ECOWAS and the
CPLP were invited to send experts who would help to
establish a task force charged with implementing the
road map. That was accomplished between 28 April
and 3 May, with the involvement of the African Union,
and resulted in the formulation of relevant
recommendations on an organizational chart for the
mission, the composition of civilian, military and
security components and a proposed schedule for
implementing the various actions outlined in the road
map. The plan for the task force will be submitted to
the Steering Committee and will subsequently include
multilateral partners, such as UNIOGBIS, UNDP and
the European Union, as well as bilateral partners.

In terms of our political agenda, the Prime
Minister noted here that we were holding consultations
with the European Union under article 96 of the
Cotonou Agreement. That Agreement is the legal
framework underpinning cooperation between the
European Union and the African, Caribbean and
Pacific States (ACP) and is aimed at furthering
political dialogue, in particular on respect for human
rights, democratic principles, the rule of law and good
governance.

My Government agreed with the outcome of
those consultations, which was the result of some
preparation and understanding among the main
national institutions, which met with President Malam
Bacai Sanha, in the presence of the President of the
Parliament, the Prime Minister and the President of the
Supreme Court, to reassert Guinea-Bissau's
commitment to dialogue and to restoring its close
relations with the European Union, our country's
largest economic partner.

Following those consultations, which took place
in Brussels on 29 March, and after preliminary
meetings with the ACP secretariat and Committee of
Ambassadors - and we believe that those results were
very encouraging - my Government undertook a
number of commitments. Through a decree issued by
the Prime Minister, a follow-up committee was
established in late in April. I myself chaired that
committee, whose members included representatives of
various institutions, ranging from the country's
presidency to civil society, the armed forces and the
judiciary. A number of working meetings have since
been held within the committee and between it and the
European Union. On Friday, 24 June, we concluded our
second working meeting with the delegation of the
European Union and ambassadors of EU member
States accredited to Guinea-Bissau. That meeting
assessed my Government's progress in executing its
commitments, with the results deemed satisfactory by
both parties.

I wish to take the opportunity of being here today
with the members of the Security Council to emphasize
some important aspects of the defence and security
sector reform process, including judicial reform as well
as civil service and public finance reforms. In passing,
it is worth recalling that the very reason for the reforms
stems from the fact that these sectors have witnessed
repeated episodes of conflict, in particular towards the
end of the 1990s, in what was a very difficult economic
situation. The public administration was plagued by
poor management, crumbling and sorely lacking
infrastructure, disturbing health and education
indicators, a faltering judicial sector and the ineffective
fight against criminality and organized crime. In
addition, there was a general feeling, which we shared,
that the link between this reform and the economic
development of our country was very strong indeed,
given that defence and security sector reform,
including of the structural elements of the State, is
itself a prerequisite for development.

Our army and security forces, which we inherited
from the war of independence, were no longer adapted
to the new demands created by the new approach to
national defence following independence. That is why
we experimented with a series of reforms, in particular
during the post-conflict period. However, they did not
produce the desired results. The army and the security
forces were still heavily overstaffed, with significant
imbalances in the number of officers, sergeants and

soldiers. For instance, officers now account for 70 per
cent of our army, while soldiers account for 30 per
cent. There is insufficient re-enlistment owing to the
failure to apply the mandatory military service law.
This situation demands change. The legal framework
for police and security forces was virtually
non-existent, and the army was rife with deficiencies,
not to mention its undertrained troops and lack of
training programmes.

Under those circumstances, defence and security
sector reform was imperative. That effort has already
led to encouraging changes and progress. For instance,
on the legal front, beyond the certifications for the
army, the security sector and the judicial sector that
were approved last year by the Government and
Parliament and enacted by our country's President,
other legislation has recently been adopted, in areas
such as those mentioned by Mrs. Viotti.

For instance, the organic law on the basic
organization of the armed forces was approved by the
President and subsequently passed by the Parliament,
on 16 June. The new law created the post of an army
deputy chief of staff. Approval was also given for a
political declaration on combating drug trafficking and
organized crime, which includes a national operational
plan for the period 2011 to 2014, as well as an
operational plan for security sector reform that
includes a very precise implementation timetable.

We have also received a contribution of $16.8
million from the 2011-2013 Peacebuilding Priority
Plan for Guinea-Bissau, disbursed through the
Peacebuilding Fund. We have developed plans, at no
additional cost, to rehabilitate prisons and military
barracks and expect to launch those projects in July.

We have created a national guard as a new
component of Guinea-Bissau's security apparatus. That
was done by means of an organic law that was
approved by Parliament, enacted by the President and
published in the official gazette. Six-week training
sessions have already been held for several groups of
former police forces. However, the only difficulty
facing the national guard is the establishment of its
headquarters and command centre.

We have expanded model police stations
throughout the country. Progress has also been made in
humanitarian demining operations and in the
destruction of explosive devices. There are good
prospects for building new and more secure weapons
depots, with support from the Republic of Angola and
the United States.

Four working teams have been established to
provide technical advice to the Steering Committee on
programmes involving demobilization, the pension
fund, reintegration, recruitment, military training,
infrastructure and equipment and legal and institutional
management. The teams are composed of civil servants
from the army, the police, the justice sector,
UNIOGBIS, UNDP, the European Union, the African
Union and ECOWAS, as well as the Angolan and
Brazilian military missions.

We have also conducted a bidding process based
on specifications prepared with the European Union
delegation and selected a bank - namely, the Banco
da Africa Ocidental in Bissau, which has just been
mentioned - to manage the pension fund. An account
has already been opened for the disbursement of funds.
The first payments have been proposed by the road
map task force for next September, although that has
not yet been decided.

With regard to departures due to retirement, the
timetable for the following numbers: 1,320 people in
2009, 153 in 2010, 157 in 2011, 169 in 2012, 133 in
2013, 138 in 2014 and 108 in 2015. The number of
early voluntary departures is estimated in the hundreds.
In addition, my next trip to Timor-Leste next August as
head of a military delegation to the official ceremony
for demobilizing former guerrilla fighters will be an
opportunity to draw lessons and learn from the
experience of the Timorese people.

In connection with that task, on 16 June the
Government approved a payment scale for the pension
fund that takes into account two other aspects other
than age-based retirements. The first pertains to the
retirement of military personnel who are veterans of
the war of independence, while the second has to do
with early voluntary retirements for those who have
not reached the age threshold.

With regard to the first category, retirees will
receive pension payments of 100 per cent of their
current salaries, in accordance with the law adopted
following independence. As for the second category,
the Government had to resort to new arbitration, which
set the pension at between 60 and 100 per cent of
current salaries. This applies to soldiers and corporals
whose present salaries are, respectively, approximately
$60 and $67.

Furthermore, the total cost of the pension fund
will be accordingly reassessed by 15 July. Additional
measures are planned, such as the establishment of a
pension fund for the defence and security forces,
following a specific regime, which will be integrated
into the civil service pension fund in a general system
for all of the State's civil servants. Through these
savings and staff assessments, we will be able to
ensure the continuation of the pension fund beyond
2015.

There is therefore agreement that the pension
fund is a necessary, albeit insufficient, element in
reconfiguring the defence and security forces that will
have a very positive effect on the health of public
finances by reducing the total wage bill and improving
the social profile of these forces. The fund is thus of a
strategic nature in terms of both short- and medium-
term reforms.

The revitalization of the military hierarchy as
provided for in the road map entails proceeding with
gradual departures. With an army made up of 70 per
cent officers, it is clear that a good part of the military
hierarchy has reached the age limit and, under the
terms of the law, should retire. The retirement age is
between 48 and 64 years of age, based on categories.
Those between 40 and 59 years of age will therefore
gradually be prepared for retirement, while those
between 18 and 49 years will receive training to enable
them to reach higher ranks in the army. At the same
time, measures for redeployment are planned for
general and higher officers for posts such as
ambassadors, defence attaches, military advisers and
international civil servants, based on the level of each.

Given that the pension amounts they are to
receive may not encourage them to retire, it will be
crucial to set up a reintegration programme for
volunteers and those who depart early. This could be
done by first using funds already available under the
road map and the Peacebuilding Priority Plan. I would
like to take this opportunity to express my
Government's desire that the international community
consider holding the high-level meeting on the priority
reform programmes that was postponed indefinitely
owing to the events of 1 April 2010.

With respect to the staff of a reconfigured
army- whose number should not exceed 4,000 and
who must undergo training and certification similar to
that now being provided to the police forces - only 30

per cent will be permanent. The others will form the
army's non-permanent ranks. The reform for this sector
accordingly provides a broad range of projects for
these men. In the short term, however, the Ministry has
already been given a legal decree on the activities of
the Government and the armed forces in the productive
sector that provides for the establishment of a military
production centre with agricultural, agro-industrial,
manufacturing, military engineering and sanitation
units, aimed at maximizing the enormous potential of
the resources made available to the army by the
Government. In addition, early this month we put in
place a new mechanism for distributing supplies to the
army that aims at improving the quality of services and
access to resources.

Before I conclude, allow me to report on other
important progress in the area of consolidating the rule
of law and improving the macroeconomic business
environment in our country.

Reform is under way in the public administration
with the establishment of a single payroll, which is
something new that makes it possible to monitor the
State's salary spending, as well as the setting up of a
database and an integrated human resources
management centre for the civil service. This system
followed a biometric census of civil servants, which
revealed the existence of about 4,000 bogus civil
servants. That enabled the State to reduce current
spending by 12 per cent. Only the armed forces are
currently not part of the payroll. However, following a
meeting in May with the latest mission from the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), a commitment was
undertaken by the Government to begin payments to
personnel present beginning in July, followed by the
integration of army staff under a single payroll. This
approach aims to improve the administrative
management of human resources in the army and to
ensure transparency of the payroll.

All these reform efforts are in the context of the
IMF's latest assessment that the role played by the
Government in the framework of the three-year
agreement under the Extended Credit Facility had been
satisfactory. Having reached the completion point of
the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative, and
given the successful outcome of the Paris Club
meeting, which forgave 90 per cent of the external debt
of Guinea-Bissau - a step later followed by Brazil,
Portugal and Angola - we can affirm that there is new
momentum in the pace of economic reform. The

Government is now establishing measures to increase
revenue and improve the management of public
finances and structural reforms.

With an economic growth rate in Guinea-Bissau
of 3.5 per cent in 2010, the IMF and the Government
predict an increase to 4.3 per cent for this year. That is
thanks to the increase in the production of and sale
price of cashew nuts, as well as the reconstruction of
infrastructure. The immediate goals are to raise growth
to 4.5 per cent by the end of the programme, decrease
annual inflation and maintain the budgetary deficit
consistent with available financing. My Government
has also established a business training centre in order
to create an environment conducive to fostering and
improving economic activity.

Preparations are also under way to conclude the
electoral cycle, in particular with Parliament's adoption
of a draft law for municipalities that gives added value
to the process of decentralization.

I could refer to other important measures,
although I want to conclude and avoid speaking at
length. For example, Parliament has adopted a fiercely
debated law banning the practice of female genital
mutilation, which represents an important step in
respect for human rights. The Government has also
adopted and submitted to Parliament a host of laws,
including on freedom of the press, social media, the
status of journalists and the right of reply. Finally, it is
important to highlight the very committed efforts by
the Parliament and other national institutions in the
process of national reconciliation - with regard to the
army, the security forces and Guinea-Bissau's
diaspora- in particular the meetings held in Dakar
and Lisbon for our nationals living in Africa and
Europe.

In the spirit of our national strategic poverty
reduction document, the Government is focusing its
attention on reforms to the security, defence and justice
sectors and the modernization of the State. We are also
focusing on putting in place policies to improve access
to basic social services and optimize sectors with high
potential for growth - such as agriculture,
agro-industry, fishing, tourism and mining - as well
as other promising sectors when it comes to
infrastructure and investment.
To do this, in addition to domestic efforts,
Guinea-Bissau needs strong support from the
international community. We count on such support as
we define a comprehensive development policy that
takes into account all of these reforms in the context of
our second national poverty reduction strategy
document over the next five years. We expect to hold a
donors' conference in that regard by the end of this
year

With respect to the whole host of defence and
security sector reform programmes, it is worth
mentioning that, during consultations held in Brussels,
our Prime Minister announced that 10 per cent of the
overall cost of the reform throughout the years of its
implementation, including with regard to the pension
fund, would be included in the national budget. The
Government's contribution to the pension fund is
$4,596,480.

I cannot conclude my statement without
expressing thanks to ECOWAS and UNIOGBIS for the
work carried out by their special representatives in
Guinea-Bissau, Hamet Sidibe and Joseph Mutaboba,
respectively, as well as to Ambassador Maria Luiza
Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations and Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. I
would like to take this opportunity to thank them for
their outstanding work and their commitment to
Guinea-Bissau. We are open to advice and guidance
that adds value to the efforts that we are undertaking to
help our country emerge from the recurring instability
that we have had in the recent past.

I know that there may be sceptics among those
present here. However, I would invite them to share
our relative optimism. We are deeply convinced that
our country is now regaining peace and stability for the
long term, decreasing crime and better respecting
human rights. Today, there are no political prisoners or
arbitrary detentions. We have the longest-lasting
Government since 1997. We have armed forces and
security forces that are beginning to believe in the
reform of their sectors. We have a population that
believes in a Guinea-Bissau that is being reborn and
blossoming. I thank members for their solidarity and
for their affection for Guinea-Bissau. We believe in a
brilliant future. Together, let us move forward.

