Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank you, Sir, for having
convened this important meeting of the Security
Council to discuss the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. We also wish to
thank Mr. B. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing.

We align ourselves with the statements made by
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement,
Kazakhstan on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and Qatar on behalf of the Arab Group.
The eyes of the international community are now
focused on the Security Council and whether it will
take a historic stand on the Palestinian request for full
membership in the United Nations. That request was
made after a long delay and with due entitlement,
particularly since more than 130 countries,
representing a majority of two thirds of the Member
States, already recognize the Palestinian State.

The peoples and the States of the region have
high hopes that the international community, in
general, and the Security Council, in particular, will
assume their political, legal and moral responsibilities
in supporting Palestine's request for membership in the
United Nations. They also hope that rights will be
restored to their owners and that the Palestinian people
will realize their right to self-determination and their
legitimate aspiration to have a sovereign State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, within the framework of
the 4 June 1967 borders and in accordance with
internationally legitimate resolutions, in particular the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Needless to say, that there is one party that pays
no attention to international legitimacy, nor does it
heed the resolutions of the Security Council, or
international or humanitarian laws. While the entire
world is demanding that the parties return to the
negotiating table and halt all provocative unilateral
activities that undermine the chances of success in the
peace process, Israel persists in its intransigence and
arrogance, and continues its illegal and aggressive
actions through an illegal expansionist settlement
campaign. At the same time, it ignores all appeals by
the family of nations to stop the settlement activity,
revive the peace process and resume negotiations so as
to achieve the two-State solution.

Perhaps the latest decision by the Israeli
Government to build 1,100 new illegal settlement units
on occupied Palestinian territories supplies further
proof of Israel's arrogance and its lack of seriousness
in reaching out towards the option of peace. In that
regard, we would like to draw attention to the
harassment being suffered by the Palestinians,
including the elderly, children and women, at the hands
of armed Israeli settlers, whose destructive hands have
also reached houses of worship and destroyed
mosques, farms and trees in the occupied territories.
The State of Kuwait appeals to the international
community not to stand idle in the face of the criminal
Israeli actions that violate all international norms,
agreements and instruments. We also call for providing
the necessary protection for defenceless Palestinians in
Palestinian territories.

While we welcome the recent release of a number
of Palestinian prisoners and detainees, we also demand
the release of the remaining prisoners and detainees
and call for the deployment of an international fact-
finding mission to examine the conditions in Israeli
jails and the extent to which Israel adheres to the rules
of international law.

The blockade imposed on Gaza continues. There
is no doubt that this represents another violation by
Israel of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) and
the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of 1949.
Instead of protecting Palestinian civilians, the
occupation authorities subject them to collective
punishment, which has exacerbated and led to the
deterioration of the economic, social and humanitarian
situations in the Gaza Strip. The frightening statistics
resulting from this blockade are no longer surprising,
such as the unemployment rate, which stands at 65 per
cent. We cannot ignore Israel's occasional air raids
against populated Palestinian areas, an act that
qualifies as terroristic and should be condemned.

My country renews its demand for Israel's
compliance with Security Council resolution 497
(1981), which calls for Israel's withdrawal from the
occupied Syrian Golan and its withdrawal to the line of
4 June 1967. We emphasize that Israel's continued
occupation of part of the territory of the sisterly Syrian
Arab Republic poses a real obstacle to achieving peace
and security in the Middle East.

In regard to the situation in Lebanon, the State of
Kuwait reaffirms its commitment to stand beside the
sisterly Republic of Lebanon and supports efforts to
maintain its security and preserve the integrity of its
territories. My country also demands that Israel
immediately cease its continued violations of
Lebanon's territory and air space and that it comply
with Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) and
withdraw completely from Lebanese territory.

We would like to stress that the peoples and
States of the region follow the meetings of the Security
Council regarding the Palestinian request for full
United Nations membership with great interest and
hope. Given that all of the international initiatives,
settlements and resolutions call for a two-State
solution, we therefore appeal to the Security Council to
assume its responsibilities and oblige Israel to halt its
illegal settlement activities and to resume negotiations
in order to achieve a two-State solution, in accordance
with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1860 (2009), the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Road Map.

