Mr. Michel (European Commission) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to congratulate the
United Republic of Tanzania on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. I would like, Madam President, to hail your
initiative to organize, at this very critical juncture, a
debate on peace, security and development in the Great
Lakes region. You know better than anyone that today
we have a real opportunity we must seize - indeed, an
opportunity we must wrest from the hand of fate.

I understand very well the honour the Security
Council has bestowed upon the European Commission
(EC) presided over by Jose Manuel Barroso by
allowing us to address the Council. We would see this
as reflecting a conviction that is too often ignored: that
while there can be no development without peace or
stability, there is no chance for peace or stability
without development. And that is precisely what gives
specific added value to the institution that I represent.

From that perspective, the Commission fully
endorses the statement just made by the European
Union presidency, which defined the framework and
strategy of the European political contribution to
bringing about peace in the Great Lakes region, whose
stability is so important for balance, harmony and
economic restructuring and human recovery throughout
the African continent.

I would recall the steady commitment of the
European Commission, which is often at the forefront of
the international community, and which is mandated by
the European Union to seek a conclusive solution to the
crises and conflicts that, for too long now, have affected
this region, which is so rich in potential in many areas.

We have always counted on the virtues of a
political dialogue that is active and frank, but also
respectful and without a hidden agenda. We have no
objective other than that of peace, security and the
well-being of people. We believe that we can attain it
only by rebuilding States that can protect and mediate
among their populations and that are legitimate
because of democratic systems - States that possess
institutions capable of fulfilling the major governing
functions that, alone, can ensure for all citizens equal
rights, such as access to education, health services,
justice, administration and culture.

Beyond our duty to provide emergency
humanitarian assistance, our policy has always been
based on the conviction that poverty will be
vanquished only through the establishment and
consolidation of an impartial Government that
encourages vigilant civil societies that are able to take
on full responsibility for their destiny.

Since 2002, the Union has mobilized more than
€1 billion - more than $1.3 billion - for this region
and these countries. The Commission has invested in
key areas, such as governance and the electoral
process - where we are the top donors, with €149
million for the Democratic Republic of the Congo -
as well as the rebuilding of services and basic
infrastructure. To consolidate these gains, we need to
release further funds. But those funds would not and
will not be sufficient without unified analysis, action
and commitment on the part of all international actors.
We will need to maintain this holy alliance until the
end of the peace processes, and even beyond.

Until the end, the process will remain fragile, and
the enormous promise of a Central Africa that is finally
at peace, open and headed for the future will always
run the risk of being shattered by, irresponsible
behaviour - individual or collective - by sterile
quarrels and even by foolish blunders. Our
commitment to ourselves and to our African friends
will have to remain unshakeable if we are to ward off
these dangers once and for all.

But I am optimistic. In Rwanda, the painful
wounds of the genocide are starting to subside, little by
little. There is already a new economic recovery that
can give hope and motivation to members of the young
generations, who now know that, if they wish, they can
fashion a future of prosperity, solidarity and justice. A
little more than 10 years after the abominable tragedy
there, we can finally believe that reconciliation is
going to take place among the people.

As to Burundi, a few months ago Burundians
successfully took up a challenge that we all believed to
be out of reach. They democratically elected a
Parliament representing their entire population. They
wisely gave the President the broadest possible
legitimacy with which to establish the conditions for
reunification. The President has created a Government
with more than one-third female representation and
developed a modern agenda that is generous and
ambitious, beginning with free primary education.
Those are all undeniably positive signs.

Today in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
a drawn-out and fragile transitional process is
gradually being completed. In a few months, more than
25 million Congolese men and women have received
their voting cards, providing them for the first time
with identity, citizenship and a sense of belonging to a
single nation and people. How can we not believe in
miracles when we see the miracle being enacted at the
registration centres in the hearts and souls of men and
women who were hitherto mere phantom citizens? On
18 December, more than 60 per cent of them voted, for
the first time in 40 years. Eighty-four per cent of the
voters ratified a balanced and democratic constitution,
because they instinctively understood that, through that
founding gesture, they held the key to turning the tide
of their own history.

To the very end, the international community
must help and encourage them and exhort their leaders
to adhere to the electoral timetable. An electoral law
must be enacted that will, I hope, provide for the
broadest possible representation of all sectors of
Congolese society in order to avert any resurgence of
the sense of exclusion.

How can we fail to see that these countries have a
shared destiny? I am deeply convinced that the
successful completion of the process may be difficult,
not only regionally, but throughout Africa. The
regional dimension strikes me as being fundamental.
We need to join forces and to focus attention on themes
of common interest, basing our action on the
principle - one that is at the very heart of the
construction of Europe - that it is by sharing our
interests, problems and resources that we are able to
achieve and maintain peace and increase prosperity. I
am therefore pleased to see the determination of those
three countries to give new impetus to the Economic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries. We
ourselves are determined to provide substantial funding
for that project.

In considering the prospects, how can we fail
unequivocally to denounce the barbarous acts and
inhuman attacks perpetrated this week by several
criminal groups, which, in their own sordid interests,
are terrorizing innocent citizens and even killing those
who, at their own peril and on our behalf, went there to
protect them?

The European Commission has always taken a
voluntarist approach, along with its special partners in
the United Nations, the Bretton Woods institutions, the
African Union and other donors. The Peacebuilding
Commission will have a major role to play in that
respect. The European Commission will become even
further involved in the development strategy as an
essential factor in conflict prevention and in the re-
establishment of the rule of law through independent
and trustworthy judicial systems, effective public
administrations that can control their territory, and
reformed security forces subject to strict democratic
oversight.

In conclusion, I deeply believe that relations
between us and Africa have been reborn and are
evolving in mutual respect between partners that are
equal in rights and responsibilities and capable of
engaging in dialogue and debate and of living with
their differences in the firm resolve to reach a common
understanding of the concepts of democracy and law. I
believe that we must resolutely and consistently look to
the largest possible common denominator - the major
concepts that regulate the organization of modern
societies. Such notions as justice, solidarity and
freedom must be subject to debate. The international
community cannot unilaterally impose its terms of
reference.

We must also be guided and persuaded by our
partners. Their experience, history, perceptions and
culture can enrich ours. I believe that, if we wish, we
can finally begin to exorcise the demons of our
respective pasts and achieve a common reading of
history. Only thus can we build together a world of
peace, justice and freedom.

