Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, allow me to thank the briefers, Special Representative of the Secretary-General Mankeur Ndiaye, Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA); Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa at the European External Action Service; and later on, hopefully, when technology permits, Ambassador Smail Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security. Following the United Nations high-level meeting earlier this month, their briefings are indeed crucial, even more so as we approach the mandate renewal of MINUSCA and the upcoming election in December. Allow me to focus my comments on three points. First, we need to ensure peace and stability in the Central African Republic during and beyond the elections. We welcome the Government's efforts to maintain the electoral deadline of 27 December and recognize its various challenges. The democratic process is anything but easy. It is a vast logistical undertaking that requires thorough planning to anticipate all challenges, especially amid the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its aftermath. We continue to call on all stakeholders to continue to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Central African Republic and provide ample space and sufficient trust for democracy to take place in the Central African Republic. Beyond the elections, the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, signed in Bangui, remains the primary framework for sustaining peace in the country. National ownership is the key to success. The presence and ability of the Government to enforce it are indeed crucial. Technical and financial assistance is needed. Secondly, we should never forget our commitment to saving the people of the Central African Republic. The most recent report (S/2020/994) shows that approximately 2.6 million people require humanitarian assistance; more than 2.3 million people are food- insecure; intercommunal tensions and attacks against civilians continue to impair the humanitarian situation; and the COVID-19 pandemic has worsened the country's socioeconomic conditions. On top of that, attacks towards humanitarian workers persist. We call on partners and those who remain doubtful about peace being established in the Central African Republic to step up and follow up their cries with real and tangible assistance to the country. Thirdly, the role of MINUSCA is more important than ever. MINUSCA will be pertinent in creating an environment conducive to a peaceful electoral process. For MINUSCA to successfully carry out its mandate, attacks against it must stop. As the largest personnel contributor to MINUSCA in the Council, Indonesia will continue to make the safety, health and security of peacekeepers its top priority. At the same time, we reiterate our commitment to the professionalism of peacekeeping and to protecting civilians through community engagements. Indonesia will work together with Council members and other relevant stakeholders in the renewal of MINUSCA's mandate. We should maintain the Security Council's unity in supporting the people of the Central African Republic and help them face the insurmountable obstacles mentioned by President Touadera at the high-level meeting. As an elected member of the Security Council, Indonesia has followed closely the progress in the Central African Republic, including the Bangui peace agreement of February 2019. In the past two years, Indonesia has supported the establishment of a benchmark on the lifting of the arms embargo, as well as the three Council resolutions that ease the embargo in the Central African Republic. We also continue to support MINUSCA inside and outside the Council through our peacekeeping engagements and contribution. Indonesia is committed as a true partner for peace for the Central African Republic even beyond its time in the Council.
