Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It
gives me great pleasure, Sir, to convey to you the
sincere congratulations of His Excellency Mr. Ahmed
Maher El Sayed, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt,
on your country's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We appreciate your
presiding over this important meeting and your
personal interest in organizing it. Since Mr. Maher El
Sayed was unable to accept your generous invitation to
participate in this meeting, it is my honour to deliver
this statement on his behalf, given the importance and
priority of the issue before us for the Government of

Egypt.
(spoke in English)

The Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and its current Chairman have
both spoken eloquently before this august Council on
behalf of our continental organization and its member
States. They highlighted the priorities on which the
international community must focus in the coming
period and the challenges that we must overcome in
accordance with our collective responsibilities and
duties under the Charter. It is for that reason that I
would like to confine my statement to a number of
specific remarks in terms of what we expect, or hope
for, from the Security Council.

But before doing so, I would like to take this
opportunity to recognize that the United Nations,
through its organs and agencies, has indeed come a
long way in re-establishing the primary role it played
in Africa after the end of the cold war and revitalizing
its performance in the numerous fields that have made
it an indispensable partner of the continent. We have
seen that the United Nations is indeed capable of
displaying the required political will to contribute to
the resolution of three of Africa's most destructive
conflicts: those in Sierra Leone, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and between Ethiopia and
Eritrea. We have seen how it has become the primary
advocate in the struggle to eradicate the combined
scourge of HIV/AIDS and malaria in Africa, and we
have seen how it can play a pivotal role in harmonizing
the many initiatives aimed at promoting Africa's
economic and social recovery and at helping the
continent to help itself.

While those efforts are certainly welcome and
appreciated, we must, however, ask ourselves whether
the United Nations could in fact do more, and it is from
that perspective that I would like to make the following
specific remarks. First, the Security Council must not
shy away from assuming its responsibilities in terms of
addressing the various conflict situations that afflict the
continent, and it must display the necessary political
will in a uniform, consistent and non-selective manner,
irrespective of the magnitude of the challenges that lie
ahead. The Council must, first and foremost,
implement what it has already pledged to do with
regard to Africa, as reflected in the declaration adopted
by the Council at the level of heads of State or
Government in September 2000 (resolution 1318 (2000), annex).

It is from this standpoint that we find that the
Security Council's approach towards Africa has been
lacking in uniformity and has been plagued by
selectivity; given the interrelated nature of many of
Africa's problems, there is no reason why the Council
should be so eager to resolve the conflict between
Ethiopia and Eritrea while ignoring the conflict in
neighbouring Somalia; there is no rationale for the
Council to play a primary role in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo while assuming a secondary one
in the Central African Republic to its north and in
Burundi to its east; and there is no justification for the
Council continuing its pivotal activities with respect to
Sierra Leone while neglecting the growing insecurity
within neighbouring Liberia and along that country's
borders with Sierra Leone and Guinea. For the Council
to be truly responsive to Africa's needs, it must display
the needed enthusiasm and take concrete measures
commensurate with all of Africa's conflicts, and not
just with some of its challenges.

Secondly, while we are all in agreement that the
Organization of African Unity, the various subregional
organizations and individual African States have to
assume growing responsibility for tackling their own
problems and resolving their own conflicts, we must
also be in agreement in affirming that Africa's efforts
should in no way allow the United Nations in general
or the Security Council in particular to abdicate their
responsibilities towards the continent.

We have all, as Member States, conferred upon
the Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Accordingly, this responsibility must be exercised
throughout Africa no less vigorously than it is being
exercised in Afghanistan, East Timor, Kosovo, Bosnia
and elsewhere.

The Organization of African Unity (OAU) has
played its part to the best of its ability. Through its
Mechanism for the Conflict Prevention, Management
and Resolution, it has undertaken a number of wide-
ranging tasks. The OAU has been, and is still, deeply
involved in efforts to resolve conflict and reduce
tensions in the Comoros, Angola, Somalia, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and elsewhere. There is, however, a limit to
what the OAU can attain, and it is thus incumbent on
the Security Council not only to support the efforts of
the OAU and the various initiatives undertaken by
Africans at the regional and subregional level, but also
to assume the primary responsibility when Africa is
unable to bear the heavy burdens that accompany
peace-making, peacekeeping and peace-building
efforts.

Thirdly, while there is clearly a need to
objectively define what Africa expects from the United
Nations and what the United Nations expects in return
from Africa, there is also a need to institute a practical
mechanism of consultation between the United Nations
and the OAU. Such a mechanism already exists
between the secretariats of the two organizations; it is
now time to institute a similar one between the OAU
and the Security Council. It was as recently as
December 1999- at the end of a similar meeting
organized by the Council and presided over by the
Minister of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom - that the conclusion
was reached to try and institute regular and more
structured consultation and coordination between the
Council and the OAU and regional bodies.

Suggestions put forward at the time included joint
envoys and missions; staff exchange; working groups;
and more regular meetings between the Security
Council, the OAU and subregional bodies. Egypt
believes that these conclusions are no less valid today
than they were two years ago. The presence of Mr.
Essy today is a welcome example of what can be done
in this vein. Here we would suggest, as a first step, that
the Security Council also involve representatives of the
OAU in the missions it dispatches to Africa. Perhaps
the planned mission of the Council to Ethiopia and
Eritrea in February can serve as a useful opportunity
for putting such a mechanism into practice.

Fourthly, the OAU certainly has little capacity to
assume responsibility for peacekeeping; that is one
area in which we feel that the Security Council should
reassert its responsibility. While the OAU has been
able in the past to deploy limited missions to a number
of regions, the leaders of Africa clearly recognized, as
long ago as 1993, that those conflicts that deteriorate to
the extent of requiring collective international
intervention and policing, the assistance or, where
appropriate, the services of the United Nations will be
sought under the general terms of the Charter.

While we have come a long way since that
recognition, and while the United Nations has shown
some inclination to assume its responsibilities through
establishing and deploying operations such as the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea and the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, there is still an evident degree
of hesitation on the part of the Security Council to
assume its full responsibility in establishing operations
in Africa when they are required, with the mandates
they require and in the strength and size that they
require.

We are all in agreement that there has to be a
minimum degree of peace for United Nations Blue
Helmets to keep, but at the same time there will
certainly be instances when the Council will be
confronted with challenges in which it must take the
calculated risk of deploying operations in conflict
situations where there may be little peace to keep, but
where operations may nonetheless assist in the
implementation of a peace agreement or prevent a
massive humanitarian crisis. In this context, the
Council's response to the crisis that erupted in Sierra
Leone in May 2000 is one that we hope will be
emulated, should a similar challenge arise elsewhere in
the continent.

Fifthly and lastly, the tragic events of 11
September have left many in Africa sceptical and
afraid that the international community may lose
interest in the continent, changing its priorities and
aspirations to others that may be deemed to be more
immediate in nature. While we are confident that this
will not be the case 4 as this important meeting amply
demonstrates- we should also stress that the most
effective way of ensuring that Africa remains the
partner that it is in the global fight against terrorism
lies in ensuring that Africa is a prosperous, peaceful
and stable continent where terrorism will never find a
home.

While we certainly find no justification
whatsoever in resorting to military means to target any
African State in the context of the ongoing response to
the events of 11 September, we feel that the way ahead
should focus on two priority areas. The first is
assistance in the implementation of the OAU
Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
Terrorism, adopted at the Algiers Summit in 1999.
Here, we feel that the Counter-Terrorism Committee
established by Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)
can play a useful role through a structured mechanism
of interaction with the OAU. The second is the full and
integrated implementation of the New Partnership for
Africa's Development, as it is only through the
alleviation of poverty, the inducement of economic
growth and the promotion of sustainable development
throughout Africa that we will be able to eradicate the
root causes in which terrorism finds fertile ground to
breed.

