Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The delegation of China will vote in favour of
the draft resolution before us. China supports the peace
process in Tajikistan, advocates an active role for the
United Nations in promoting peace and reconciliation in
Tajikistan and is in favour of further extending the
mandate of the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT). As a close neighbour of Tajikistan,
China has always been very concerned about the situation
there. We appreciate the commitment of both sides in
Tajikistan to the implementation of the General
Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National
Accord. We hope that both sides will be able to maintain
the spirit of reconciliation and will endeavour to take
measures to enhance mutual confidence with a View to
the early completion of the tasks under the General
Agreement.

China welcomes the new timetable formulated by the
Commission on National Reconciliation. We hope that the
effective implementation of the timetable will help
reinforce mutual trust and cooperation between the two
sides.

 

China's assessment of the regional peacekeeping
efforts of the countries of the Commonwealth of
Independent States in Tajikistan is positive. We believe that
the international community, including the United Nations,
should support these efforts. At the same time, we call on
the international community to respond positively to the
Secretary-General's recommendations on increasing
financial assistance to Tajikistan and supporting its
economic rehabilitation. We believe that only rehabilitation
and development will ensure durable peace and stability in
Tajikistan.
In conclusion, I should like to take this opportunity to
thank Mr. Gerd Merrem for his contribution to promoting
the peace process in Tajikistan during his term as the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for Tajikistan.
At this crucial juncture for peace in Tajikistan, we look
forward to the early appointment by the Secretary-General
of a new Special Representative to ensure the continuation
of efforts to bring about definitive peace and reconciliation
in Tajikistan.

