Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): It has been established that,
in conflict situations across the world, non-combatants,
especially children, are often at the greatest risk. They
risk being abducted, they risk being maimed, and they
risk being killed. They are indoctrinated and recruited
as child combatants. Their rights - notably, their right
to education - are brazenly violated. The Council's
debate today demonstrates remarkable leadership in
drawing attention to and taking action on the children
and armed conflict agenda. I want to thank all the
briefers for sharing their profound insights on the
subject, and especially acknowledge the presence and
participation of Foreign Minister Asselborn at this
debate.

My delegation welcomes this opportunity to share
its perspectives on children and armed conflict as they
concern the activities of the infamous terrorist group
Boko Haram, which has now been included as a party
on the Secretary-General's list. Our nation has been
particularly traumatized by the deplorable and inhuman
acts of terror perpetrated by Boko Haram, particularly
targeting schools. The Boko Haram ideology, which
inherently opposes Western education, propels it to
attack schools and educational institutions.

The Nigerian Government and the Nigerian people
have condemned these heinous acts in the strongest
terms and are united in the determination to put a firm
stop to them. We acknowledge with appreciation the
support of the United Nations and the international
community in our fight against Boko Haram. We
believe that these global partnerships are critical to
our campaign to confront the Boko Haram insurgency.
The Government has no higher priority than routing
and defeating Boko Haram and rescuing the almost
220 schoolgirls kidnapped from Chibok. Our concern
is not only to rescue the girls, but to bring them back
alive and intact - all of them. We are extensively and
effectively utilizing all resources at our disposal in this
effort. Let there be no doubt that the Nigerian people
have mustered the will and determination to succeed
in this effort.

We recognize that a multi-track strategy represents
the best chance of defeating Boko Haram. Accordingly,
the Nigerian Government is implementing a
comprehensive programme of assistance to support,
protect and empower local communities, with a special
focus on the most vulnerable parts of the country. The
Safe Schools Initiative is one aspect of the programme.
It is aimed at strengthening the security of educational
facilities in states under emergency rule in order to
keep our schoolchildren safe. Measures that are being
taken under the Initiative include the construction
of perimetre fences around schools and housing
for teachers, improved community policing, the
employment of school guards, and the installation of
alarm systems and modern communication equipment.
The federal Government is also working with state
Governments, community leaders, teachers and parents
to identify and remedy the vulnerabilities that put our
children at risk.

The Safe Schools Initiative is a collective effort.
The Government's spending has been matched by the
private sector, and now totals over $20 million. Our
goal is to create a fund of $100 million to support this
programme, and we have already received pledges of
support not only from the United Nations Special Envoy
for Global Education, but also from the World Bank,
the African Development Bank and other development
partners.

Strident steps have been taken by the Government
to address the salient dimensions of the socioeconomic
factors that feed the insurgency. A community
services programme has been instituted, and has
already recruited 11,500 young people to participate
in community development projects. Similarly, the
Government is developing a comprehensive economic
empowerment plan for the region under a presidential
initiative for north-eastern Nigeria. This initiative is
aimed at helping the region to productively harness its
abundant resources. It is being pursued in partnership
with state and local Governments in the north-east of
Nigeria.

It is common knowledge that hatred is conceived
in the minds of men, and ultimately hatched in terror
and conflict. Our collective responsibility is to reverse
this mindset for good and for peace. The Nigerian soft
approach to countering violent extremism is premised
on four streams, one of which is deradicalization.
The deradicalization programme aims to integrate
extremists and their families back into society through
a number of activities, including prison interventions
and vocational training.

Changing behaviour patterns is at the core of
the reradicalizaiton strategy. This stream seeks to
understand the process of radicalization that Boko
Haram adherents undertake, and to engage them
mentally, psychologically and spiritually in a series of
activities that are designed to transform the way that
they think and the way that they behave. It is envisaged
that, through this process, radicals will begin to realize
that certain forms of behaviour are incompatible not
only with their faith, but also with the society to which
they belong.

The Nigerian Government and people remain
unwavering in their determination to work tirelessly, in
collaboration with all domestic stakeholders, our friends
and partners, and the United Nations, the African Union,
relevant multilateral agencies and non-governmental
organizations to promote and to protect all aspects of

the well-being of children affected by this insurgency
in the north-eastern part of our country.

