Mrs. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Madam President, and your
country for holding this important debate. I would
also like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the representative of UNICEF, and
Ms. Eunice Apio for her testimony.

In March, we met here in the Council to discuss
the serious human-rights violations affecting children
(see S/PV.7414), and the enormous concern over the
worsening situation in many parts of the world was
palpable. Today, four months later, despite the efforts
and involvement of the international community, we see
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2015/409) that the
situation in that regard is referred to as unprecedented.
That shows us how great the present challenge is. In
this difficult global context, Colombia, which is not on
the Security Council's list, is, however, mentioned in
the report, as a result of the prolonged internal conflict,
lasting over five decades, which has affected our
development and our civilian population, particularly
the most vulnerable segment of it - our children.

Three years ago, President Juan Manuel Santos
and the entire nation courageously sought a negotiated
end to the conflict, the sole one in the Americas. That
enabled the Government to implement pioneering
legislation at the international level, reflected in the
Law on Victims and Land Restitution and the joint
agreement on clearing anti-personnel mines. Moreover,
we have made progress on three out of the five items on
the agenda of the peace talks, and have subsequently
improved the living conditions of the civilian population.
As the Special Representative mentioned, the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia announced that
they would remove children younger than 15 years of
age from their ranks. That is why my country is deeply
perplexed by our country's portrayal in the Secretary-
General's report. It does not reflect the present situation,
nor the progress achieved. The terms used to describe
the situation in Colombia in 2014 cannot be the same as
those that would have applied in 1999. Challenged by
enormous difficulties, we have taken brave steps in the
peace negotiations, because we see that as the best way
to restore the rights of all persons affected by the armed
conflict - especially our children.

Less than a year ago, in August 2014, I was here
at the United Nations for the official presentation of
the Secretary General's Guidance Note on reparations
for conflict-related sexual violence (see S/2014/181),
in which Colombia was held up as a paradigm for
the efforts that it has implemented. In the Note, the
implementation of our historic law regarding Victims
was recognized as an effort without precedent in the
context of armed conflicts elsewhere in the world.
Those developments complement the public policies
implemented by the Colombian Government. I would
like to mention just two examples.

First, Colombia had a great number of displaced
persons, but the country has made every effort to
deal with the problem and its impact on our children.
Furthermore, I would point out that during the period
under review in the report, our country reported a
noteworthy reduction of 47 per cent in the phenomenon
of internally displaced persons. That reduction has not
been referred to in the report.

Secondly, in 2014, the Intersectoral Commission
for the Prevention of Recruitment, which involves 27
State agencies, implemented urgent prevention and
protection measures, given the risk of the recruitment
of girls and boys in more than 200 municipalities in
Colombia. In September 2014, I addressed the Council
on that very issue. I said,

"[m]y task is to build up a harmonious and
stable relationship of mutual respect with the
[United Nations] system through which it can be
possible to improve conditions on the ground,
so that Colombia is never again included in
the Secretary-General's report on this issue."
(S/PV. 7259, pp. 31-32)
Colombia and my delegation have done everything
possible to achieve that goal. We have opened all
channels of communication: we have promoted meetings
with all relevant authorities; we have approached the
Office of the Special Representative with openness:
and, in that spirit, we would respectfully ask the Special
Representative to take full account of the substantive
considerations of the Colombian State reflected in
the current report, which we hope to see corrected in
the final draft. We have made significant progress in
protecting our children and ensuring their rights. We
will continue working with full determination and
conviction to that end.

Dialogue and cooperation are undoubtedly the best
tools available to the United Nations for working with
States. I therefore reiterate that the Colombian State
is completely prepared to continue to make progress
in this area within a respectful relationship based on
accuracy and objectivity. I would also reiterate to you,
Mr. President, our determination to work for the good
of the children of Colombia and the whole world.

