Mr. Prosor (Israel): Before I begin, I want to
express Israel's condolences on the death of United
Nations personnel in Friday's terrorist attack in Kabul.
There is no excuse for targeting civilians and United
Nations workers.

Allow me to take this opportunity to congratulate
Jordan on its election to the Security Council. We
thank the Secretary-General, Foreign Minister Judeh,
Mr. Jean Asselborn and Vice-Minister Cho Tae-yul
for being here today. We also congratulate the new
non-permanent members - Chad, Chile, Lithuania
and Nigeria - onjoining the Council. As ambassadors,
they are privileged to represent their countries in the
Chamber, and I wish them luck.

The Middle East is known as the cradle of
civilization - the birth place of history's greatest
empires and three world religions. The region was once
admired for its inspiring art, striking architecture and
significant innovations. Today, the world looks at the
Middle East and sees a region shaken by violence. From
the Arabian Sea to the Mediterranean Sea, not a day goes
by when we do not read about brutality and bloodshed,
or new threats looming on the horizon. Amid that sea of
hostility, Israel is an island of stability and democracy.
It is a nation in which the majority governs, but the
minority enjoys equal rights, a nation that embraces
diversity and welcomes diverse opinions, a nation that
leads the world in human rights and encourages women
to be leaders.

Israel is proud of its democracy and yearns for

peace with its neighbours and security on its borders.

The people of Israel are still mourning the loss of
their legendary statesman and soldier, Ariel Sharon.
He was a fearless leader who knew the heavy price of
war and was willing to take bold steps for peace. The
State of Israel is still willing to take courageous steps
for peace and is committed to serious and meaningful
negotiations with the Palestinians. I would like to take
this opportunity to thank the United States, in particular
Secretary Kerry for his tireless devotion to promoting
peace in our region.

Twenty years ago, I recall watching King Hussein
and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin meet in the Arava
Desert to sign the historic peace treaty between our two
countries. At the signing, King Hussein said,

"This is a peace with commitment. This is our gift
to our peoples and the generations to come."

Fifteen years after his death, King Hussein's legacy
of peace lives on. Israelis from across the political
and religious spectrum still admire King Hussein's
towering morality and his profound belief in the
sanctity of life and the dignity of every human being.
I and most Israelis will never forget the sight of King
Hussein consoling the Israeli families whose children
had been killed in a terrorist attack. After learning
that a Jordanian soldier had murdered seven Israeli
schoolgirls, King Hussein travelled to Israel to visit the
homes of the bereaved families. One by one, he sat with
the grieving parents, held their hands, offered words of
condolence and hugged and kissed them. King Hussein
told them,

"I feel that if there is anything left in life, it will
be to ensure that all the children enjoy the kind of
peace and security that we never had in our times."

That is the legacy that his son, King Abdullah, proudly
continues today.

Contrast that picture with a picture from just a few
weeks ago. In December, Israel once again made the
heartbreaking decision to release convicted Palestinian
terrorists in an effort to advance the peace process.
The released terrorists were given a heroes' welcome
by the Palestinians and embraced by President Abbas.
Murderers were met with fireworks and festivities
and showered with candies and congratulations. The
Palestinian Authority (PA) is rewarding terrorists
with tens of thousands of dollars. The motto of the
PA's pension plan seems to be "the more you slay, the
more we pay." Is that coexistence? Is that tolerance?
Is that mutual respect? Grieving Israelis watched as
Palestinians celebrated men like Abu Harbish, who
threw a firebomb at a bus, murdering 26-year-old Rachel
Weiss and her three young children. To everyone in the
Chamber I ask, How would you feel if you had to watch
your family's murderers being celebrated? Would you
call into question the so-called peaceful intentions of
your neighbours? President Abbas could learn a great
deal from King Hussein of Jordan about demonstrating
his commitment to making peace.

Since peace talks began in July, hundreds of
examples of Palestinian incitement against Israelis and
Jews have occurred. From cradles to kindergartens and
from schools to soccer stadiums, Palestinian children
are besieged by messages of hate. They are born in
hospitals named after violent Palestinian groups, attend
schools named after terrorists and are taught from
textbooks that equate Zionism with racism. In their free
time, Palestinian children play on sports teams named
after murderers and watch television programmes that
teach that Jews are "our enemies and should be killed."

Rather than condemning that incitement, the
Palestinian Authority is amplifying the messages of
intolerance. President Abbas' Fatah party regularly
displays maps that erase Israel. In one map, for example,
the Palestinian flag flies over the entire geographic
area of the State of Israel. This map extends from the
Mediterranean Sea to the Jordan River and is entitled
"Palestine". In a speech on Christmas day, President
Abbas declared that Jesus was a "Palestinian messenger"
and suggested that Israel was to blame for the exodus
of Christians from the Holy Land. That is a blatant
attempt to rewrite history and erase any connection
between the Jewish people and the land of Israel. Today
we are witnessing a mass exodus of Christians from the
Palestinian territories and the Arab world because of
the constant persecution and discrimination that they
face by the Arab States. Abbas's made-up maps and
mythical accounts couldjoin the fables of the book The
Thousand and One Nights.

We have already lost an entire generation to
incitement. How many more children will grow up
being taught hatred instead of peace, violence instead
of tolerance, and martyrdom instead of mutual
understanding? The international community must
finally confront Palestinian leaders and publically
demand an end to incitement.

The glorification of terrorists, combined with
unrelenting messages of hatred, are having deadly
consequences. In 2013, there were 1,500 attacks against
Israelis, 700 ofwhich occurred after peace negotiations
had begun in July. In recent months there has been
a sharp increase in terrorist attacks, including the
murder of five Israelis. Just last month, a Palestinian
sniper murdered 20-year-old Saleh Abu Latif, an Israeli
Bedouin civilian. Two days later, a bomb exploded on
a civilian bus in a suburb just outside Tel Aviv. Had it
not been for the quick thinking of the bus driver and
an alert passenger, dozens of people would have been
killed. A successful attack could have had disastrous
consequences for the peace talks.

In the face of the violence and bloodshed, we
have yet to hear President Abbas and the Palestinian
Authority utter a single word denouncing those attacks.
They even remained silent when it was revealed that
one of the bus bombers was, surprisingly, a member of
the Palestinian police force. While most police forces
have officers that uproot terrorism, that police officer
was busy planting bombs.

The Palestinian leadership has yet to learn that real
peace requires real commitment. You cannot condemn
terrorism to international media and congratulate
terrorists on Palestinian media. You cannot victimize
others and then insist that you are the victim. And you
cannot use this forum to spread destructive messages
and then expect constructive results.

How many times have we heard that the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is the major conflict in the Middle
East, and that if we solve that conflict we will solve
all of the conflicts in the Middle East? Some in this
Chamber have even repeated that fiction. Really? The
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the major conflict in the
Middle East? Wow. People who say that need an eye
doctor to help them to see clearly - beginning, maybe,
with the ophthalmologist from Damascus, Bashar
al-Assad, who is butchering his people every day. I am
sure that is really connected to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Shiites fighting Sunnis fighting Alawites;
extremist groups battling one another in Libya, Yemen
and Tunisia; Al-Qaida forces overrunning major cities
in Iraq - all of that is, of course, caused by the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. That is a revelation. The truth is
that Israel is an island of stability in a sea of tyranny.

Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., whose legacy is being
celebrated today, once described Israel as

"one of the great outposts of democracy in the
world and a marvellous example of what can be
done - how desert land can be transformed into
an oasis of brotherhood and democracy. Peace for
Israel means security, and that security must be a
reality".

I think it should be obvious that the Violence and
instability afflicting the Middle East have nothing to
do with Israel. We must solve the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict on its own merits because it is important for
us. Solving the conflict is not a prescription for curing
the epidemic of violence plaguing the Middle East.
Despite what is constantly heard, the core of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict has never been about borders or
settlements. The major obstacle to peace remains the
refusal of the Palestinian leaders to accept the Jewish
State in any border. We will never hear President Abbas
or any Palestinian leader utter the phrase "two States
for two peoples".

Let me understand that. The Palestinians call for an
independent Palestinian State, but want millions of their
people to flood the Jewish State. It will never happen.
It is a complete non-starter. Many in this Chamber are
very vocal in telling Israel what to do, but begin to
stutter, mumble and fall silent when it comes to telling
the Palestinians what they must do. Each and every one
present here must tell the Palestinians that there will
never be peace as long as they refuse to recognize Israel
as the nation State of the Jewish people and insist on a
so-called right of return.

Despite what many believe, Israel dedicates a
great deal of its energy and resources to assisting
the Palestinian people. Today, more than 100,000
Palestinians earn their living in Israel and their income
constitutes more than 10 per cent of the Palestinian gross
domestic product. Israel helps generate solutions to
energize the Palestinian economy. We transfer millions
of dollars in electricity, water and natural gas to power
Palestinian homes, schools and hospitals. When a giant
storm struck last month, Israel delivered humanitarian
aid and water pumps and facilitated the passage of fuel
and cooking gas to Palestinians in need.

Yet for every truckload in the name of coexistence,
we seem to be feeding a Palestinian opposition that
challenges our very existence. It is time for Palestinians
leaders to lead; it is time for them to set a course
towards coexistence; and it is time for them to build the
Palestinian people up, rather than to tear Israel down.

The Middle East is plagued by a reign oftyrants and
a drought in leadership. Millions of people have taken
to the streets demanding better lives, better economies
and greater opportunities. The first peaceful protests
in the region were in the streets of Tehran, where the
Government brutalizes it citizens and throws innocent
people into jail. Many in the international community
believed that the new Iranian President would set a new
precedent. It has been almost six months since President
Rouhani took office, and Iran is still persecuting
minorities, imprisoning journalists and targeting
political adversaries. The Iranian Government has
executed more of its citizens, per capita, than any other
Government. Last year alone, the regime executed
almost 600 people, including 367 since President
Rouhani took office in August.

Iran does not confine its Violence and extremism to
its own borders. From Buenos Aires to Burgas, Iran is
the world's primary sponsor of terror. Just this month,
Iranian Foreign Minister Zarif paid tribute, on behalf of
the Islamic Republic, at the grave of one of Hizbullah's
most notorious murderers. Rather than cleaning
house, the new President believes that he can sweep
Iran's atrocities under the Persian rug by introducing
United Nations resolutions that condemn violence and
extremism. Iran's so-called WAVE resolution, entitled
"A world against violence and violent extremism"
(resolution 68/127), may have made a splash at the
United Nations, but messages of intolerance and
violence continue to trickle down from the top.

Behind Iran's smiling facade, President Rouhani
and Ayatollah Khamenei continue to preach hatred
and provoke hostility. Ayatollah Khamenei recently
appeared on State television and delegitimized Israel,
using disgusting profanity that does not bear repeating.
The ink is barely dry on the interim nuclear agreement
and Iran is already showing its true colours. It is a
regime that crosses red lines, produces yellow cake and
beats its citizens black and blue. Meanwhile, some in
the international community are willing to serve Iran
its yellow cake on a silver platter. Permitting Iran to
keep its enrichment capabilities today means that Iran
will retain its ability to break out and build a nuclear
bomb tomorrow.

Violence is encoded in the Iranian regime's DNA.
It does not take a crime-scene investigator to see Iran's
fingerprints on the violence erupting in parts of the
Middle East.

In the Gaza Strip, Iran backs the Hamas terrorist
organization, which uses Palestinian schools, hospitals
and mosques to launch rockets at Israeli citizens. We
are barely three weeks into the new year, and Hamas
has already launched 17 rockets at Israel, attacks that
have closed schools and kept tens of thousands of
children in southern Israel at home.

The international community has yet to find the
time to utter even a single word of condemnation of
those attacks, attacks that could derail the peace
process. It has also yet to condemn Hamas for
deliberately exploiting children. Schools in Gaza have
become the training ground for the next generation of
terrorists. Last week, Hamas graduated 13,000 students
from paramilitary camps geared at training children to
fight Israel.

In Lebanon, Iran has helped Hizbullah hijack the
Lebanese State and transform it into an outpost for
terror. For years, Hizbullah insisted that it needed a
private army to defend Lebanon against, of course,
Israel. Today, that army has sent 2,000 fighters to
butcher the Syrian people and shoot rockets into Israel.

Hizbullah has positioned 60,000 missiles and
rockets in the heart of southern Lebanon's civilian
population. General Hajizadeh, a senior commander of
the Aero-Space Forces of Iran's Islamic Revolutionary
Guards Corps, recently boasted that Hizbullah had
improved its missile capabilities and could now hit and
destroy any target in Israel.

Hizbullah intentionally hides those missiles in the
basements of homes, in the playgrounds of schools and
in the back rooms of hospitals. In doing so, Hizbullah
is committing a double war crime: first, by using
Lebanese civilians as human shields and, secondly, by
targeting Israeli citizens.

The Government of Lebanon cannot continue to
ignore what is happening in southern Lebanon, and it
can no longer ignore its international obligations under
resolution 1701 (2006). Throughout December, armed
terrorists fired shots across the Blue Line into northern
Israel. In one incident, a member of the Lebanese
Armed Forces shot Israeli soldier Shlomi Cohen in a
ruthless and unprovoked attack.

It is time for the Council to hold accountable all
those who arm, train and harbour terrorists. It is time to
speak out against those who callously disregard human
life. As we have seen in Syria, the failure to do so has
disastrous consequences.

The war in Syria is approaching its fourth year,
and the death toll continues to climb. The Syrian
Government has resorted to new depths of brutality by
dropping barrel bombs packed with explosives, nails
and other shrapnel on markets and hospitals. In just a
few days, more than 700 people have been killed and
over 3,000 injured.

The State of Israel and the Jewish people are deeply
troubled by the suffering of the Syrian people and are
reaching out to help them. While some in the region
are aiding the murderous Al-Assad regime, Israel is
providing medical aid.

Sunnis, Alawites and Shiites are running to Israel,
the so-called enemy, because they know that Israel
will treat anyone without prejudice and regardless of
ethnicity, religion or gender. We will continue to lend
humanitarian assistance to the victims with open arms
and an open heart.

Today, the Middle East stands at a critical juncture.
There are two roads before us. The first is the future
offered by Iran and Syria, a future of more extremism
and greater violence. The second is the road towards
equality, reform and stability.

Study after study has shown that there is a clear
connection between advancing peace and advancing
equal rights. When a woman receives an education,
her children are healthier and more likely to get an
education. When a woman generates her own income,
she reinvests 90 per cent in her family and community.
But women can help drive a nation's economy only if
they are allowed onto the driver's seat.

As we begin the new year, the international
community must call upon Arab leaders to choose the
path of progress and abandon the road of repression.
Tell them that tyranny will fail, tell them that peace
is built on tolerance, and tell them that every man
and every woman is entitled to equal rights and equal
opportunities.

As Winston Churchill said, "All the great things
are simple, and many can be expressed in a single
word: freedom honour hope". The international
community must stand on the side of human rights
and human dignity. We must speak up and speak out
so that the people of the Middle East can finally enjoy
freedom, honour and hope.

