Mr. Darusman: On behalf of the independent
international fact-finding mission on Myanmar, I thank
you, Mr. President, for this timely opportunity to brief
the Security Council.

The Council is aware of our recent report to the
Human Rights Council (A/HRC/39/64), including our
detailed findings of 444 pages, establishing the facts
and circumstances of recent alleged human rights
violations and abuses in Myanmar, which are based on an
investigation that scrupulously adhered to international
best practices on human rights fact-finding. We worked
for over a year to collect and corroborate information,
weighing its validity and analysing it against applicable
law in a spirit of objectivity and impartiality. We invite
anyone who claims that our report is one-sided or based
on a single source to read its 444 pages, including a full
account of our methodology.

Our report characterizes the recent events in
Rakhine state as a human rights catastrophe that was
foreseeable and planned. It will have a severe impact
for many generations to come, if not forever. The report
describes in detail the Tatmadaw's so-called clearance
operations in six villages, marked by large-scale
massacres and other killings of civilians, including
women, children and the elderly, as well as mass gang-
rape, burning and looting.

The Mission verified similar operations in
54 separate locations across northern Rakhine state.
Over 725,000 Rohingya fled. At least 392 villages
were partially or totally destroyed. Estimates of 10,000
Rohingya deaths are conservative. Those attacks were
widespread and systematic, their modus operandi
across northern Rakhine state strikingly similar. While
the attacks of the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
contributed to the escalation and must be condemned,
the operations of the security forces were brutal and
utterly disproportionate. They were conducted in total
disregard for human life and dignity, in violation of
human rights and international humanitarian law.

That occurred against a backdrop of State
policies and practices implemented over decades,
steadily marginalizing and dehumanizing the
Rohingya - resulting in a State-sanctioned and
institutionalized system of oppression affecting the
lives of Rohingya from birth to death. Similar clearance
operations, albeit on a smaller scale, began in October
2016, with complete impunity. The following months
were marked by increased intimidation ofthe Rohingya,
a surge in hate speech, instilling fear into other ethnic
communities, and the mobilization of troops and other
military assets into northern Rakhine state. The nature,
scale and organization of those events demonstrate
preparation and planning.

The mass displacement of the Rohingya and the
burning of villages were followed by the appropriation of
vacated lands. Entire villages were flattened and erased,
along with every trace of the Rohingya communities.
New structures were built for other communities, while
the root causes of the exodus, including the oppression
and exclusionary rhetoric, are being denied and continue
unabated. The remaining Rohingya in Rakhine state are
at grave risk, and conditions are not in place for a safe,
dignified and sustainable return of the Rohingya in
Bangladesh. Their return in this situation is tantamount
to condemning them to life as subhumans and further
mass killing.

Although horrific and intense, the situation of the
Rohingya must not be seen in isolation. The Mission
found similar patterns of serious human rights
violations elsewhere in Myanmar, notably in Kachin
and Shan states. They were predominantly committed
by the Myanmar military following the same policies,
tactics and conduct. In those conflict areas, we also
found patterns of deliberate targeting of civilians,
unlawful killings, torture, rape and sexual violence,
arbitrary deprivation of liberty, forced labour and
forced displacement.

Many of the serious violations described in our
report undoubtedly amount to the most serious crimes
of concern to the international community, which
threaten the peace, security and well-being of the world.
War crimes and crimes against humanity have been
committed in Kachin, Shan and Rakhine states. The
mission also found sufficient information to warrant
the investigation and prosecution of senior officials in
the Tatmadaw on charges of genocide. That means that
we consider that genocidal intent - meaning the intent
to destroy the Rohingya in whole or in part - can be
reasonably inferred.

At the core of this situation sits the Myanmar
military, which has pursued these strategies and tactics
for decades. The Tatmadaw, consistently and as a
matter of policy and tactics, targets civilians and rapes
women and girls. It actively pursues an exclusionary
and discriminatory vision for the country. It has a clear
chain of command, with those in leadership positions
in effective control of its operations. It acts with total
impunity. The contempt shown by the Tatmadaw for
human life, integrity and freedom, and for international
law generally, has had a devastating impact on the
human rights, security and development of everyone in
Myanmar. It is also a threat to regional stability and
international peace and security.

The Security Council holds the power to break that
cycle. The key is a sharp focus on accountability. Apart
from accountability for atrocity crimes being a legal
and moral obligation, we submit that there are at least
three other compelling reasons for such a focus.

First, effective prevention is premised on
accountability. A history of atrocity crimes combined
with impunity and weak State institutions is a core
risk factor for further violations. Sadly, that toxic mix
has persisted in Myanmar for a long time. Impunity
for gross human rights violations has demonstrably
contributed to the validation of deeply oppressive
and discriminatory conduct, enabled the recurrence
of atrocity crimes, emboldened the perpetrators and
silenced the Victims. Unless that impunity is addressed,
violence and associated atrocity crimes will continue
and recur.

Secondly, without accountability there can be no
sustainable, safe and dignified return of the Rohingya
to Myanmar. How can the Rohingya be expected to
return to Myanmar, where their suffering is denied
and the perpetrators enjoy complete impunity? Can
we reasonably expect them to rely for their protection
on the same unaccountable security forces who killed,
raped and devastated their communities?

Thirdly, there can be no just and lasting
reconciliation without accountability. The complex
issues of citizenship, deep-rooted discrimination,
oppression and distrust between communities cannot
be overcome without a human rights and rule-of-law-
based approach. Impunity is the antithesis of that. We
firmly believe that accountability will pave the way
towards stability, development and peace and security
for all in Myanmar.

Unfortunately, accountability in Myanmar must
come from the international community. Impunity is
deeply entrenched in Myanmar's political and legal
system, effectively placing the Tatmadaw above the
law. Myanmar's internal inquiries have proven to be
ineffective failures, with no reason to consider that that
will change in the foreseeable future. Even if domestic
leaders were well-intentioned, accountability at the
national level is currently unattainable. The Security
Council must refer the situation in Myanmar to the
International Criminal Court or another international
ad hoc tribunal.

The Council and its individual members should
also impose targeted individual sanctions against those
most responsible for serious crimes under international
law. In our report, we identified six of the Tatmadaw's
most senior generals with command responsibility for
the clearance operations in Rakhine state, starting
with the Commander-in-Chief of the Myanmar Armed
Forces, Senior General Min Aung Hlaing. They
must cease to benefit from all international support,
both institutionally and personally. That includes an
arms embargo on Myanmar and a prohibition of all
transactions with Tatmadaw-affiliated enterprises.

We also call for the Council's support for a
comprehensive independent inquiry into the United
Nations involvement in Myanmar since 2011. No
organization involved in a catastrophe of these
proportions should fail to review its engagement and
learn lessons for future prevention. The review should
include the performance of United Nations organs,
agencies, departments, funds and programmes under
all three pillars - development, human rights and
peace and security. In addressing and preventing human
rights violations, the United Nations succeeds or fails
in relation to all of those three pillars collectively.

If anyone were to seek to deliberately foment conflict
and extremism, the events in Myanmar could serve as
a step-by-step manual. Dehumanizing a population,
calling them all terrorists, depriving them of all rights,
segregating and attacking them, raping and killing
them, crowding them into internally displaced persons
camps or driving them out and protecting the killers
from justice - those steps can be, and almost certainly
will be, learned and deployed in other countries against
other populations.

The international community must be gravely
concerned. Myanmar presents precisely the kind
of threat to peace and security that the United
Nations - particularly the Council - was created to
address. We urge the Council to take action. Decisive
action is needed to halt the destructive dynamics in
Myanmar and prevent the further fomenting of hatred,
hostility, discrimination and extremism that will
inevitably lead to further devastation. Impunity must
not be excused and continue to embolden the Tatmadaw
in its promotion of Bamar-Buddhist supremacy.
National sovereignty is not a license to commit crimes
against humanity or genocide.
There can be no moving on from this crisis without
addressing its root causes, all of which continue to exist
today, and primarily the presence of an unaccountable
military that acts with complete impunity. The
Rohingya and all of Myanmar's people - in fact the
entire world - is looking to the Council to take action.

