Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): First of
all, my delegation would also like to extend its sincere
condolences to the Russian Federation following the
incident that occurred yesterday in Syria.

My delegation welcomes today's briefing on the
political process and the humanitarian situation in Syria
under your presidency, Sir, and thanks Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, for their informative briefings on
the latest developments in Syria.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, my
delegation welcomes the multifaceted assistance that
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
continue to provide to people in distress in the areas
affected by armed clashes, despite ongoing hostilities.
The plight of those people is all the more worrying as
they are also exposed to risks caused by the presence of
explosive remnants of war and landmines. In addition,
several staff members of United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations specialized in
the provision of humanitarian aid also pay with their
lives for their commitment to assisting people affected
by the conflict. Reports to date reveal that 22 United
Nations agency staff members have been killed,
including 18 from the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. As
for non-governmental organizations, 74 Syrian and
Palestinian Red Crescent staff and volunteers have
made the ultimate sacrifice.

My delegation remains convinced that a possible
offensive by the Syrian armed forces in Idlib will have
unprecedented humanitarian consequences, which
will cause another mass exodus, thereby adding to
the suffering of a population martyred by seven years
of particularly deadly conflict. We are extremely
concerned about the increasing risk of a humanitarian
disaster in Idlib governorate, which hosts nearly
3 million people, including 1.4 million internally
displaced persons. Those people have no choice but
to take refuge in overcrowded camps, where basic
services are struggling to meet their immense needs.
C6te d'Ivoire therefore urges the parties to the conflict
to show restraint and take the necessary measures to
ensure safe, sustainable and unhindered access for
humanitarian assistance in order to avoid another
tragedy, such as that experienced in eastern Ghouta,
Aleppo and Homs.

My country recalls that the warring parties cannot
evade their obligations to protect civilians and civilian
objects, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
international law. We therefore call upon them to take
all the measures necessary to spare schools, hospitals
and medical personnel during military operations.
My country also takes this opportunity to reiterate
its commitment to the principle of accountability. To
that end, my delegation urges all parties, including
States, civil society and United Nations agencies, to
cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.

On the political front, my country welcomes the
sustained efforts of Mr. De Mistura to reach a political
solution, which is the only way out of the current
impasse. In that regard, we welcome the meetings
organized by the Special Envoy last week in Geneva
among the guarantors of the Astana process to discuss
the establishment of the constitutional committee
and among the representatives of the United States
of America, the United Kingdom, France, Germany,
Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Jordan to discuss issues
related to the political process and the establishment of
the electoral committee. Cote d'Ivoire urges all parties
to support the Special Envoy in his quest for a lasting
political solution to the Syrian conflict. Lastly, we call
on the warring parties to opt for the path of dialogue, as
stipulated in resolution 2254 (2015).

