Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): We have decided
today to go along with the adoption of this draft report,
but we would like to place on record that we are doing
so with reluctance and reservations. We feel obliged to
place this on record because, when this draft report is
discussed in the General Assembly, we will probably
be very critical of it and it is only fair - before anyone
asks us why, if we were so critical, we did not speak
out at the point of adoption 4 that we speak out now.
In doing so, we would like to stress that we are not
criticizing any members of the Secretariat or, indeed,
any of our colleagues. We know that a lot of hard work
and effort have gone into the preparation of this draft
report and we commend those who have put in the
effort.

Unfortunately for us, however, we find that the
final product is not a satisfactory one. In terms of
illuminating the General Assembly on the actual work
that takes place in the Council, I suspect that it fails to
achieve that objective. We are not quite sure why this
is the case. It is possibly because we may not have had
sufficient time to discuss this draft report in depth. It
could also possibly be because this draft report is the
result of various decisions taken over the past 35 years,
often without questioning.

Just to cite one example, this draft report, as you
said, Sir, is for the period from 16 June 2000 to 15 June
2001. This divides two presidencies in half. We are not
sure what the logic behind this is, but apparently this
decision was taken 35 years ago and has not been
revised since then.

Equally important, in the most recent decision we
took, we agreed that this report should be more
analytical. I think that, if we judge it by that criterion,
clearly there is room for improvement.

We mentioned some of these reservations when
we discussed this in the Council, but, as you said,
Mr. President, the train had already left the station this
year, and therefore we agreed to stay aboard.

We would also like to make it very clear,
however, that we believe that the time has come to
review this report and the manner in which the Security
Council reports to the General Assembly. This is, after
all, a key point that is mentioned in Article 24,
paragraph 3, of the United Nations Charter, which
states that

"The Security Council shall submit annual
and, when necessary, special reports to the
General Assembly for its consideration."

Indeed, whenever we carry out our Charter
responsibilities, we should do so as well as possible.

At the same time, over the years the report has
grown in length. Based on a rough estimate of $600 a
page, this draft report will cost us $350,340. I think
that, if we are going to spend that kind of money, it is
only fair that we should review the product that we are
obtaining.

We are, of course, very pleased that the members
of the Council have agreed to refer this matter to the
informal working group of the Security Council
concerning the Council's documentation and other
procedural questions. We hope that this informal
working group will meet soon to start reviewing ways
of improving the report. Since this informal working
group does not meet very often, I believe that the
sooner it meets, the better it would be for our work.

Finally, since the report is intended for the
members of the General Assembly, we hope that in this
year's debate in the Assembly, its members will
provide us feedback on both its content and format, and
that we will be able to take on board this feedback in
preparing next year's report.

