Mr. Maiga (Mali) (spoke in French): I would like
to express my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
convening this public meeting of the Security Council
to debate the serious violent situation that continues to
prevail in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem. Mali is keenly concerned at the continuing
violence in the occupied Palestinian territories. We
believe that unless these tragic events are dealt with
quickly, they will be a real threat to peace and security
in the entire Middle East.

Mali firmly condemns acts of repression and the
excessive and indiscriminate use of force by the Israeli
army that has claimed over 437 victims, mostly among
Palestinian civilians. Likewise, we consider Israel's
frequent recourse to collective punishment and its use
of all types of restrictions against the population of the
territories to be counterproductive. The blockade of the
territories has made the daily life of the Palestinians a
genuine nightmare and has also caused considerable
economic losses.

No legitimate struggle, even against terrorism,
which we condemn terrorism in all its forms, can
justify the imposition of such measures. We urge all of
the parties to demonstrate restraint and moderation, to
refrain from acts of provocation and to work together
for the return of calm.

The present violence can end only with the
signing of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
agreement based on the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and the agreements signed by the
parties. We consider that the Security Council has an
essential role to play in this regard.

In accordance with the Charter, the Council has
the obligation to work to establish confidence-building
measures between the parties that can put an end to
violence and restore a climate conducive to the
resumption without conditions of negotiations on the
final status of the territories.

In addition, my delegation believes that it is
Israel's obligation to ensure respect for the holy sites
and to guarantee the protection of the civilian
Palestinian population.

Israel, the occupying Power, must strive to ensure
scrupulous respect for the norms of international
humanitarian law, as well as for the relevant provisions
of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. Once
again, we join Palestine in asking the Security Council
for the speedy establishment of an international
observer mission in the territories entrusted with
ensuring the protection of civilians.

In this spirit, Mali fully supports the demarche of
the non-aligned caucus and other members of the
Council to hold discussions with the parties with a
view to the prompt and effective deployment of
observers in the field. We urge the Israeli Government
to assist the international community in making this
idea a reality, as a confidence-building measure for the
good of both the Palestinians and the Israelis.

The situation is tragic, and we have been talking
about a setback in the peace process at a time when a
peace agreement was within reach. Nevertheless, there
are grounds for hope. This is why my delegation
welcomes the decision taken by the Israeli
Government, announced to us yesterday by the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Israel, to start to lift the internal blockade between
Palestinian cities in order to make the daily life of the
civilian population less difficult. This is a positive
measure that could contribute significantly to
improving the living conditions of the inhabitants of
the territories and mitigate the present level of
violence. Beyond that measure, which we once again
hail, what we are expecting from Israel is the end of the
blockade of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip in order
to allow Palestinians to enter Israel to go to work.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the support
of my delegation for the efforts made by the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative to bring the
parties closer in order to bring about a resumption of
the peace process. We also request the international
community to provide the needed humanitarian and
economic assistance to the Palestinian people.

