Mr. Dronjic (Bosnia and Herzegovina): As this is
the first time that I am addressing the Council, allow
me to begin on a personal note by expressing my feeling
of pride and humility, for there is no greater honour
for a career diplomat than to represent his country
at the United Nations, and especially at a Security
Council meeting.
I would like to congratulate China on assuming the
presidency for the month of November and wish you,
Mr. President, success in your endeavours.

As the Council is aware, on 7 October general
elections took place in my country. The results of the
elections have still not been declared official by the
Central Electoral Commission. Pending the official
confirmation of the results, the newly elected members
of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina will
be sworn in and take office on 20 November, in two
weeks. According to the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Presidency is responsible for the
country's foreign policy, which requires the approval
by consensus of public statements made on behalf of
the Presidency at international organizations and their
bodies. As this is a transitional period, the outgoing
members of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
could not reach consensus at this stage on the substance
of the statement to be delivered at this meeting.
Therefore, in my personal capacity, I can only thank
Mr. Inzko for his twentieth report (S/2018/974, annex)
and his briefing today.

I would also like to thank the members of the
Security Council for adopting the resolution on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and extending
the mandate of the European Union-led stabilization
force, Operation Althea, for an additional period of 12
months (resolution 2443 (2018)). I note that, in spite of
some difficulties, the resolution deems that the security
environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains calm
and stable.

Furthermore, I would like to thank the European
Union for allocating €7.2 million in grants to support
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the area of migration and
border management.

In addition, I would like to thank the Government
of the Netherlands and the United Nations Development
Programme for granting $245,400 for the EXPLODE+
project, which will help to dispose of the ammunition
surplus and further contribute to the security of the
population in the country and the region.

In conclusion, I sincerely hope that the newly elected
members of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
will find the modus operandi that will enable them to
overcome situations like this one and spare me from
being put in a somewhat awkward position.

