Mr. Almansoor (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like at the outset to place on record my
delegation's appreciation to you, Sir, for having
convened this open meeting on threats to international
peace and security caused by terrorist acts. We believe
that the convening of these open meetings, with the
participation of non-members of the Council, serves to
support efforts to increase transparency in the work of
the Council by engaging non-members in the
deliberations.

The subject under discussion today is a priority
item in our work. Terrorism is a dangerous
phenomenon that we must combat collectively. This
phenomenon has recently intensified, and now
commands the attention of the international
community- which has made strenuous efforts to
fight it and to limit its catastrophic consequences,
particularly the grave loss of life and property it
causes.

In that respect, we note that efforts at the United
Nations to arrive at a definition of terrorism have yet to
yield any results. We believe the time has come to step
up international efforts to overcome the differences
preventing us from arriving at a definition of terrorism.

The events of 11 September 2001 in the United
States of America represented a dramatic turning point
that shed light on the phenomenon of terrorism, which
directly threatens the stability and security of States
and international economic stability. The tragic events
in Bali and Moscow, and Israel's acts of terror in the
occupied Palestinian territories, are but links in the
continuous chain of the acts of international terror that
the international community must step up its efforts to
combat.

Bahrain, which is eager to see the international
community engaged in combating this dangerous
international phenomenon threatening peace and
security and the stability of States, has extended its
cooperation to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) since it was established by resolution 1373
(2001). We have provided the Committee with the
reports required under paragraph 6 of that resolution.
Bahrain submitted its national report on time and was
among the first States to do so, because we believe that
cooperating with the Committee will enhance
international efforts to combat this phenomenon, which
threatens the world and kills innocent people
worldwide. The Kingdom of Bahrain also recently
submitted the supplementary report required by the
Committee. My country has taken every measure
necessary to combat and stop the phenomenon of
international terrorism. It has also ratified most of the
international conventions pertaining to the fight against
international terrorism.

The most important component of international
terrorism is State terrorism, which we have witnessed
in the Balkans, in particular in Kosovo and in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. State terrorism continues in the
occupied Arab territories. Such terrorism includes the
Israeli Government's deliberate demolition of
Palestinian homes, its displacement of Palestinians, its
usurpation of their lands and the looting of their
property. In that regard, my country calls on the
international community to firmly and resolutely
address this dangerous phenomenon, put an end to
those inhumane practices and bring the perpetrators to
international justice so that they may be duly punished.

Israel continues to defy United Nations
resolutions and to reject every peace initiative that
would bring an end to its occupation of territory, which
is, after all, a form of international terrorism. Israel has
also rejected the peace initiative that was recently put
forth by Saudi Crown Prince Abdullah bin Abdul Aziz
and adopted at the Arab Summit held in Beirut last
March. Israel has also continued its policy of settler
colonialism and population transfer, its terrorism
against defenceless Palestinians, who are armed only
with the determination to defy and resist Israeli terror.
My country is gravely concerned about the policies
being pursued by the Government of Israel against the
Palestinian people in defiance of international
humanitarian law, human rights law and international
law and norms.
There are many obstacles that stand in the way of
international efforts to combat international terrorism,
the most significant being the absence of a standard
legal definition of this phenomenon. There are
numerous differences on this matter, which are also
blocking the adoption of a comprehensive international
convention to combat international terrorism. We
would like to stress the need to arrive at an accurate
and comprehensive definition of terrorism. We also
wish to highlight the need to distinguish between
terrorism, which we condemn and oppose in all its
forms and manifestations, and a people's legitimate
struggle for independence and freedom. Short of that,
our efforts will be incomplete, and our task extremely
difficult. We would also like to stress that the
phenomenon of terrorism is not linked to a given
religion, culture or race. It is a global phenomenon that
has recently taken on many forms and dimensions.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation's appreciation for the efforts made by
Ambassador Sir Jeremy Greenstock as Chairman of the
CTC, as well as for his unique and outstanding ability
to reconcile his chairmanship with the duties entrusted
to him as the Permanent Representative of his country
to the United Nations. While stressing the need to
discuss and address the root causes of terrorism, we
would also like to reiterate our keen interest in
cooperating positively with the Committee in order to
bring about effective coordination among its members
and adopt the measures necessary to put an end to this
phenomenon.

