Mr. Biorn Lian (Norway): The Norwegian
Government welcomes the draft resolution prepared for
adoption today by the Security Council. This draft
resolution would authorize a Stabilization Force (SFOR)
to carry on the work so successfully started by the
Implementation Force (IFOR) in contributing to the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. Norway
strongly believes that the presence of a multinational
military force, with a robust mandate, is still required in
Bosnia. We support a duration for the mandate of 18
months, so that the force can provide security and
stability, and allow the peace process time to consolidate.

Norway will contribute substantially to SFOR, as we
did to IFOR and before that to the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR). Subject to parliamentary
approval, we will contribute more than 700 troops to
SFOR.

Norway is also prepared to continue to contribute
significantly to the implementation of the civilian aspects
of the Peace Agreement. For 1997, the Norwegian
Government plans to allocate more than $160 million to
the rebuilding of Bosnia and to our military participation
in the Stabilization Force. We will continue our short-
term assistance programme. And we will increase our
longer-term reconstruction efforts. In implementing these
programmes, we will continuously assess how our
contribution can be put to the best possible and most cost-
effective use.

The tasks and needs associated with civilian
reconstruction in Bosnia are enormous. It may therefore
seem paradoxical that the international community should
again have to invest heavily in military resources. It
should be kept in mind that IFOR has not only provided
a stable general environment for the civilian efforts, it
also gave specific support to these efforts. Without the
presence of the multinational force to be authorized today,
deterring the parties from resuming military hostilities,
civilian implementation would be very difficult indeed.

The international community has now set a time
limit for its involvement in Bosnia, in both the civilian
and the military spheres. When the multinational force
leaves after the end of its mandate, continued stability
must be provided by the agreements on confidence-

 

building and arms control signed in Vienna and Florence
earlier this year. These agreements limit the size of forces
and their use, and it is of crucial importance to the stability
of the region that the commitments undertaken, and the
timetables agreed upon, are respected by all.

At the Peace Implementation Conference in London
last week, the state of civilian implementation of the
agreement was thoroughly examined. In some areas
important achievements have been made. Elections have
taken place throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. New and
joint institutions are now being put in place. The next
challenge will be to make these institutions work in an
efficient and democratic manner, based on the provisions
and on the spirit of the Peace Agreement.

The contributions of the International Police Task
Force (IPTF) were rightly emphasized at the London
Conference. And the success of IPTF in assisting the parties
in establishing modern, democratic law enforcement in
Bosnia will be of crucial importance for the development of
civilian society in general.

Democratic institutions must be complemented by free
and independent media. The leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its two entities must establish a legal
framework which will allow a pluralistic media society to
develop. This will be essential to the maintenance of peace
and to the process of reconciliation and democratization.
Norway intends to increase its support for the building of
democracy and free and independent media by providing
financial assistance, expertise and training. The importance
of independent media is currently illustrated by the
developments in Serbia, where a small number of radio
stations and newspapers have played a crucial role in
upholding popular resistance to a Government that refuses
to abide by democratic rules.

We note with deep regret that little or no progress has
taken place in important areas of the peace process. As has
been pointed out many times before, it is not acceptable
when we are asked to contribute to the reconstruction of
houses - in order to allow the return of refugees - that
existing houses are being destroyed in order to prevent
refugees from returning. It is not acceptable when we
finance costly demining operations - in order to facilitate
freedom of movement - that at the same time new mines
are laid precisely to prevent people from moving freely.
Freedom of movement, although a basic concept of the
Dayton Peace Agreement, is still lacking. Furthermore, the
parties' record of cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal on the Former Yugoslavia has been
unsatisfactory. We should all insist that all parties
improve their cooperation with the Tribunal without
delay.

The message that was given to the leaders of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in London was loud and clear: the
international community is determined to continue its
presence and its efforts in the military, political and
economic areas. The mobilization of international
resources to this effect for the benefit of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is impressive. But it must be matched by an
equally strong mobilization of political will by the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its two entities.
It is their country and their future that are at stake. They
must make the peace agreement work.

