Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): As the
international community commemorates the seventieth
anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, we
remember the horrors that led to its creation and the
hope of saving the world from another world war. For
the past 50 years, the forces of the occupying Power, in
full view of the eyes of the international community,
have attacked generations of Palestinians, including
women and children. Israel has consistently violated
every relevant international instrument and United
Nations resolution.

Days, weeks and years pass and nothing happens,
except that the situation deteriorates further. Israel does
not end its usual practices against the Palestinians and
the holy sites in East Jerusalem, or in the West Bank,
and Gaza. Israel persists in its colonialist expansion
and its attempts to change the status quo with respect to
the holy sites and continues to put obstacles in the way
of any peace initiative. In 2013 and 2014, the United
States attempted to mediate between the parties, but to
no avail.

There is no denying that the international community
and the Security Council have a responsibility in
this matter. Meanwhile, Israel persists in its illegal,
immoral practices against Palestinians. It has given
free rein to its settlers and to terrorist groups to carry
out acts of aggression in Jerusalem, to attack citizens
and holy sites, including the Al-Aqsa Mosque. Those
actions seriously aggravate the situation and are a clear
indication of Israel's plans to change the traditional
status quo in that area and escalate the situation.

Israel must shoulder its responsibilities. We
condemn all attacks in East Jerusalem and on the
Al-Aqsa Mosque. We consider them to be in flagrant
violation of the holy sites of the Muslims and their
religion. We have warned the Council that there is
bound to be a reaction against the aggression and
violence; and, indeed, religious hatred and extremism
have been growing. We also condemn the serious
military escalation and the unjustified use of force by
the occupying Power to prevent the Palestinian people
from defending their holy sites, even including extra-
judicial executions.

The international community and the Security
Council must now change their approach to the question
of Palestine. A two-State solution that is just and lasting
and that will enable the people of Palestine to recover
their legitimate rights must be found. If the current
situation is allowed to continue, it will simply get
worse. The growing sense of frustration and injustice
will have devastating consequences for all the parties.
In order to put an end to the tension and uprisings in
the region, it is necessary to end the occupation and
settlement policy, which is, after all, the root cause of
the conflict.

I commend the efforts of the various parties to try
to find a just solution to the question of Palestine. We
appreciate the endeavours of the Security Council, of
the Quartet in its new format, of the Secretary-General
and of United States Secretary of State John Kerry to
defuse the current situation.

In conclusion, I reaffirm that it is high time to
consider what can actually be done to protect the
Palestinian people and the holy sites of Islam. Tunisia
supports the request of President Mahmoud Abbas to
the United Nations to provide international protection
to the Palestinian people in keeping with international
norms and laws.

