Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Envoy De Mistura for his briefing on the results of his
visit to Damascus. We appreciate his visit and thank
him for all his efforts to achieve peace in Syria. We
highly value his engagement in intensive further
consultations in the period ahead so as to ascertain
the possibilities for convening a credible and balanced
United Nations-facilitated, Syrian-owned and Syrian-
led constitutional committee.

Kazakhstan is closely following the situation
presented by the crisis in Syria and supports all
initiatives aimed at resolving the violent conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic as soon as possible. We consider
the protection of Syrian civilians and infrastructure
to be a high priority. At this moment, our attention
should be focused on preserving the peace in Idlib. In
that regard, I would like to thank Russia and Turkey
for the agreement, which has allowed us to prevent
bloodshed and a large-scale humanitarian catastrophe.
We are encouraged by the information concerning the
establishment of humanitarian corridors that can be
used by as many as 3,000 civilians. All of that is the
result of the creation ofa demilitarized zone, which has
become a guarantee for the cessation of hostilities.

We welcome the agreement reached on 24 October
in Moscow by the Astana guarantors to speed up the
formation of the constitutional committee. At the same
time, Astana calls on all interested parties to take into
account the interests of all Syrians in the formation
of the constitutional committee in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015). We also commend the readiness
of the Astana group to pursue dialogue with the so-
called small group on Syria. We know that the dialogue
should be based on that resolution.

Kazakhstan underlines the need to move towards
the creation of the constitutional committee as a starting
point for the revitalization of the political settlement
process in Syria. We hope that the committee will be
formed as soon as possible. At the same time, in the
future the constitutional committee should work in
compliance with the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the United Nations resolutions on
the Syrian issue to protect the sovereignty, independence
and unification of Syria.

Astana underlines the importance of achieving
a political solution in Syria, especially by forming a
constitutional committee as a major step in the political
settlement ofthe crisis. Astana fully supports the Special
Envoy's efforts to achieve a comprehensive settlement
of the regional crisis. It is the Syrians themselves who
should begin to shape the future political system of the
Syrian State, with the necessary legislative reforms,
territorial and administrative structure and presidential
and parliamentary elections. Only a political, diplomatic
approach in the spirit of the Charter and the Council
documents on preventive diplomacy and sustaining
peace can bring proper results.

There is therefore a strong need to continue to
support the goals of the Astana talks and further
Geneva negotiations in order to see positive outcomes.
We believe that the Syrian people are capable of
determining their own future. However, achieving their
aspirations for democracy, reconstruction and stability
is impossible without genuine international support.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
Security Council has a particular responsibility to end
the tragic period in Syria. We urge the Council to unite
around that common political goal by supporting the
Geneva and Astana processes, as well as the Special
Envoy and a comprehensive political settlement.

