China thanks Ambassador Ladeb and Ambassador Dyjani for their respective briefings. Over the past year, the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities; the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism; and the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) maintained normal operations and actively carried out their work despite the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). China commends the Chairs of the three Committees, as well as their teams and the Secretariat staff, for their efforts in that regard. Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction seriously threaten international peace and security. Currently, the coronavirus disease continues to rage throughout the world. The socioeconomic fallout from the pandemic could exacerbate conditions conducive to terrorism and increase medium- and long-term terrorist threats. It could also upset international non-proliferation efforts and increase the risk of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The international community should pay special attention to this issue and respond effectively through cooperation. The 1267 Committee is an important United Nations and Security Council mechanism for counter-terrorism sanctions. Despite the challenges posed by COVID-19, the Committee has continued to fulfil its mandate in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions, conduct regular reviews of the sanctions list, strengthen cooperation with the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team and the Office of the Ombudsperson and improve its working methods. Those efforts have achieved positive results. China supports the 1267 Committee in communicating closely with the countries concerned, strengthening cooperation with regional and subregional counter-terrorism mechanisms and maintaining its important role in assessing terrorist threats and strengthening sanctions. We hope that, with regard to such issues as listing, exemptions and delisting, the Committee will strictly abide by the relevant Security Council resolutions as well as the guidelines for the conduct of its work, and uphold the principles of objectivity, impartiality and professionalism, based on solid evidence and broad consensus, so as to safeguard the authority and effectiveness of the sanctions regime. The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) is mandated by the relevant Security Council resolutions to track new terrorism threats and trends and provide technical assistance to the relevant countries. The Committee plays an active role in the international fight against terrorism. China hopes that the CTC will continue to strengthen dialogue with Member States, analyse the impact of COVID-19 on the counter-terrorism efforts of Member States, especially developing countries, and prevent terrorist organizations from profiting from the pandemic. China supports the Committee's cooperation with international, regional and subregional organizations to jointly tackle new challenges associated with the Internet and new technologies by terrorist organizations to instigate, plan, fund and implement terrorist attacks. The 1540 Committee is an important part of the international non-proliferation mechanism. China supports the Committee in continuing to abide by the mandate of Security Council resolutions, while comprehensively advancing the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), strengthening international non-proliferation cooperation and capacity-building and focusing on meeting the international assistance needs of developing countries. Last month, China adopted an export control law and a biosafety law. In October last year, China and the 1540 Committee jointly organized the third Non-Proliferation Points of Contact Training Course in the Asia-Pacific Region. China has taken concrete actions to continuously improve its own non-proliferation and export control regime. We have contributed to strengthening the capacity- building of countries in the Asia-Pacific region. The novel coronavirus disease pandemic has brought about challenges for international non-proliferation efforts and hampered the work of the Committee. We hope that the Committee will remain steadfast in performing its duties to ensure that next year's comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004) is open, transparent and inclusive. That would guarantee the participation of developing countries, take into account the international obligations and national contexts of each country and promote the lasting and effective implementation of the resolution. Over the past year, the three Committees have strengthened communication and coordination and achieved positive results, which is precisely what the Security Council aims to achieve by holding joint briefings. China hopes that, after the pandemic is brought under control, the three Committees will resume full normal operations as soon as possible and continue to strengthen information-sharing, coordination and cooperation through joint meetings and joint visits so as to form even greater synergies. China firmly rejects terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, as well as the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery. We will continue to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions and support the work of the 1267 Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the 1540 Committee. We hope that the three Committees and their respective expert bodies will strengthen coordination, complement each other, continue to improve their work and pay greater attention to the views of member States in order to contribute more significantly to promoting international counter-terrorism cooperation and improving the international non-proliferation system. Second statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the United Nations, Geng Shuang [Original: Chinese] It is late now, and I apologize for requesting the floor to make a further statement. In his statement, the representative of the United Kingdom made a baseless attack against China for the counter-terrorism and deradicalization measures it has taken in Xinjiang. I must respond. The statement made by the delegation of the United Kingdom fully exposes its double standards on counter-terrorism, which are neither responsible nor constructive. I would like to remind the representative of the United Kingdom of three facts. First Xinjiang province enjoys political stability, economic growth and social harmony, and its people are safe and at peace. Not a single act of terrorism has occurred in the province for quite some time. The human rights situation of people of all ethnic groups in Xinjiang continues to improve. Secondly, during the deliberations on 6 October on issues related to the Third Committee of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, the representatives of approximately 50 countries opposed the attacks on China by a certain country and supported China's measures in Xinjiang. Thirdly, the purpose of today's joint briefing is to review the work of the three Committees, discuss how to enhance communication and coordination among them so as to better implement relevant Security Council resolutions and promote international counter-terrorism cooperation. The statement made by the representative of the United Kingdom did not match those made by the representatives of the majority of countries on the issue and was inconsistent with the atmosphere of today's meeting. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that China rejects terrorism in all its forms and, as always, will actively participate in and promote international counter- terrorism cooperation and make its relevant contributions.
