Mr. Liden (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. In addition, the
following countries align themselves with this
statement: Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav
7

Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia, Iceland and Ukraine.

Developments over the past year have made it
abundantly clear that we must move swiftly towards a
renewal of the peace process in the Middle East. The
European Union remains committed to a
comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict
on the basis of international law; the relevant Security
Council resolutions; the terms of reference of the
Madrid Conference, including land for peace; the Road
Map; the agreements previously reached by the parties;
and the Annapolis process, as well as the Arab Peace
Initiative. We remain equally committed to the two-
State solution, with an independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State, comprising the
West Bank and Gaza, living side by side in peace and
security with the State of Israel.

We welcome the United States Administration's
commitment to pursue vigorously a two-State solution
and a comprehensive peace in the Middle East. The
European Union is ready to work with the parties to the
conflict, as well as with the United States, other
Quartet members and Arab partners, to achieve that
goal.

Both parties must now take concrete measures to
resume peace negotiations, respecting previous
agreements and understandings.

The continued settlement activities, house
demolitions and evictions in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including in East Jerusalem, remain a
serious concern for the European Union. We urge the
Government of Israel to immediately end those
settlement activities, including so-called natural
growth, and to dismantle all outposts erected since
March 2001. The European Union reiterates that the
settlements are illegal under international law and
constitute an obstacle to peace. If there is to be genuine
peace, a way must be found to share Jerusalem as the
capital of two States. The European Union will not
recognize any changes to the pre-1967 borders other
than those agreed by both parties.

A durable solution to the Gaza crisis has to be
achieved through the full implementation of Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009). The European Union
remains gravely concerned at the humanitarian
situation in Gaza and calls for the immediate and
unconditional opening of crossings for the flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to
and from Gaza. Reconstruction and economic recovery
have to be allowed, and the current humanitarian crisis
must be resolved.

All violence must stop, including rocket attacks
on Israel. An effective mechanism to prevent the
smuggling of arms and ammunition into the Gaza Strip
should be put in place. We call on those holding the
abducted Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit to release him
without delay.

We call upon the Government of Israel to work
unequivocally towards the two-State solution. The
European Union welcomes the initial step, announced
by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, of
commitment to a peace that would include a
Palestinian State.

We call upon the Palestinian Authority to
continue to make every effort to improve law and order
in territories under its control, and we welcome steps
taken so far. All parties must stop incitement and
violence against civilians, and respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights must be ensured.
The European Union will continue to follow closely
investigations into alleged violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights.

The European Union calls upon the Palestinians
to step up the intra-Palestinian reconciliation efforts in
support of President Mahmoud Abbas. We support the
mediation by Egypt and the Arab League. Palestinians
should quickly overcome their divisions and find
common ground on the basis of non-violence, with a
view to preserving the prospects for the creation of a
future State. Reconciliation will facilitate the
reconstruction in Gaza and the organization of
elections.

The European Union will promote Palestinian
State-building and intensify work in partnership with
the Palestinian Authority on reforms. The efforts of the
Palestinian Authority to develop an effective and
reformed security sector are positive. We will
cooperate towards additional improvement. Civilian
police and the judicial sector will continue to be a
focus of European Union support.

The declared readiness of the Government of
Israel to promote Palestinian economic development is
a positive sign. This should be carried out within the
framework of the broader perspective of the two-State
solution. The European Union welcomes the positive
steps recently taken by the Israeli authorities regarding
the easing of restrictions on the West Bank. We look
forward to further and sustained improvements in
movement and access in all of the occupied Palestinian
territories. The Agreement on Movement and Access of
2005 must be fully implemented. The European Union
is ready to work closely with Israel, the Palestinian
Authority and international donors in order to achieve
sustainable development of the Palestinian economy.

The European Union will contribute substantially
to post-conflict arrangements aimed at ensuring the
sustainability of peace agreements, while also
addressing the regional economic and security
dimensions. We call on all partners in the international
community to contribute actively to the achievement of
a comprehensive settlement. Arab countries and other
partners should be forthcoming, both politically and
financially, in assisting the Palestinian Authority. In
line with the spirit of the Arab Peace Initiative, the
European Union invites Israel and all Arab countries to
take confidence-building measures in order to
stimulate mutual trust and to create an atmosphere
conducive to conflict resolution.

A lasting settlement of the conflicts between
Israel and Syria and between Israel and Lebanon
should be pursued in parallel, creating mutually
reinforcing processes. The European Union expects
Syria and Israel to resume peace negotiations.

The European Union congratulates the people of
Lebanon on the successful holding of parliamentary
elections, which is an important step in the democratic
development of the country. At the same time and in
the light of some worrying recent developments in
southern Lebanon, which also affect the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the European Union
reiterates its call to all the parties to fully abide by and
implement the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006).

In the light of further developments at the
political level and on the ground, the European Union
stands ready to support concrete and early results on
the path to a comprehensive settlement of the conflict.

