Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): My delegation wishes to
express its appreciation to your delegation, Mr. President,
for convening this debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine. We welcome
Mr. Riad Malki, Foreign Minister of the observer
State of Palestine, to this meeting, and we also the
Special Coordinator of the Middle East Peace Process
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Robert Serry, for his briefing to the Council.

We would like to associate ourselves with the
statement delivered by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).

My delegation welcomes this opportunity to discuss
the situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine. We believe that with sustained focus and
enduring attention, the international community will
find ajust, peaceful and lasting solution to the conflict.

It is in this connection that we call for a halt to
Israeli settlements. Palestinian land is taken for the
construction of more Jewish settlements despite the
opposition of the international community, including
in the Security Council. A case in point is the planned
construction ofsettlements in the so-called E-l region of
Palestine. The construction of the so-called separation
wall, which has been declared an illegal act, is another
case in point. Those and similar acts will only serve
to threaten the viability of the two-State solution and
impede the peace process and final status decisions.

Nigeria believes that the stalled peace process could
be re-energized through direct negotiations between
the parties. We urge the Quartet to spare no effort to
create an enabling environment for those talks to thrive.
We are mindful of the need for the presence of the
political will, and we call upon both parties to come to
the negotiating table without preconditions. The status
quo must be altered and the State of Palestine must be
created, living side by side in peace and security with
its neighbour Israel, within boundaries recognized by
the rest of the world, with its capital in East Jerusalem.

The situation in Gaza is cause for concern. The
Israeli blockade of the Strip, which continues to
incapacitate the economic and social life of the area,
has worsened the plight of the people, who struggle
daily. That continued blockade, which leaves the
most vulnerable of society, particularly women and
children, in abject penury, remains a scar on the
collective conscience of the international community.
It violates humanitarian and human rights laws, as
well as relevant United Nations resolutions and other
conventions of which Israel is a signatory. We therefore
call on Israel to fulfil all its obligations as specified in
those conventions.

Nigeria believes that the two-State solution is the
best option to resolve the protracted conflict in the
Middle East. It not only recognizes the right of the State
of Israel to exist, but to exist in peace and security. We
therefore echo the call of Mr. Serry for concerted action
with a view to salvaging the two-State solution.

My delegation believes that there exists an
opportunity for both Israel and Palestine to live side
by side as independent sovereign entities and that
both parties to the conflict need to show genuine
commitment to the negotiation process. The right
of Israel to exist should be recognized by Palestine,
while Israel should withdraw to its pre-1967 border
and should cede East Jerusalem to Palestine to serve
as the capital of the Palestinian State. In light of that,
on 29 November 2012 my delegation voted in favour
of General Assembly resolution 67/19, according
Palestine the status of a non-member observer State.
We now look forward to the admission of Palestine as
a fully fledged, independent and sovereign Member of
the United Nations, as it rightly deserves. That is long
overdue, and we hope that it will be realized this year.

With regard to the situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic, Nigeria desires to see a speedy and
peaceful settlement of the crisis, driven by a national
reconciliation process led by Syrians themselves.
It is our view that while the Security Council seems
deadlocked on the matter and does not seem to be
inclined to move quickly on the crisis, all sides in the
Syrian conflict should not use that fact as a convenient
excuse to destroy their country and continue to inflict
untold hardships on their helpless populace.

External involvement should assist rather than
polarize the parties to the conflict and compound
sentiments that are already extremely opposed to
each other. We deplore the continued deterioration of
the situation in Syria and observe with regret that the
international community has failed to bring it to an
end by using the instruments of dialogue, mediation
and conciliation. We believe that the international
community, especially the United Nations, has the moral
responsibility to ensure that the Syrian Government and
the rebels cease all hostilities in the overall interests of
the country and the region as a whole.

Peace must be allowed to return to Syria, and all
sides to the conflict must adhere to the rule of law
and exhibit basic decency and consideration for the
suffering of their people. The international community
should therefore help the parties come together and
resolve their differences peacefully, like brothers and
sisters. Let the people of Syria themselves resolve
their differences, assisted only by impartial and well-
meaning outside involvement.

