Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): At the outset, I wish to
join other delegations in extending our welcome to
Ambassador John Bolton.

The Brazilian delegation condemns, in the
strongest terms, the terrorist acts taking place
throughout Iraq. No motivation can justify the deadly
toll of civilians on a daily basis. We express our deep
condolences to the families of the Victims and to the
people and the Government of Iraq. Brazil shares their
pain, as we lost Sergio Vieira de Mello in a brutal
attack against the United Nations headquarters in
Baghdad almost two years ago. Presently, the Brazilian
Government is making additional efforts to search for
the engineer Joao Jose Vasconcellos, Jr., who was
kidnapped last January. The resolution just adopted
reflects our concern for the security of foreign
diplomats, United Nations staff and foreign civilian
personnel in Iraq.

The successful conclusion of the transitional
period with the referendum on a permanent
constitution and the election of a new Government can
provide the conditions that will enable Iraqis to
definitely break with the past and build a new future.
Energies should be focused so as to enable that Vital
political process to prosper. All parties in Iraq have a
responsibility to prevent a stalemate at this stage,
which would mean only the perpetuation of instability,
carnage and suffering.

That responsibility relies on ensuring that the
political process is inclusive and transparent. It is a
task for both those who are taking part in the process,
who must be responsive to the broader interests of
society and must provide for participation in decision-
making, and those who have decided not to engage,
who are asked to lay down their arms or to overcome
their indifference and step in.

The Brazilian Government stresses the right of
the Iraqi people to determine their own political future.
An independent, sovereign and democratic Iraq is to be
built through reconciliation and unity. That is the only
possible way to ensure that their keenest national
interests will prevail and that Iraq will be able to walk
on its own feet once again.

