Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I apologize for taking
the floor again but I must make a few comments on the
illusion under which the delegation of the United States
is operating with regard to my country's vote.

First of all, as the Ambassador of China stated
so eloquently, I would like to recall the high level of
responsibility that the United States shoulders in the
origin and subsequent developments of a conflict whose
consequences we are seeing in Syria. Interventionist
policies in the Middle East - in Iraq, Libya and
Syria - are among the main causes of the emergence
of terrorism and the destabilization of institutions and
States in North Africa.

No institution has been able to address terrorism
because armies and other State institutions have been
destroyed. In that regard, for a State to invoke the
humanitarian situation that it has caused itself is an
act of political cynicism. As a country elected by the
General Assembly to be a non-permanent member
of the Security Council, Venezuela is responsible
for superimposing the elements of the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations on any national
or geopolitical interest. For that reason, in all of our
resolutions and actions, we have firmly supported the
principles of the United Nations to counter foreign
interference, defend sovereignty and support peace.
We do so without employing double standards or
preconditions and we do so in all circumstances.

President Obama has acknowledged his mistakes.
He announced them publicly when referring to the
intervention in Libya. North American domestic
political debate makes many references to the mistakes
made in Iraq and Syria. What is regrettable about the
entire situation is that in spite of this ongoing debate
on Syria here in the Security Council, it is the Syrian
people who are dying and the victims ofa brutal conflict
that has been thrust on them, in which terrorist groups
have destroyed and devastated the entire country.
That means that we have shared but differentiated
responsibilities within the Security Council. Some
countries have been directly involved in this conflict
and could do a little more to achieve a political solution.
That is why we believe in and support the efforts of
the International Syria Support Group, whose two
co-Chairs are members of the Security Council.

In addition, we cannot allow the political discussion
and division in the Council on this type of vote to distract
us from the main goal of the Security Council, which is
to defeat terrorism. As a body, our responsibility should
be to support a political solution. As stated openly,
there are no military solutions. Of course, as human
beings we would like to see a radical change in the
humanitarian situation for the peoples of Syria, Iraq,
Yemen and Libya, on whom great suffering has been
inflicted as a result of the war. That can be achieved
only through political agreement, the cessation of
hostilities and an agreement to be reached by all parties
involved to ensure that Syrians decide their own future
without interference and interventionism.

