The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the members of the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives of Angola, Belgium,
Burundi, Canada, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Japan, Namibia, Nigeria, Rwanda, South
Africa, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Zambia and Zimbabwe, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Leonard She Okitundu,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. She
Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
took the seat reserved for him at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. James Wapakhabulo, Third Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Uganda.

At the invitation of the President, Mr.
Wapakhabulo (Uganda) took the seat reservedfor
him at the side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Stanislaus I.G. Mudenge, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mudenge
(Zimbabwe) took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Abdulkadeer Shareef, Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
the United Republic of Tanzania.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Shareef
(United Republic of Tanzania) took the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Patrick Mazimhaka, Adviser to the
President of Rwanda.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mazimhaka
(Rwanda) took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mangueira
(Angola), Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium), Mr. Nteturuye
(Burundi), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada),
Mr. Kitagawa (Japan), Mr. Theron (Namibia),
Mr. Hart (Nigeria), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa)
and Mr. Musambachime (Zambia) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Mahmoud Kassem, Chairman of the
Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

If there is no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Kassem to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2001/1072, containing a letter dated 10

Sll'V.4437

 

November 2001 from the Secretary-General
transmitting the addendum to the final report of the
Panel.
I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to the following documents:
S/200l/1080, S/200l/1102, S/2001/1107, S/2001/lll3,
S/2001/ll43, S/2001/1156, S/2001/ll75, S/2001/ll61,
S/200l/l 163, S/2001/ll68 and S/2001/1197.

At this meeting, the Chairman of the Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Mahmoud
Kassem, will introduce the report.

I wish to inform members of the Council that,
after having heard the speakers on my list on this item,
the Experts will be meeting at 3 pm. to finalize the
text of the presidential statement that we will be
adopting following our meeting.

I give the floor to Mr. Kassem.


