Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to bid welcome to Mr. Aziz Pahad and to
thank him for his important briefing on the Pretoria
Agreement and on the efforts of the South African
mediation team to implement it.

I wish also to very warmly commend the
Government of South Africa and President Mbeki for
their extraordinary contribution to peace in Cote
d'Ivoire. We also appreciate the efforts of the Ivorian
political actors, who have demonstrated responsibility,
and who have taken this final opportunity to conclude a
political compromise, which will pave the way to a
peaceful end to the crisis. This is not the time or the
place to analyse the Pretoria Agreement and its
relevance, particularly the arrangements intended to lift
the burdens which have weighed on the process and
which held it in perpetual jeopardy.

We consider that the Pretoria Agreement opens
up reasonably promising prospects for a reactivation of
the peace process in Cote d'Ivoire. Every effort must
therefore be made to bring it to prompt fruition. All the
actors responsible for its implementation must play
their appropriate roles. It is clear that the Ivorian
parties bear the major responsibility for the
implementation of the Agreement, but the role of the
international community, especially the United
Nations, is just as important. One of the formidable
challenges involved in supporting the implementation
of the Agreement is that of maintaining confidence in
the process by ensuring that each party shoulders its
share of the responsibility in good faith and in a timely
manner.

The armed forces of the two camps, as they have
done in the past, have shown the way by scrupulously
following the disarmament timetables. It is important
for political leaders to fulfil their obligations. Indeed,
success in carrying out this key element of the
settlement of the crisis depends on action with respect
to the other provisions of the Agreement. Of course,
there is the question of article 35 of the Constitution
which we hope will be resolved tomorrow, as well as
the issue of legislative harmonization so that October's
elections will be held in proper conditions. It is
encouraging to note in this regard that, in their
aspirations to peace, Ivorians of all convictions have
lent their support to the Pretoria Agreement. Ivorian
political leaders, including President Laurent Gbagbo
and the leaders of other institutions of the Republic,
will be able to meet the legitimate expectations of the
people for peace, security and development.

For its part, the international community cannot
allow this historic opportunity to help Ivorians find
peace and security slip away. More than ever before, it
must be prepared to support the mediation in those
areas where it has agreed to play a role in monitoring
the implementation of the Agreement. In particular, it
is important for the international community to clearly
express its willingness to support the mediation in its
role of arbiter, and to firmly support any decision it
needs to take along those lines. The path of the
implementation of the Agreement will be arduous and
strewn with obstacles. Obstacles will arise, and they
will be easier to overcome if the parties realize that the
mediation is supported and trusted by the international
community.

It is clear also that, in addition to political
support, financial and technical assistance will be
critical to bring the process to a successful conclusion.
The programme of disarmament and the social
reintegration of demobilized elements and members of
dismantled militias, as well as the restructuring of the
armed forces, will require considerable expertise and
resources. The idea of temporary recruitment of 600
members of the Forces nouvelles, who, together with
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI), would be responsible for security in the
northern part of the country, seems to be relevant in
three areas: this group would participate in the process
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR); it would strengthen the confidence of the
Forces nouvelles in the process; and it would fill a
security vacuum in that part of the country during the
transition period. Implementing that plan will also
require resources. The question of financing is
especially urgent because international financial
institutions have suspended their cooperation with the
country. We therefore need to find a rapid solution to
this problem.

Support for the electoral process is another
element that merits the attention of the international
community, especially since the United Nations will be
playing a greater role in it. Every effort must be made
to ensure that the elections take place on the scheduled
date and in the best possible conditions.

To sum up, the prospects opened by the Pretoria
Agreement and the priorities it sets mean that the
international community will very probably have to
modify its operation on the ground, including through
the draft resolution that the Security Council is
preparing to discuss in the next few days. Algeria is
prepared to make an active and constructive
contribution, as we are convinced that every effort
should be made to help this country succeed in its
peace initiative.

