Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by saying how much our thoughts today
are with all of the Tanzanian Blue Helmets killed as
they carried out their duties in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo, as well as with all ofthe families
and friends of those who lost their lives while serving
the United Nations. On behalf of France, I would like
once again to express our most sincere condolences,
sympathy and deep sadness to the Government and the
people of Tanzania.

France welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2391 (2017), which provides operational
and logistical support from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) to the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). Thanks to
this resolution, the security forces of the G-5 Sahel
countries operating in Mali as part of the Joint Force
will soon be able to enjoy the support of MINUSMA in
terms of supplies, medical evacuation and engineering
support. That support will play a crucial role in terms
of strengthening the effectiveness and scope ofthe Joint
Force's operations, as it will be provided directly on the
ground as opposed by way of bilateral financing. It will
meet the interests of MINUSMA, which has everything
to gain from a Joint Force that is equipped to achieve
the goals it has set for itself. It will be fully financed
by international voluntary contributions and centred
around a mechanism under the European Union. It
will be set up according to modalities that ensure that
there is no negative impact on MINUSMA's capacity to
implement its mandate and to provide security for its
staff- a crucial point for us.

It is important for the technical agreement between
the G-5, the United Nations and the European Union, on
which that support is to be based, be concluded as soon
as possible. I am delighted to commend all of those
Ambassadors who are here representing the G-5 Sahel
countries. They are both colleagues and friends.
The resolution that we have just adopted, however,
does not just focus on creating an operational link
between the G-5 Sahel Joint Force and MINUSMA.
In a kind of extension of resolution 2359 (2017), this
new resolution makes significant progress in five other
areas.

First, it once again clearly and strongly welcomes
the determination of the G-5 countries to pool their
efforts to combat the terrorist threat. Resolution 2391
(2017) recognizes the significant progress that has
been made in that area in just a few months, and urges
everybody to shoulder their responsibility so that the
Joint Force reaches full operational capacity as soon as
possible. That is decisive for the next step.

Secondly, this resolution recognizes the
authorization that the Joint Force enjoys based on the
mandate granted by the African Union. It encourages the
G-5 Sahel to continue its efforts integrate its initiatives
into its regional and international environment by
holding regular meetings of the support group.

Thirdly, it endorses the role played by the European
Union in coordinating international contributions at the
request of the G-5 Sahel States.

Fourthly, it notes that the G-5 Joint Force will be
a success only if there are accompanying development
efforts on the ground and respect for fundamental
human rights. It calls on the G-5 States to create an
appropriate environment to that end, and calls upon
all G-5 Sahel partners, first and foremost the United
Nations, to support its implementation.

Fifthly, the resolution strongly underscores that
there can be no lasting stability in the Sahel without
the full and effective implementation of the Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. It also clearly
reminds all Malian parties of their responsibilities
vis-a-vis the sanctions regime put in place pursuant to
resolution 2374 (2017).

Resolution 2391 (2017) therefore represents a
genuine and important new phase in terms of the
Security Council's support for the G-5 Sahel. It is indeed
a turning point, as we are together opening up a new
avenue for United Nations support for the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force, which is a crucial aspect ofits effectiveness
on the ground.

Just a few months ago, the idea that the Council
could reach agreement on supporting MINUSMA
by providing means to support the Joint Force was
impossible to envisage. Today's outcome has been
possible thanks to the fact that we have worked extremely
hard over recent weeks - on the basis of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/869), the Council's
mission to the Sahel and the ministerial meeting held
in October - with a view to identifying the elements
of an eventual consensus based on an incremental and
cooperative approach. I would like to commend all our
teams, including my own, which worked doggedly and
with great determination over many weeks.

This resolution therefore is not only a success for the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force but also for the Security Council,
which has shown its ability to provide a substantive
response to one of the main threats to international
peace and security in the world today. It demonstrates
the consensus that now exists around this table on the
importance of the international community's support to
African countries that are coming together to combat
terrorism. This is a cause in which France believes very
strongly, and one that we will continue to support very
energetically in New York and elsewhere.

Once again, I would like to thank all Security
Council delegations for their commitment. In particular,
I would like to thank my colleague and American friend
Ambassador Nikki Hailey, with whom we had a frank
and, I believe, constructive dialogue throughout the
entire negotiation process.

This resolution favourably positions us together so
as to move ahead on the important path that remains
before us. The technical agreement mechanism, which
became necessary because ofconstraints imposed on the
Council today, is not the one that we initially favoured.
However, it nevertheless constitutes a solid foundation
for making further progress based on the Secretary-
General's future semi-annual reports, provided that
the G-5 Sahel States continue to take the necessary
steps to move towards the full operationalization of the
Joint Force and take advantage of the support already
provided to them so as to record their first successes
on the ground. More than ever, France believes that
the United Nations has a central role to play with
regard to international support for the Joint Force,
first and foremost owing to our firm commitment to
multilateralism and the centrality of the United Nations
in that regard, as well as for the sake of effectiveness,
because we believe that the United Nations provides us
with an existing functional framework to coordinate
our work in the most rational way possible.
The security threat facing the Sahel concerns us
all owing to its implications for international peace
and security. The G-5 Sahel Joint Force is the right
response to that threat. It is therefore essential that the
G-5 Sahel and the international community be able to
take advantage of that opportunity together. Within the
Council, our responsibility is to provide the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force support commensurate with the stakes
involved. We have taken an important step in that
direction today, and we must continue to move forward
during this demanding phase united and resolutely, with
the same ambitious spirit of consensus that enabled us
to achieve today's outcome together.

Members can count on France's commitment in
that regard. My country will remain ready at all levels
to support the G-5 Sahel, and, next week, we will host
a high-level meeting aimed at moving forward the
operationalization of the Force and the implementation
of its support.

