The President (spoke in Spanish): After
consultations among members of the Security Council,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
progress achieved so far in critical areas for the
consolidation of Haiti's stability, namely political
dialogue, extension of State authority, including
border management, strengthening of security,
and rule of law and human rights.

"The Council notes with concern the
challenges in the area of social and economic
development, as there has been a marked
deterioration in the living standards of the vast
majority of Haitians. The Council reiterates the
need for security to be accompanied by social and
economic development as a way for Haiti to
achieve lasting stability. In this regard, the
Council calls upon MINUSTAH and the United
Nations Country Team to enhance further their
coordination with the Government of Haiti and
international and regional partners, while bearing
in mind the ownership and primary responsibility
of the Government and people of Haiti.

"The Council recognizes the vital
importance of the high-level donor conference on
Haiti to be hosted by the Inter-American
Development Bank in Washington, DC, on
14 April. The Council welcomes the valuable
continuing support of donors and urges them to
make available the additional technical and
financial assistance required by the Government
of Haiti to meet the country's immediate
humanitarian, early recovery and reconstruction
needs, while laying the foundations for
sustainable economic and social development.

"The Council urges the institutions of Haiti
to intensify their efforts to meet the Haitian
population's basic needs, and to work together to
promote dialogue, the rule of law and good
governance.

"The Security Council reaffirms the need
for the upcoming elections for the renewal of one
third of the Senate to be inclusive, free and fair.
The Council calls on all political actors in Haiti
to ensure the elections are held in a peaceful
atmosphere.

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
support for MINUSTAH and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for their
efforts to improve stability and governance in
Haiti, while emphasizing the need for
MINUSTAH to continue to adjust to changing
circumstances on the ground, and expresses its
appreciation to all Member States who support
the stabilization process, in particular the troop-
and police-contributing countries."

This statement will be issued as a document of

the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/4.

I thank those who participated in today's rich

debate for their statements.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my

list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.
