The President (spoke in French): | shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Belgium. With regard to the humanitarian consequences of the Idlib offensive, the representative of Germanyspoke also on behalf of Belgium as the humanitarian co-penholder. I will therefore limit my statement to several remarks concerning the political dimension. First, we are deeply alarmed by the military escalation under way. Let us be clear - we support the fight against terrorism, but efforts to combat terrorism can in no way ever release parties from their obligations under international humanitarian law, including the principles of distinction, precaution and proportionality. Secondly, unfortunately the situation demonstrates that delegating the work of achieving a ceasefire to the Astana format has not succeeded. Of the many ceasefires that have failed, the most recent one lasted only two days. The crisis and especially the risk of any potential miscalculation resulting from clashes among the various parties pose an enormous threat to international peace and security. Moreover, we have seen this film many times and, regrettably, we know all too well how it ends. It is civilians who suffer the consequences. We therefore call on all parties to exercise maximum restraint. We expect the United Nations, in particular the Special Envoy, to spare no effort to restore calm. We call for a cessation of hostilities at the national level, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), and for a negotiated solution to sustainably address the complex challenges in the north-west of the country and Syria as a whole. The only path leading to stability is a credible and inclusive political solution facilitated by the United Nations, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). Thirdly, beyond its devastating impact on civilians, bombing urban areas destroys homes, schools, hospitals and electricity and water distribution networks. How can the Syrian authorities bomb such infrastructure in urban areas and, at the same time, expect the international community to pay for reconstruction? I reaffirm that, in keeping with the policy of its European partners, Belgium will not participate in the reconstruction process without the solid foundation of a political solution. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
