Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Security Council decided relatively
recently to consider the humanitarian situation in
Syria, and only after it became clear that attempts to
use the deterioration of the humanitarian situation to
effect regime change were unsuccessful.

The Russian Federation supported the resolution just
adopted (resolution 2139 (2014)) because, in the process
of negotiating its text, many Russian considerations
were taken into account, and the resulting document
was thus of a balanced nature.
The main aim of international efforts concerning
the humanitarian crisis in Syria, including today's
resolution, is to improve the situation in Syria and
facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance to
the population in need. In order to achieve that, all
parties must cooperate with international humanitarian
agencies. Those agencies, in coordination with the
Syrian authorities and with the active assistance of
the Russian Federation, are carrying out difficult,
painstaking work in very difficult conflict conditions.

That work has seen positive and concrete results,
although not as quickly as we would have liked. There
has been a gradual opening up of the population
centres. Recent examples include the southern
suburbs of Damascus - Yalda, Babila, Bayt Sahm
and Aqraba - where until very recently, residents
were firing weapons against soldiers. They are now
patrolling with them and pooling their efforts to combat
banditry and terrorism. The established ceasefire in
Barzeh and Moadamiya is important. Thousands of
civilians have returned home. Progress is being made
on the reconstruction of the infrastructure in all the
population centres mentioned, and soon there are going
to be functioning medical centres and schools.

Progress in improving the difficult situation for
civilians has shown the value of effective humanitarian
operations and of providing support with the coordinated
action of all participating parties. That experience
needs to be expanded to other areas of Syria as well.
There need to be agreements on localized ceasefires,
access for humanitarian supplies and the exchange of
prisoners.

There have also been other advances. An air
bridge to provide humanitarian access to Qamishli has
been organized. Humanitarian terminals have been
opened. Vaccination campaigns against polio have
been successfully carried out throughout the country,
reaching over 3.4 million children.

Despite the difficult conditions on the ground,
areas that are difficult to access in Aleppo, Idlib,
Homs, Hama and Dayr Al-Zour and Raqqa have
received more than 51 convoys. Work is under way to
normalize the humanitarian situation in the Palestinian
Al-Yarmouk camp. However, the armed rebels in Syria
are continuing to plunder convoys, kill humanitarian
workers and attack civilian facilities, using civilians as
human shields and carrying out terrorist attacks. There
is still no way to provide assistance to the besieged
areas of Nubul and Zahra, besieged by the rebels, in
Aleppo, Fuah and Kifarya in the Idlib governorate,
Adra in the suburbs of Damascus, and the northeast
province of Hasakah.

Similar activities by the opposition to undermine
humanitarian operations must be swiftly and firmly
condemned by all members of the international
community. We believe that the resolution appropriately
assesses such actions, and the appropriate signals will
reach those who are sabotaging humanitarian efforts in
Syria.

The resolution adopted today focuses on the need
to provide humanitarian access based on a mutual,
unpoliticized and impartial approach and in line with
the guiding principles of the United Nations in the
area of providing humanitarian assistance. That fully
applies to the provisions of the resolution regarding the
provision of humanitarian assistance across front lines
and the borders of neighbouring countries. We believe
that humanitarian workers will adhere to those rules
and the Secretary-General will bear this in mind in his
reports to the Security Council. We trust that Syrian
authorities and the opposition will implement the
resolution appropriately by freeing besieged areas and
so-called remote regions.

The Security Council, irrespective of the progress
achieved by this resolution and its implementation
by all sides, can consider further steps. However, we
would like to underscore that the resolution does not
provide for an automatic imposition of sanctions - the
Security Council would not have allowed that.

The resolution once again draws attention to the
fact that, given the lack of a political settlement, the
humanitarian situation will continue to deteriorate.
We believe that an improvement in the humanitarian
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, just as a solution
to the problems that are causing the ongoing and bloody
conflict in the country, will be possible only through
a comprehensive political settlement. That is possible
by ensuring sustainable progress in negotiations among
the Syrian parties based on the Geneva communique
of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). That document
is based on the understanding that decisions on
fundamental matters of developing the Syrian State
will be taken by the Syrian people themselves, based
on mutual consent. Only decisions taken in such a way
can be viable and lead to the settlement of the conflict
in the country, which has already suffered so much.

A central element of the resolution is its strong
anti-terrorism component, which is in line with the
June 2013 declaration adopted by the Group of Eight
Heads of State and Government meeting at Lough Erne.
It calls on all Syrian sides to break with terrorists. In
that regard, we underscore the need for the opposition
groups not only to assume their responsibilities but to
support the fight against terrorism in Syria in order to
eradicate the problem and to work together with the
Government to overcome that challenge.

We believe that the Security Council should
swiftly proceed to discuss a further draft document on
countering terrorist activities in Syria.

