Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I wish to congratulate Poland on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
China also wishes to thank High Representative Inzko
for his briefing.

China respects the sovereignty, independence,
national unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We respect the choice made by the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina for the future of
their country. We support the peaceful coexistence of
different ethnicities in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
their search for common development.

We welcome the efforts made by Bosnia and
Herzegovina in promoting national reconciliation
and economic and social development. We hope
that the country's different ethnicities will be fully
and actively engaged in consolidating the progress
made in the political process and in society building,
seek consensus through dialogue and consultation,
resolve their differences by peaceful means and fully
implement the Dayton Peace Accord, so as to promote
greater development in all areas, which will enable
the different peoples of the country to truly enjoy the
peace dividend.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country in
the Balkans. Stable development and ethnic harmony
are in the common interests of the international
community and the countries of the region. The
international community should take a balanced and
prudent approach and pay special attention to and
accommodate the views of all the parties concerned,
so as to play a constructive role in helping the country
achieve national reconciliation and long-term stability
and development.

China welcomes the effort by High Representative
Inzko to advance the country's political process. We
hope that, within the purview of his mandate, he will
play an active role in promoting the implementation
of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We hope that the
European Union-led peacekeeping force will continue
to strengthen communication and cooperation with the
parties concerned and help the country achieve lasting
peace and stability.

China is ready to play its part, together with the rest
of the international community, in helping the country
truly achieve lasting peace, stability and development.

