Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow me,
first of all, to thank the Bolivian presidency for taking
the initiative to organize this debate on the important
issue of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. I would also like to thank Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu and Mr. Joseph Ballard for their particularly
informative presentations.

Assuredly, our debate is timely, given the current
situation, which reminds us constantly of the sad
realities that are the threat of terrorism and the risk
that non-State actors may acquire nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons. Those threats are all the more
worrying against the backdrop of the rapid developments
in science and technology, globalization and the
constantly changing business and trade environment,
which are new factors that non-State actors can take
advantage ofin order to gain access to weapons of mass
destruction.

Unfortunately, that risk is very real today with the
use of chemical weapons in the Middle East, as well
as with regard to issues related to cybersecurity, the
consequences of which could be even more serious
if such attacks were directed against nuclear power
plants, for example. That is why the topic under
discussion today should encourage us to redouble our
efforts and fully implement the obligations set out in
resolution 1540 (2004). Moreover, strengthening the
prevention system to avoid the humanitarian, political,
economic and environmental disaster that could result
from the use of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons
by non-State actors, including terrorists, is more urgent
than ever.

In that connection, the Security Council, seriously
concerned about that threat, felt compelled to address
a series of requests and to impose a set of obligations
on Member States through the adoption of resolution
1540 (2004). Today we must accurately take inventory
of all the sources of weapons of mass destruction
throughout the world in order to ensure that they can be
systematically safeguarded or simply destroyed. While
important steps have already been taken, much remains
to be done.

In the light of all those challenges, my country
is of the view that, in today's interdependent world
where our interests are interlinked, we must strengthen
cooperation in terms of border control, monitoring
of financial flows and Internet networks, and legal
assistance in order to develop an appropriate strategy to
prevent weapons of mass destruction from falling into
the wrong hands. To that end, we will need to generate
synergies among all the stakeholders concerned and
share our experiences.

Moreover, countries should take steps to implement
their obligations arising from resolution 1540 (2004).
Those include, inter alia, first, developing voluntary
five-year national action plans for implementing
resolution 1540 (2004); secondly, establishing national
coordination mechanisms for detecting activities by
non-State actors in order to boost cooperation among
the relevant national actors; thirdly, the implementing
national legislative frameworks on terrorism; and,
fourthly, putting in place physical protection systems for
nuclear, radiological, biological and chemical materials
and their installations to cover the entire life cycle of
said material and to govern their transportation, as
well as to strengthen the capacities of border services,
in particular through the training of agents and the
provision of detection equipment.

In 2016, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2325 (2016), which substantially reinforced
the provisions already in force in resolution 1540
(2014). It should be noted that the measures added to the
recommendations emanating from the comprehensive
review process of resolution 1540 (2004) have enabled
Member States, relevant international and regional
organizations and civil society to redirect their
efforts and strategies towards a more comprehensive,
coordinated and consistent approach in order sustainably
address the multiple challenges facing international
peace and security. If properly implemented, those
proposals for concrete, practical and appropriate
measures by Member States could greatly contribute
to strengthening the system in order to prevent any
potential catastrophe that could be caused by the use of
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors.

In the case of Africa, an analysis of the data shows
steady progress in the implementation of the measures
established by resolution 1540 (2004), in particular in
terms of the development of appropriate legislation
and the submission of implementation reports. That
development should be welcomed, although we must
bear in mind that such measures need to be improved,
in particular through the adoption of national
legislative frameworks for biological weapons, which
many African countries still lack. There is also a need
for effective domestic controls to monitor sensitive
materials and technologies.

Moreover, the Senegalese delegation would like to
recall the political commitment of the African Union to
support the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by
African States, which was reflected in the organization
of several meetings on the subject. We therefore call for
the continuation of such cooperation initiatives between
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and African countries, the
majority of which have benefited from the Committee's
support in terms of the implementation of their
obligations under the resolution.

Assistance is also akey aspect ofthe implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Progress could be made, in
particular as we seek to improve assistance procedures,
data gathering and an analysis of assistance needs.
We could also further our discussions on the topic of
assistance with relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations and, where appropriate, with
non-governmental organizations. That would require
enhancing the capacities of the 1540 Committee and its
Group of Experts to better provide assistance to those
countries that request it.

At the same time, the Security Council could
consider ways to strengthen the warning and prevention
system to combat the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, in particular among non-State
actors, by strengthening coordination among the
system's components, as well as by monitoring the
implementation of the obligations under resolution
1540 (2004) and through an analysis of the risks of
proliferation.

We also encourage the training of national focal
points, and therefore call on the Member States with
sufficient resources to contribute them. We reiterate
the need to create a sustainable mechanism to improve
interaction and coordination among those requesting
and those providing assistance in order to avoid
duplication and identify best practices for assistance
in order to replicate them. The primary challenge is
therefore to improve the coordination of existing tools
in order to limit the likelihood for non-State actors to
engage in proliferation.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Senegal's
willingness and unwavering commitment to make
every effort to combat the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. To that end, my country has taken
steps to fulfil its obligations under resolution 1540
(2004). Among those measures, we underscore the
establishment of national coordination mechanisms
to detect the activities of non-State actors, which
facilitates collaboration between the relevant national
actors, and the implementation of programmes for the
technical and human capacity-building of the National
Commission on Nuclear, Biological and Chemical
Weapons and the Authority for Radiation Protection
and Nuclear Safety.

Senegal will continue to focus its efforts on fulfilling
its commitments in this area, because it is aware that
cooperation and the pooling of efforts, experiences and
expertise are the only way to ensure that we will have a
better understanding of these threats in order to develop
consistent, holistic and comprehensive strategies and
approaches to effectively deal with these challenges.

