Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France,
alongside the United States and the United Kingdom,
asked for this emergency meeting to be convened
because the information we have received from Aleppo
marks a new height in the military escalation and a
further descent into the abyss that characterize the
tragedy in Syria. This information, corroborated by
the statement made just now by Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura - whom, on
behalf of France, I thank for his involvement - attests
to a level of violence that has certainly never been
attained in five years of a conflict that, I recall, is the
greatest humanitarian tragedy since the Second World
War.

F olllowing the unspeakable attack on ahumanitarian
convoy last Monday, on Thursday the regime - with the
support of its backers - launched a major air offensive
the clear objective of which is to bring Aleppo to its
knees as soon as possible. The streets of Aleppo are
no longer anything but a heap of ruins. According to
the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, hundreds
of victims - including many children - have have
been massacred in three days by the regime's bombs.
As we speak, 275,000 civilians remain prisoners in the
city and live in terror of indiscriminate bombing by the
Syrian regime and its active supporters.

We are horrified by this new military gambit of
the Syrian regime, which has persisted for months in
trying to take Aleppo with the help of its supporters.
Under the guise of fighting terrorism, the regime
indiscriminately bombs homes, maternity clinics,
hospitals, schools, refugee camps and neighbourhoods
held by the moderate opposition. While the international
community has sought for months to secure a truce, the
Al-Assad regime has tirelessly violated international
humanitarian law, the resolutions of the Security
Council and the most basic principles of humanity.

In many ways, Aleppo is to Syria what Sarajevo was
to Bosnia and Herzegovina, or Guernica to the Spanish
Civil War - a symbolic city, a crossroads city, a
martyred city. Aleppo, a symbolic city several thousand
years old that has been declared a World Heritage site;
a crossroads city, where so many countless cultures
have met and mingled, has today become a martyred
city. That symbol of civilization is under a siege that
can only be called medieval. This is retrogressive and,
frankly, shameful.

The information at our disposal indicates the
systematic use of a new type of incendiary weapon
and high-tech ammunition and subammunition that
puncture bunkers and cause the collapse of an entire
building in one impact. The use of such weapons against
civilians should not surprise us, unfortunately, in the
hands of a regime that has for many years bombarded
its population with chlorine gas, phosphorus and
explosive barrels. As the Secretary-General recalled
yesterday, the indiscriminate and systematic use of
such weapons in residential neighbourhoods constitutes
a war crime - yes, a war crime - nd such a crime
cannot go unpunished.

If we do nothing to prevent the total destruction of
Aleppo, this week will be recalled as the moment when
diplomacy failed and barbarity and brutality triumphed.
The Council and the International Syria Support
Group have met this week to seek an agreement on the
cessation of hostilities and immediate and unhindered
access to humanitarian aid. These discussions have not,
for now, been unsuccessful. The military escalation
now under way threatens the fragile hope for a truce
in which we could still believe only a week ago. Russia
imagines that it can restore the trust of its partners by
negotiating a cessation of hostilities with one hand
while supporting the regime that is bombarding Aleppo
with the other.

Today, saving Aleppo must be our priority. A few
weeks ago, Russia and the United States were able to
agree to an operational plan for establishing a cessation
of hostilities and ensuring the delivery of humanitarian
aid. France supported the agreement, as it had supported
all Vienna process initiatives to alleviate the suffering
of civilians. The immediate implementation of that
agreement, beginning with Aleppo, is our only hope
and must therefore be our priority. France also calls
for the establishment of a robust mechanism to monitor
the cessation of hostilitiess, which alone can restore
the necessary confidence and ensure the consolidation
of the truce, first in Aleppo and then throughout the
country. Through its Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Jean-Marc Ayrault, my country has made detailed
proposals to that end.

If there is one zone where the cessation of hostilities
must be implemented on a priority basis, it is Aleppo.
If there is one zone that the regime's aircraft must
immediately be forbidden to overfly, it is Aleppo. If
there is one zone where the people are urgently in need
of emergency humanitarian assistance, it is Aleppo.

The Security Council is today at a moment of
truth. It must rise to the immense responsibility that is
incumbent upon it, and thus upon each of its members
and all of us. We expect Russia in particular to give
proof of its genuine readiness to stop supporting the
military option and to truly seek a negotiated solution
to the Syrian conflict with all the means and leverage
at its disposal. If we wish to end the tragedy in Aleppo
and Syria, we must ultimately put all our cards on the
table, call things by their rightful names, and find a way
to unite around a collective approach. That is the only
possible option, howsoever difficult it may be, to break
the current deadlock and restore the political dynamic
that is the only way to stop the Syrian conflict.

