Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): Allow me to begin by
welcoming Assistant Secretary-General Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco and thanking him for his candid
briefing.

Our meeting today comes at the end of an intense
transition period that has witnessed important political
statements, meetings and events, bringing new
opportunities and challenges.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered later on behalf of the European Union, but
allow me to add a few comments.

Croatia sees this meeting as representing hopeful
momentum towards taking concrete steps to achieve a
two-State solution and regional peace. We are
encouraged by the vigorous engagement of the United
States Administration, which has created the impetus
for arriving at a lasting solution in the Middle East,
including through the personal determination of
President Obama and today's activities of the special
envoy, Senator Mitchell. We also welcome the
commitment of Prime Minister Netanyahu and
President Abbas to the two-State solution. Croatia
believes that our collective interest is to remain focused
on a shared, clear and fundamental objective - the
establishment of an independent, democratic and viable
Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel, and a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the region.

For the international community, this means
focusing on creating conditions conducive to the peace
process and encouraging the parties to resume
negotiations as soon as possible, with a view to settling
all permanent status issues on the basis of the two-State
solution, mutual recognition, freedom from violence,
incitement and terror, and respect for previous
agreements and understandings. There is no other way
for the two parties to realize their legitimate
aspirations.

This means respecting the integrity of the
bilateral negotiations while also recognizing the
regional dimension of the process. We value the efforts
of the responsible regional partners to secure a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East
based on the Arab Peace Initiative.

Croatia understands that the political and
diplomatic process remains inextricably linked to the
situation on the ground. We understand that it may be
illusory to expect credible progress without positively
changing the realities on the ground, or without
properly addressing the obstacles. That is why it is
crucial for both parties to implement their obligations
under the Road Map and to refrain from provocative
acts or unilateral actions that could prejudge the
outcome of the negotiations or erode trust and
confidence in the peace process. This makes it
necessary to end settlement activities, dismantle all
outposts and refrain from any unilateral action.

Division among the Palestinians and their
inadequate institutional and security capacity, as well
as the regional environment, are causes for concern.
Croatia appreciates the mediation efforts of Egypt and
the Arab League in overcoming Palestinian divisions.

Another ongoing cause for concern is the
humanitarian situation in Gaza. Croatia continues to
believe that this crisis ultimately requires a political
solution. The controlled and sustained opening of
border crossings, matched with appropriate monitoring
arrangements, is essential for securing adequate
supplies of food, medicine and cash, as well as
reconstruction and economic recovery. In that context,
the full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) is
critical to obtaining a durable solution to the Gaza
crisis and responding to legitimate Israeli security
concerns. Sustained and indiscriminate rocket attacks
on southern Israel and the ongoing arms smuggling
cannot be tolerated.

Croatia understands that the renewed push for
peace demands that both parties take decisive steps.
The Palestinian Authority needs to continue its efforts
to consolidate progress in developing an effective and
reformed security sector and functioning institutions.
Israel must be reassured that Palestinian statehood will

not come at the expense of its legitimate security
concerns. Both parties must take credible steps to
overcome the disruptive effects of the crisis in
confidence and implement their obligations under the
Road Map.

There also needs to be improvement in the lives
of ordinary Palestinians throughout the West Bank and
Gaza, including by promoting Palestinian economic
development based on the full implementation of the
Agreement on Movement and Access. We are pleased
to note the recent trend of economic and security
revival in the West Bank, and welcome steps taken by
Israel towards removing some of the road blocks in the
West Bank. Israel and Arab countries in turn would
need to undertake confidence-building measures. We
share the view that the comprehensive peace process
needs to see progress both on the Israeli-Palestinian
and on the Syrian-Lebanese tracks, including by
preparing the Moscow conference.

Allow me to briefly turn to Lebanon. Croatia
congratulates the people of Lebanon on holding free,
fair and peaceful elections - a remarkable
demonstration of their yearning for democracy and
normalcy. With the process of the formation of a
Government under way, which we hope will continue
in a spirit of dialogue and responsibility, it remains
crucial, as the recent incident in South Lebanon clearly
demonstrated, for all political actors to remain
committed to the full implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Taif Accords and
to address the question of disarming Hizbullah, which
remains of central importance to peace and stability in
Lebanon and the region.

