Mr. Prosor (Israel): I would like to extend my
appreciation to New Zealand for putting the spotlight,
for the very first time in the Council, on the peace and
security challenges facing small island developing
States (SIDS).

Albert Einstein said, "In matters of truth and
justice, there is no difference between large and small
problems." In matters of truth and justice, there is
also no difference between large and small countries.
More than a fifth of the Member States of the United
Nations are classified as small island developing
States. Whether in the Pacific, the Caribbean or
off the coast of Africa, members of this unique
community - SIDS - are disproportionately affected
by climate change, environmental degradation and
natural disasters. These challenges pose considerable
obstacles to their development and, ultimately, to their
peace and security and to ours.

One major challenge for SIDS is the health of
our oceans. Although we in Israel may not have vast
oceans lapping at our shores, we know that they are
the livelihood of our blue planet. Healthy oceans are
not only essential for the environment, but they are
at the core of the world's economic prosperity, social
resilience and our peace and security. While the health
of our oceans is an issue that we must all confront
together, the small island developing States are at the
vanguard of this global effort and face the highest risks
should we all fail.

In this campaign, it is not the size of the country
but the bravery and determination of its people that will
make the difference. One example we can look to is
Palau, which has demonstrated courage and leadership,
announcing it will establish the world's first nation-wide
marine sanctuary. Palau will designate its entire ocean
territory as a regenerative zone for sharks, whales, tuna
and countless other precious species.

When asked about his country's tremendous
efforts in that regard, the President of Palau, Tommy
Remengesau, replied powerfully and succinctly, "We
have no choice - the ocean is our way of life". The
international community has no choice but to stand
with the SIDS to protect our oceans and to combat
climate change.
Around the globe, SIDS are proactively coming
together and partnering with other countries to employ
innovative ways to combat climate change. For example,
the Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre in
Belize coordinates the Caribbean region's response
to climate change. Efforts to incorporate renewable
energy, particularly solar power, to combat climate
change are growing in this region. Recently, energy
professionals from Trinidad and Tobago, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and Belize came to Israel to undergo a
unique course of intensive training in renewable sources
of energy. Israel and its Caribbean SIDS partners are
working together to bring renewable energy solutions
to the region because we know that small countries can
produce big ideas.

The courage of SIDS, disproportionate to their size
and population, is also quite evident in the realm of
peacemaking. Some of the smallest SIDS - some of
the smallest Member States in this family of nations, in
fact- are proud contributors to peacekeeping. Countries
such as Vanuatu, Samoa and Grenada contribute police
officers to peacekeeping efforts around the world. For
decades we in Israel have appreciated the presence
of the Fijian peacekeepers serving in United Nations
peacekeeping missions in the Golan Heights and in
Lebanon and in the multilateral force in the Sinai. Far
away from home, the Fijian peacekeepers have earned
a place of respect for their contribution to peace and
security in our region.

Israel is a small island of sorts, a State in the midst
of an often turbulent sea of hostility. We face important
challenges to peace and security, but in our early years
the primary strategic threat to Israel was the scarcity of
water and the challenges of developing our agricultural
infrastructure 4 issues that are still plaguing many
SIDS. That is not ancient history, nor is it theory. Our
successes and our failures are still fresh, and those
lessons are part of our contribution to our SIDS partners
on their path to development, peace and security.

In 2014 Israel participated in the historic Third
International Conference on Small Island Developing
States in Samoa. The SIDS Accelerated Modalities of
Action (Samoa Pathway) outcome document of 2014
is the road map for addressing the challenges of peace
and security facing SIDS. At its heart is the principle
of sustainable development of small island developing
States through genuine and durable partnerships. In
the spirit of the Samoa Pathway, Israel has pledged to
provide 25 public health scholarships for SIDS scholars
at the world-renowned Hebrew University in Jerusalem,
of which I am a graduate. Furthermore, Israel, in
cooperation with the Marshall Islands, deployed an
innovative, mobile water purification vehicle in the
island of Ebeye.

As we are about to agree on the most comprehensive
and ambitious sustainable development goals for the
next 15 years, we must make sure that SIDS remain at
the top of our priorities. In our interconnected global
reality, no man is an island and no island is detached
from the rest of the world. Island nations must be
embraced. From Port Vila in Vanuatu to Port au Prince
in Haiti, the global community must sow the seeds of
development so that SIDS will prosper in the future.

