The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its
resolutions regarding the situation in Ethiopia and
Eritrea, in particular resolutions 1298 (2000) of
17 May 2000, 1312 (2000) of 31 July 2000 and
1320 (2000) of 15 September 2000, which
established the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE).

"The Security Council reaffirms the
commitment of all Member States to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Ethiopia and Eritrea.

"The Security Council notes with
appreciation the commitment of both parties
towards a final and comprehensive peace
settlement. The Council also notes with
appreciation the rounds of proximity talks that
have taken place and, pursuant to paragraph 14 of
resolution 1320 (2000), calls on the parties to
continue negotiations and to conclude without
delay a final and comprehensive peace settlement.
The Council emphasizes that the deployment of
UNMEE should contribute to a positive climate
for negotiations and that it does not replace the
need for such a peace settlement.

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
support for the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities between the Government of the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the
Government of the State of Eritrea signed in
Algiers on 18 June 2000 (S/2000/601).

"The Security Council underlines the
important role which confidence-building
measures could play in dispelling the remaining
distrust between Ethiopia and Eritrea, and
encourages both States to agree on a package of
such measures. In particular the Council
encourages the parties to agree on the immediate
release and voluntary and orderly return of
interned civilians under the auspices of the
International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC); the opening of land and air corridors for
UNMEE; an exchange of maps showing mined
areas; the prompt release of prisoners of war and
their return under the auspices of the ICRC; and a
moratorium on expulsions.

"The Security Council reaffirms the need
for both parties to fulfil all their obligations under
international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law. The Council calls on the parties to
cooperate with UNMEE in this regard.

"The Security Council expresses its
continuing support for the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy, the
Organization of African Unity, the President of
Algeria and his Special Envoy, and concerned
Member States to find a peaceful and lasting
solution to the conflict.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of the full compliance of Member
States with the arms embargo imposed by
resolution 1298 (2000).

"The Security Council remains actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2000/34.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.
