Mr. Choi Young-Jin: The eighteenth progress
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'lvoire (UNOCI), which is before
the Council(S/2008/645), provides an update on the
major developments in Cote d'Ivoire since his most
recent report of 10 July 2008. With your permission,
Mr. President, I would like to focus my briefing today
on the most crucial issues of this period for Cote
d'lvoire, that is, identification and elections.

Those two issues will have a decisive and direct
bearing on the future of Cote d'lvoire and indeed on
the UNOCl exit strategy. The Secretary-General's
report refers to the seriousness of the logistical
challenges facing the Ivorian dual identification-
electoral process, which are bound to cause delays.
But, at the same time, the report reveals that this
process has now reached important milestones such as
the successful financing arrangement and the launching
of the identification process. At present, the
accumulating delays constitute the foremost and
primary concern for us because they may put at risk the
entire Ivorian peace process.

It is almost one and a half months since the
identification and voter registration process was
launched on 15 September with a view to completing it
on 30 October. Unfortunately, however, the pace of
progress has been painfully slow. Acceleration factors
will soon be introduced and many sites will soon attain
"cruising speed". Yet the magnitude of the delay has
taken almost everybody by surprise.

The main reason for that delay is the logistical
complexity of the identification process. In C6te
d'lvoire, the elections process has become inextricably
enmeshed with the identification process. Those two
crucial and historic events are concomitantly unfolding
in the country; 11 million people are expected to be
identified with a very sophisticated identification
mechanism and 9 million people are expected to
register as voters. To make matters more complex, the
identification process is in the charge of a dual
operator system consisting of a private French
company, SAGEM, and the Ivorian National Institute
of Statistics responsible for the process.

To make matters even more complicated, the
overall supervisory and implementing role has been
08-56874
confided to the Independent Electoral Commission,
which has a quadripartite composition. Three quarters
of its members, including its president, have been
provided by the two main opposition political parties
and the Forces nouvelles. That mosaic composition is
certainly sufficient cause for delay.

The accumulating delays are preoccupying. Yet
we should not lose sight of the significant and strategic
progress made until now, and we should continue to
build on it. Indeed, delays notwithstanding, solid
progress has been made: peace has been sufficiently
restored so as to allow people to travel freely across
the country; all the political actors remain firmly
committed to the identification-electoral process; and
the Mobile Court operation is now complete, with
excellent results. As I reported in my previous briefing,
all the financial arrangements for both the
identification process and the elections have been
secured. The Ivorian identification process and
elections have been going slowly but making solid
progress. In terms of financing, the Ivorian
Government is bearing the lion's share of the cost, to
the tune of around $200 million dollars. The long-
awaited identification process has been launched with
an enthusiastic participation from the population. I
have visited several identification sites and met people
queuing for several hours, some since 3 a.m., in order
not to miss the identification process. That was a very
heartwarming experience.

All that progress allows us to acknowledge that
the delays due to bureaucratic red tape and logistical
difficulties will remain manageable as long as
momentum is kept alive. For the first time in the
Ivorian crisis, the delays are mainly due to logistical
aspects and not to political issues. The window of
opportunity remains open. Millions of people will, in
several months, be in possession of an identity card for
the first time in their life, enabling them to travel and
engage in business freely. The question of "Ivoirite" -
or Ivorianness - that has been at the heart of the
troubled Ivorian politics for the last two decades will
be resolved once and for all. Thus, having reached
milestones of such importance, the Ivorian process now
seems irreversible.

As the Ivorian actors are struggling with the
logistical delays, we, the international community,
must redouble our efforts to bring timely financial,
technical and logistical assistance to the Ivorian
identification and electoral process.
08-56874
With that in mind, UNOCI, along with the other
United Nations entities and international community
bodies in Abidjan, is trying to be as creative as it can to
assist the Ivorian identification and electoral process:
international donors are providing around $50 million
for the electoral process, which will cost about $80
million; UNOCI transported the first batch of electoral
materials, 15 tons of them, from Europe to Cote
d'Ivoire using its own aircraft in July; and we have
been providing air conditioners and other critical
equipment to the identification sites as needed.

Now, having recently identified the lack of
transportation means as one of the major impediments
to the speedy progress of the identification process,
UNOCI is, in cooperation with the Independent
Electoral Commission, currently devising an overall
transportation assistance scheme, dubbed Operation
Transport. UNOCI will be making available its cars
and drivers to all 34 regional electoral commissioners
in the critical cities of Abidjan and Bouake. Our
military and police units are planning transportation of
a significant portion of the identification agents and
material throughout the country outside those two
cities. UNOCI has entered into negotiation with
Ivorian private transportation companies with a view to
providing vehicles to the entire 1,000 identification
sites in Abidjan and Bouake.

Perhaps most importantly, in terms of planning
and safeguarding the elections, UNOCI is providing
valuable advice and assistance through its certification
mandate and its Electoral Assistance Division. UNOCI,
along with other United Nations entities, especially
UNDP, will continue to give support by providing
technical and logistical assistance to the Ivorian
electoral process.

I trust that, with the combined efforts of the
Ivorians and the international community, the Ivorian
peace process will successfully meet the challenges of
the elections and reunification of the country, which in
turn will provide UNOCI with an exit strategy.

Before closing, let me touch upon the security
issues. By virtue of the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement, all Ivorian political actors have now
formally joined the political mainstream of the
elections. The impartial forces - of Licorne and
UNOCI - are highly dependable and credible, to such
a degree that virtually no one in Cote d'Ivoire deems a
military provocation or disorder during the election
3
period plausible. On the other hand, civil disorders, as
evidenced by the recent sporadic disturbances at
identification sites, will remain UNOCI's main concern
in terms of safeguarding both the process and the
results of the election.

