Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of States members of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in my
capacity as Chair of the OIC group.

This meeting is taking place in a climate
overburdened by an increasingly unstable and volatile
situation in the Middle East, with the unresolved and
festering question of Palestine remaining at the heart of
unrest in the region. The OIC is very concerned about
the contempt shown by Israel, the occupying Power,
towards the Security Council's authoritative decisions
and demands, in contravention of international law and
in total obstruction of a political horizon for a peaceful
solution. In this fiftieth year of the Israeli occupation
of Palestinian and Arab lands since 1967, the urgency
for a peaceful solution remains as pressing as ever and
requires serious and immediate efforts.

The OIC expresses its serious concern with regard
to the ongoing developments in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and condemns all
of the illegal policies and measures being implemented
by Israel, the occupying Power, aimed at altering the
status, character and demography of the territory,
including the Arab, Islamic and Palestinian character
and identity of Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. The OIC condemns Israel's illegal action of
closing the Mosque and further impeding the access
of Muslim worshippers to the Mosque. The OIC urges
the Council to compel Israel, the occupying Power,
to ensure the freedom of worship for Palestinians,
including in occupied East Jerusalem; refrain from
interfering in the affairs of the Islamic and Christian
holy sites; respect the historic status quo at Al-Haram
Al-Sharif; and act in compliance with its obligations
under international law as the occupying Power. In
that regard, the OIC reiterates its firm commitment
to the rights of the Palestinian people in occupied
East Jerusalem, which forms an integral part of the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967.

At the same time, the OIC reiterates its condemnation
of the continuation and escalation of Israel's illegal
measures and policies aimed at expanding its illegal
colonial settlements and further entrenching its
five-decades-long colonization of Palestinian land. The
OIC condemns in particular the recent Israeli decision
to build more than 1,800 illegal settlement units in
occupied East Jerusalem, which will in effect lead to the
confiscation of Palestinian land and the forced eviction
and dispossession of more Palestinian civilians. In that
connection, the OIC reaffirms that the continuation
of the Israeli settlement policy will undermine the
territorial integrity, viability and contiguity of a
future Palestinian State, notwithstanding the fact
that settlement activities are illegal acts constituting
flagrant violations of international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions, including,in particular
resolution 2334 (2016), which unequivocally demands
an end to all such activities.

The Council must act to uphold its responsibilities
to end Israeli settlement activities, which have been
manifestly and deliberately stepped up in the occupied
Palestinian territory, especially in and around East
Jerusalem. While the OIC welcomes the second report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016), as orally delivered to the
Security Council by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General (see S/PV.7977), we call once
again for the submission of a meaningful written
report so as to ensure the proper documentation of the
implementation of the resolution's provisions, given
Israel's continued flagrant disrespect ofthe Council and
its resolutions. We further appeal to the international
community for its sustained engagement, as also called
for by resolution 2334 (2016), and its full support at this
critical period for sponsorship to a timed, multilateral
political process that would lead to the enforcement of
the relevant United Nations resolutions aimed at finally
ending the Israeli occupation of Palestinian land since
1967, achieving the internationally recognized two-
State solution and the realization of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people - the objectives to
which the OIC remains unflinchingly committed.

The OIC further reminds the Council of its
duties with regard to Israel's condemnable systematic
violations of human rights in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including deliberately killing and injuring
civilians and peaceful protesters; violent military
attacks against the civilian population; the detention
of thousands of Palestinian civilians; the confiscation
of land and property; the demolition of Palestinian
homes; and the forced displacement of Palestinians;
as well as terrorism perpetrated by settlers against
Palestinian civilians. All such actions continue to raise
tensions and sensitivities and are severely aggravating
the fragile situation on the ground, with the potential to
spark grave consequences. The Security Council must
demand that all such illegal acts cease and that Israel,
the occupying Power, abide by its obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law, and all the relevant United
Nations resolutions on the question of Palestine.

The OIC group remains firm in its conviction that
the Security Council must not be absolved of its role in
that regard. It should act to ensure that the Palestinian
people realize their right to self-determination,
sovereignty and independence in their State of
Palestine in the territory occupied since 1967, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, and that a just solution
emerges for the plight of Palestinian refugees, in line
with United Nations resolutions and international law.

Imust also reiterate the concerns ofthe OIC regarding
the grave humanitarian suffering that the Palestinian
people is enduring throughout occupied Palestine. The
situation in the Gaza Strip remains particularly grave
and alarming, as the Palestinian civilian population
there continues to suffer from decades of occupation
and the impact of military aggression, compounded by
the inhumane, illegal Israeli blockade, now in its tenth
year. We reiterate the call for an end to this massive
form of collective punishment of the Palestinian people
and for urgent efforts to reconstruct, rehabilitate and
revive Gaza, which also remains an integral part of the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967.

Today we must also reiterate the call for attention to
the plight ofPalestinian political prisoners and detainees
in Israeli detention centres. We call for respect of their

rights, in accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention
and international human rights law, and for an end
to their abuse and captivity by the occupying Power.
The hunger strike recently undertaken by thousands of
prisoners is a cry for attention to their critical plight
and for action to resolve it. In that regard, we appeal for
international compassion and responsibility.

Lastly, the OIC encourages all States Members of
the United Nations to intensify their ongoing efforts
aimed at overcoming the continuing financial shortfalls
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, with a view to
ensuring adequate, sufficient, predictable and sustained
funding for the Agency for the duration of its mandate,
pending a solution. In that way, it can fully meet the
needs of the Palestine refugees at this critical time and
continue to carry out its indispensable humanitarian
mission and its stabilizing role amid the heightened
needs and volatility in the region.

In conclusion, there is no doubt that the conflicts
in the Middle East - including the tragedy of the
Palestine question and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
with the occupation now in its fiftieth year - and
what seems to be chronic divisions within the Security
Council have allowed such menaces as violent
extremism and terrorism to flourish in the region and
reach the proportions we must confront today as we
collectively grapple with the elusive search for viable
solutions. Therefore, the multifaceted dimension and
root causes of the region's conflicts must be addressed,
without exception, in the context of international law,
including humanitarian law and human rights law, and
with adherence to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, the guarantor of peace
and security in the Middle East and globally.

