Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): We,
too, would like to express our satisfaction at seeing
you, Sir, preside over the work of the Council for the
month of November. We also take this opportunity to
heartily congratulate Ambassador Joy ngu for the
remarkable way in which she led our efforts last
month.

We thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for his second
report under paragraph 7 of resolution 1970 (2011) and
for the additional information that he has just given us
following his recent visit to Libya. The Prosecutor's
briefing demonstrates the commitment to shed light on
the crimes committed in Libya by the former regime.
We would recall that on 27 June arrest warrants were
issued against three individuals alleged to be guilty of
widespread and systematic attacks against the civilian
population.

We note and we welcome the independence and
impartiality with which the Court is conducting its
proceedings. It is important that the Court be perceived
as being the guarantor of the rights of everyone,
including suspects. Likewise, we note that the ongoing
investigations cover the issues of violence against
women, indemnification and victim protection. We also
note that the Office of the Prosecutor is dealing with
acts of violence committed by forces loyal to the
National Transitional Council. Gabon, a country that
has always fought against impunity in all its forms,
hopes that the criminals in Libya will be prosecuted so
as to create the conditions necessary for peace, justice
and lasting reconciliation.

We note the commitment of the new authorities in
Libya to ensure justice with regard to crimes
committed in Libya, especially in Benghazi, Misrata
and Tripoli. Beyond specific ongoing procedures, the
efforts of the authorities and of the Security Council
must seek to shed light on serious crimes committed all
over Libya, including against foreign workers, in
particular migrant workers from sub-Saharan Africa. It
is important that the Office of the Prosecutor have all
that it needs to conduct its investigations.

We encourage the Prosecutor to work closely
with Libyan authorities and the International
Independent Commission of Inquiry set up by the
Human Rights Council, as well as to cooperate with
regional organizations and Libya's neighbouring
States. The Court's action could help improve security
in the region. We assure the Prosecutor that the
Gabonese Government is prepared to cooperate in its
efforts in Libya.

We would also like to recall the responsibility of
the new Libyan authorities to fully cooperate with the
Court, in accordance with the obligations they have
undertaken. In conclusion, Libya is now undergoing a
historic transition. The Security Council and the
international community, which have supported the
significant changes that have taken place in the
country, should encourage the Libyan authorities to
base their new institutions on respect for the rule of
law and democratic values. In that respect, we very
much welcome the commitments undertaken by the
authorities to establish conditions favourable to the
emergence of a country committed to the rule of law.

