Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I, too, would
like to join my colleagues in thanking His Excellency
Foreign Minister Audronius Azubalis for his
comprehensive briefing on the activities of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and its priorities in the months to come.

India supports the role of regional organizations
in the maintenance of international peace and security
and their cooperation with the United Nations under
Chapter VIII of the Charter. Article 54 of the Charter
enjoins such organizations to keep the Security Council
fully informed of their activities in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We therefore welcome
the briefing by the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office.

Minister Azubalis touched upon a wide canvas of
issues, several concerning our immediate and extended
neighbourhood. Naturally, they are of great interest to
our delegation. We appreciate the work that the OSCE
has been doing to promote security in its political,
military, economic, environmental and human
dimensions. It has addressed a wide range of security-
related concerns, including arms control, confidence-
and security-building measures, human rights, national
minorities, democratization, policing strategies,
counter-terrorism, and economic and environmental
issues. They have significantly helped in managing and
resolving some of the most significant problems in the
post-Cold War world.

The countries of Central Asia and Eastern Europe
have particularly benefited from the OSCE's
cooperation. In the past decade or so, the OSCE has
significantly expanded its activities in our
neighbourhood under the Asian Partners for
Cooperation and the Asian Contact Group. Annual
conferences in areas such as human security, regional
cooperation and comprehensive security in Central
Asia, anti-trafficking and the implementation of OSCE
confidence- and security-building measures in North-
East Asia are important activities. The OSCE's
cooperation with the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations Regional Forum, of which India is a member,
on matters related to confidence-building measures and
preventive diplomacy is appreciable. We also welcome
the OSCE'S partnership with Afghanistan in border
security management and its deployment of an election
support team during the elections in that country.

We wish the OSCE great success in its efforts and
activities to promote understanding and foster peace
and security among its member and partner countries.
We also extend our good wishes to the Lithuanian
chairmanship of the OSCE, and personally to Foreign
Minister AZubalis. We hope that, under his
stewardship, the OSCE will continue its important
work.

