Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of
Bolivia appreciates the briefing by Mr. Martin Kobler,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
and reiterates its support for the work he and his team
are doing.

We regret that there has notbeen significant progress
in implementing the Libyan Political Agreement by the
Government of National Accord, with the support of the
Mission. Nevertheless, we underscore that any effort by
the Security Council should lead to a peaceful political
solution of the conflict that also comprehensively
addresses the interests of the Libyan people and
respects their rights.

We believe that it is important to acknowledge
and encourage the resolute fight by the Libyan people
and their Government against Da'esh. We underscore
the fact that, as territory is liberated, the necessary
humanitarian assistance be facilitated and ensured
for the population. We vigorously condemn terrorism
and any type of political, social or economic violence,
regardless of the perpetrators or their motives.

Likewise, I would like to highlight the signing
of a memorandum of understanding between Libya
and Italy on 2 February, which aims at strengthening
Libyan State institutions and, above all, to develop
humanitarian support efforts for refugees escaping
the region due to the grave humanitarian, political and
economic crises affecting the region, who, according
to figures released by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, as of December 2016 totalled
313,000 persons since the conflict began in 2011.

It is important to arrive at a political solution
that puts an end to the tragic situation not only in
Libya but also in the region, given the alarming fact
that so far this year 255 people have lost their lives in
the Mediterranean while fleeing the crisis - in 2016
there were 4,218 such drowning deaths, according to a
5 February 2017 report by the International Maritime
Organization.

We believe we have an obligation to look ahead and
to support efforts towards a peaceful political solution
to this tragic situation. However, as we have said
previously, Bolivia believes it is timely and important
to recall the causes for which the Security Council has
to discuss this issue today. I refer once again to policies
of intervention and regime change, through which
entire populations have been decimated and onslaughts
have been carried out that led to the emergence of the
self-declared Islamic State and the rise of Da'esh. That
phenomenon has spread to various countries of the
region, ushering in a period ofinstability that continues
to have a catastrophic effect to this day, and not just in
the region.

We continue to remember the phrase
(Spoke in English)

"We came, we saw he died".
(spoke in Spanish)

He did indeed die, but so did thousands upon thousands
of Libyans died as well. In fact, thousands upon
thousands of Libyans continue to die as an outcome
of that political intervention. Allow me to recall a
statement made by Mr. Michael Flynn, former Director
of the United States Defense Intelligence Agency:

(spoke in English)

"This was a disaster. This was not a failure; it was
a disaster. We made it worse. All I know is that
in Libya we took a guy out - again, not a great
guy, but a guy who maintained stability in a bad
neighbourhood".

(spoke in Spanish)

We believe that the international community must
learn from the lessons of the past. Interventionism
and regime change have led to an instability that goes
beyond the Middle East or North Africa. It is only
in learning from these lessons that we can fulfil the
mandate of the Charter of the United Nations and the
aim of maintaining international peace and security,
which constitutes the main objective of the work of the
Council.

