Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): My delegation would like to
thank the Secretary-General for setting the context within
which we are discussing issues of great importance to our
continent, Africa. The report which he introduced last week
during a formal meeting of the Council underlines his
sustained efforts to address the many problems that
continue to confront Africa. In accepting the urgent need to
face these challenges, my delegation would like to
emphasize that the current report should be considered as
part of a process to respond to African needs, which are so
well known.

I recall that during the special meeting of the Security
Council on Africa last September, we entrusted the
Secretary-General with the task of coming up with a report
that would at least begin to clarify the way forward with
regard to addressing the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa. The report provides a good analysis of the current
situation in Africa and also sets forth a multifaceted and
practical set of recommendations which require the
participation of the international community. I further recall
that during the September meeting my Minister for Foreign
Affairs stressed that there can be no development anywhere
without peace, and that a comprehensive and integrated
approach must be found to address Africa's complex
problems. It is through the prism of this interrelationship
between peace and development that my delegation would
like to present its views.

Let me begin with peace and security. It is clear to
all of us that the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security rests with
the United Nations, and in particular with the Security
Council. As the dynamics of international relations have
changed, so, too, has the manner in which the United
Nations deals with peace and security issues. This has
been caused in large part by the failure of the instruments
that have traditionally been entrusted with maintaining
peace and security, as well as the complexities that
emerge out of every unique conflict situation. There have
been subsequent attempts to diminish the Charter-based
role that the United Nations must play in maintaining
international peace and security. Indeed, a new thrust has
emerged which seeks to regionalize peacemaking and
peacekeeping activities. We maintain that regional and
subregional organizations can play only a complementary
role to the primary one which rests with the United
Nations. This complementary role has been taken up quite
well in the past few years by the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) in West Africa and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
in the Horn of Africa, for example.

As the Secretary-General clearly outlines in his
report, peacemaking efforts need to be timely,
appropriate, well prepared and well coordinated. In this
regard, we welcome the recent creation of an Executive
Committee on Peace and Security convened by the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, intended to
enhance cooperation, policy coherence and information
sharing. This collaboration can further be facilitated by
re-energizing the annual meeting of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and the United Nations chaired by
the two Secretaries-General. Indeed, as the traditional
General Assembly resolutions on cooperation between the
United Nations and the OAU stipulate, the United Nations
is invited to assist the OAU in strengthening its
institutional and operational capacity in the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts in Africa. We
believe that the strengthening of these institutional and
operational capacities through the enhancement of an
early warning system, transfer of technology, assistance
in the training of personnel, exchange and coordination of
information, logistical support and, most importantly, the
concrete mobilization of financial support, are urgently
required.

Having underlined the complementary role of
regional and subregional organizations, it is worth
addressing the whole question of mediation. It is
important that international actors avoid competing once

 

a framework of mediation has been established. However,
we also believe that if complementary efforts seek the same
objective and are well coordinated, then the outcome will
be a good one. It is incumbent on the principal mediator in
such situations to generate a positive and cooperative
attitude and not to assume a proprietary stance with regard
to ongoing mediation efforts. Such positions exacerbate the
suffering of the innocent people whom the efforts are
designed to help.

Another proposal which we support is the mobilization
of international cooperation for peace efforts through the
creation of groups of "Friends". Such groups would
harmonize views, coordinate action and source essential
resources required for the peace process.

Having recently arrived from a visit to Africa as the
Chairman of the sanctions Committee on Angola, I can
only agree with the Secretary-General that a more effective
targeting of sanctions is necessary. In the case of Angola,
the sanctions are well targeted, have proved effective and
are indeed "smart" sanctions. In other cases, the sanctions
are too generalized, causing unintended suffering to a
civilian population and having no visible impact on those
they are intended to affect. It is also incumbent on the
international community to ensure that the provisions of
these sanctions regimes and, most particularly, arms
embargoes, are not flouted.

My delegation fully supports the Secretary-General's
recommendations, many of which have been raised before
to no avail, with regard to peacekeeping and the role of the
United Nations in peacekeeping in Africa. The separation
of antagonists in refugee camps, the establishment of safe
corridors for refugees and the implementation of
comprehensive settlements are in line with the principles
contained in the Nairobi regional summits held in 1996 on
the crisis in eastern Zaire. At that time, the Heads of State
and Government of the subregion urgently called for a
separation of those we called "intimidators" and bona fide
refugees, requiring the setting up of safe corridors and
temporary sanctuaries to facilitate humanitarian assistance.
These calls went unheeded. The result was genocide and
the disappearance of a large number of refugees who
remain unaccounted for - a hard lesson indeed.
On preventive action, we can only hope that the
example set by the African countries themselves, notably in
the Central African Republic and in Sierra Leone, will be
emulated. There is no substitute for timely and appropriate
responses by the international community.

We further support the concrete proposal for
strengthening regional and subregional initiatives. We
believe that, in view of the continuing financial
difficulties which the United Nations is facing, a strategy
of co-deployment with regional, subregional or
multinational forces is Viable.

I now turn to humanitarian issues. The problem of
conflicts has created continuing humanitarian emergencies
in Africa. Not only are we seeing massive displacements
of Africans across borders, but also significant internal
displacements of peoples due to these conflicts. It is
worth reiterating that a coordinated approach towards
humanitarian assistance should continuously be sought. In
situations of conflict, war abuses proliferate. It is
therefore useful for human rights missions to be deployed,
providing substantive international pressure on the
combatants to respect the human rights of civilians.

We also support the Secretary-General's
endorsement of the notion that children should be seen as
"zones of peace" in conflict situations and that concrete
efforts should be made to enable them to have as normal
a life as possible, conflict situations notwithstanding. To
this end, we encourage the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on the impact of armed conflict on
children to continue sensitizing the international
community and crystallizing solid international legislation
to respond to this need.

Due to the continuing problem of insecurity in
refugee camps, my delegation also supports the idea of
establishing an international mechanism to assist host
Governments in maintaining the security and neutrality of
refugee camps.

An important area which the Secretary-General has
previously addressed is the impact of so-called armed
labour. This refers to a group of displaced persons
roaming across borders with weapons. We believe that a
focused attempt to deal with this dangerous phenomenon,
which has the potential to destabilize whole subregions,
must be found.

Regarding economic issues, it is clear to us that the
sources of conflict, although varied, have at their root the
unfortunate reality of poverty. Africa remains
marginalized by current international economic relations.
The Secretary-General has addressed the impact of this
economic weakness in conflict situations. We believe that
despite these problems some African countries have
recorded great successes and continue to make serious

 

efforts to lay a solid foundation for their future
development.

At the regional level, strategies towards these goals are
being finalized. At the national level, far-reaching economic
reforms have been implemented. It bears repeating that
these efforts require the support of the international
community. In this context, we agree that there is an urgent
need to redefine Africa's relationship with the major
players within the current economic world order, including
the Bretton Woods institutions. Key within the framework
of addressing these major international economic questions
is the urgent need to reduce the debt burden which has
crippled many African economies.

In this regard, we support the Secretary-General's
recommendations that the benefits of the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries Debt Initiative be expanded to include a
greater number of African countries. Given the negative
impact of the huge debt problems we face, the support of
the international community cannot be overemphasized. His
call to all creditor countries to convert into grants all the
remaining official bilateral debts of the poorest African
countries also deserves our complete support.

With increased access to markets, support for adjusting
to a globally competitive trade environment, the provision
of at least 50 per cent of aid from our development partners
to be spent in Africa and a focus on social development,
especially in the investment of human resources, we believe
we can begin to make that solid move out of poverty and
into prosperity, and with that prosperity the scourge of
conflicts will recede even further from the lives of Africans.

And now, in conclusion, I would like to address
follow-up action as my delegation sees it. In order to
sustain the momentum gathered in this debate today and to
deal comprehensively with the problems facing Africa, my
delegation endorses the Secretary-General's
recommendation that a biennial meeting of the Security
Council be held to assess the effort undertaken and the
further action needed. We will also consider favourably the
idea that the Council convene at the summit level within
five years to look at this problem.

For us, this whole exercise is a process and not an
event. A multifaceted approach to implementing these
complex recommendations is clearly called for. To this end,
we envisage that, following this debate, the Security
Council could create a concrete mechanism for subsequent
follow-up action. The instrument creating this structure, we
suggest, should set out in very clear terms the parameters
within which we address the issues of Africa. This
mechanism would implement the Secretary-General's
recommendations which fall within the Security Council's
own competence and put in place a structure to enable
follow-up with other organs and institutions which would
need to implement recommendations within their own
competencies.

We also think that the Security Council should
consider adopting a staggered timetable that seeks to
maintain focus on the issues raised in the report and to
harness the political will to implement the
recommendations so well laid out. Indeed, September,
when most Foreign Ministers will be in New York, would
be a good time to assess the efforts undertaken so far and
further action required.

Today's discussion is only an introductory one. It is,
in our view, intended to set rolling a process of active
engagement and continued commitment which will put in
place a new and meaningful partnership between Africa
and the rest of the world. The Secretary-General's
imminent visit to Africa will, we believe, carry forward
this momentum and assist in underscoring the United
Nations continued commitment to Africa. We wish him
Godspeed and great success.

Let me underline that the reasoning behind this
approach is to ensure that no hasty decisions are reached
and that a cogent, well-thought-out process to concretize
a stable, peaceful and prosperous Africa begins. May we
all have the political will to realize this objective.

