Mr. Hunt (United Kingdom): In March 1963,
President Kennedy predicted that as many as 25 nations
would soon develop nuclear weapons, posing what he
described as the greatest possible danger to the survival
of humankind. In the end, his bleak prophecy to never
come to pass. Seven years after Kennedy voiced his
fears, the world summoned the collective wisdom to
create the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), which now has 191 States parties. All
but a handful of countries put aside their differences
and agreed that global security - indeed, the existence
of the human race - depended on halting the spread
of nuclear weapons. Only one country signed the NPT
and then sought to withdraw from it. Only one country
promised, in the Treaty, never to develop nuclear
weapons and then did exactly that. That country is
North Korea, which has tested six nuclear devices in
the past 12 years.

Today, the international community shares a
collective responsibility to ensure that North Korea
complies once again with the rules on which the safety
of every nation depends. Britain welcomes North
Korea's decision to re-engage in diplomacy since the
beginning of this year. We are encouraged by the
meeting between President Moon Jae-in and Kim
Jong Un in Pyongyang last week. We hope that North
Korea's repeated promises to denuclearize are genuine,
but we note the lack of concrete steps so far. Action
counts for more than assurances; deeds must follow
words. North Korea must comprehensively, verifiably
and irreversibly abandon its nuclear weapons and the
means to build them, in accordance with the resolutions
adopted by the Council.

Until that moment comes, Britain believes that
the sanctions agreed by the international community
should continue to be rigorously enforced, reflecting
our shared belief that North Korea's nuclear ambitions
threaten the safety of all of our peoples. The Council
adopted the relevant resolutions as one and we should
enforce them as one until the conditions that caused
their adoption have decisively and irrevocably changed.
Britain will continue to play our part in this effort.

We are supporting the work of the sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) and the United Nations Panel of Experts. The
onus rests on the whole Council to prevent North Korea
from evading sanctions, particularly the controls on
refined petroleum products. We support the assessment
presented by Secretary of State Pompeo and the
United States, which demonstrates that North Korea
has systematically violated the controls placed on the
import of these products. Indeed, the annual cap for
2018 has already been broken.

This year, Britain sent two Royal Navy ships, the
HMS Sutherland and the HMS Albion, to the Pacific,
where they have helped to monitor illegal fuel transfers.
A third ship, the HMS Argyle, is due in East Asia
later this year. The members of the Security Council,
especially the five permanent members, have a duty
to uphold and enforce the sanctions contained in the
resolutions, which we ourselves supported. We must
not allow the authority of the Security Council to
be undermined.

Today, North Korea's leadership has a choice to
make. In a country where 200,000 children are acutely
malnourished, half of all schools have no access to
running water, and only 3 per cent of roads are paved,
the regime has squandered the nation's resources and
deepened the poverty of its people by pursuing an
illegal stockpile of nuclear weapons. Far from bringing
prestige or security, this arsenal has only increased
tensions in East Asia and brought upon North Korea
the most extensive economic sanctions ever imposed by
the Security Council in the twenty-first century.

As recently as 1973, North and South Korea had
about the same gross domestic product per capita. Since
then, decades of communist economic failure in North
Korea have opened up a 20-fold disparity. Today, North
Korea's gross domestic product per capita is less than
5 per cent of South Korea's.

But it is not too late to change course. Just as
President Kennedy's prediction turned out to be
pessimistic, there is nothing inevitable about the road
along which North Korea has so far travelled. Before
his regime wastes even more resources, creates yet
more poverty and triggers still greater confrontations,
Kim Jong Un could decide to allow his country to
flourish in peace and safety. He could choose to heed
the will of the Security Council, keep his own promises
and relinquish the nuclear arsenal that has brought only
misery and tension. The decision rests on his shoulders.
Until then, the Security Council should hold fast to the
resolutions we have passed.

