Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, we welcome Ms. Del Ponte to the Security
Council for the second time. We thank her for her
briefing on the work of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and on her trip to Rwanda.

The cooperation of the countries concerned with
the two Tribunals is extremely important to the
Tribunals' work. We hope that the Tribunals will
administer justice objectively and impartially in order
to avoid becoming political tools. We fully share the
view that the ICTY should conduct investigations into
potential serious violations of international
humanitarian law committed by the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) in its bombing campaign
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. According
to the Statute of the ICTY, these activities fall within
the Tribunal's jurisdiction. A moment ago, Ms. Del
Ponte said that there are no grounds for investigations
into NATO's activities, but we believe that such a
conclusion should be supported by convincing
evidence.

We note the progress that the Rwanda Tribunal
has made to date. Expeditious and fair trials of those
accused of committing serious violations of
international humanitarian law will not only redress the
injustice done to the victims of these crimes, but also
act as an effective deterrent to future recurrences of
such crimes. We fully understand the difficulties and
complexities that the ICTR has encountered in its
work. As I said earlier, the ICTR cannot progress in its
work without the active cooperation and assistance of
the countries concerned. Particularly in the process of
case investigations, the collection of evidence and the
delivery and prosecution of suspects, the Tribunal
should enhance its communications and consultations
with the Governments of countries concerned and make
every effort to maintain cooperative relationships with
them. We hope that the work of the two Tribunals will
help to promote national reconciliation and regional
peace and stability.

In conclusion, I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
and other members of the Council for your tribute to
Ambassador Wang Yingfan and the Chinese delegation.
I will certainly convey your sentiments to him. We
believe that your outstanding talents and experience
will surely guide the Security Council to a successful
conclusion of its work this month. The Chinese
delegation will fully cooperate with you to that end.

