Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
also wish to thank Assistant-Secretary-General Cheng-
Hopkins and Ambassador Lucas for their thoughtful
briefings today.

Peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict is among our highest priorities, representing
the greatest opportunity to transform the dynamics that
led to bloodshed in the first place. If those who seek to
build peace are not successful in the months after a
conflict's end, then it becomes increasingly difficult to
consolidate peace as time passes. I would like to return
to some key points made by Ambassador Rice during
our most recent debate (see S/PV. 6396) on this
subject.

First, the strength of United Nations
peacebuilding is dependent on the expertise and
capabilities of its field personnel and on the United
Nations agility in deploying, leading and managing
them effectively. The United States welcomes the
Secretary-General's continuing focus on mission
leadership. Skilled and effective leadership is essential
to success. We also welcome the unfolding civilian
capacity review implementation process, the efforts of
which must improve the flexibility, resourcefulness and
decisiveness of the United Nations in deploying
qualified and capable civilian specialists to the field.

The constellation of United Nations departments,
agencies and programmes represents a deep reservoir
of human talent and organizational resources that can
be effective contributors to peacebuilding. We believe
that more can be done to target the skills and expertise
available within the United Nations family and the
wider international community, including the Bretton
Woods institutions. We also continue to look forward,
as we have noted previously, to further progress in
clarifying key peacebuilding roles and responsibilities.

Secondly, if United Nations efforts to build peace
are to be truly sustainable, they must incorporate
women throughout the process. We echo the comments
of the Secretary-General in his 2010 report on women's
participation in peacebuilding, in which he stated that
"women are crucial partners in shoring up three pillars
of lasting peace: economic recovery, social cohesion
and political legitimacy" (A/65/354, para. 7).

The United States is currently developing a
national action plan on women and peace and security
so as to focus efforts on women's participation in relief
and recovery efforts. Women must be empowered not
just as beneficiaries of development, but as agents of
economic, social and political transformation.

The awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize this year
to three women peacebuilders is a strong testament to
their indispensability to successful peace processes.
Our post-conflict development efforts recognize that
women are essential drivers of the peacebuilding
process. For example, members of the United States
Civilian Response Corps in South Sudan are working
with local women leaders in areas historically
underrepresented in the political circles in Juba to
facilitate their increased participation in political
processes.

We also commend the work of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, which
has developed an approach on gender matters that
combats gender-based violence and promotes access to
health care, political participation and justice for
women.

This briefing reminds us how vital the work of
peacebuilding and institution-building is. Helping a
society recover from conflict is never an easy task. But
we must persevere in collaborating to formulate the
effective solutions that each post-conflict society
needs. Unless we work together to consolidate peace in
war-torn lands, we will never be able to truly achieve
our goal of international peace and security.

