Mr. Stehelen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her eleventh report and her
briefing. I reaffirm the full support of France for
the Prosecutor and the International Criminal Court
(ICC) as a whole, in particular for the successful
implementation of resolution 1970 (2011), referring the
situation in Libya to that high-level legal jurisdiction.

A careful review of the eleventh report highlights
a number of positive developments that we welcome.
Paragraph 12 of the report indicates that cooperation
with the Office of the Libyan General Prosecutor is
producing positive results and that these early results,
including the transmission of evidence by the Libyan
judiciary, coupled with targeted investigations by
Ms. Bensouda's Office, have significantly enriched
the inquiries and evidence in the file. Clearly, much
remains to do to address the situation in Libya and, in
the words of resolution 2259 (2015) itself,

"to hold to account those responsible for violations
of international humanitarian law and violations
and abuses of human rights, including those
involving sexual violence" (resolution 2259 (2015),
para. 14).

In that regard, France expresses its concern that
the security situation in Libya does not allow the
Prosecutor's inquiries to unfold as they should. Despite
the road ahead, the progress we have made deserves
our full attention, and France continue's to support
Ms. Bensouda's action to that end. Having made these
general remarks, we would like to emphasize three
key elements.

First is support for the Libyan authorities in the field
ofjustice and rebuilding the rule of law. The Council
has affirmed that the solution to the Libyan crisis can
only be political. The efforts of Special Representative
of the Secretary -General Martin Kobler, and the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in
general, contribute not only to the objectives of peace
and stability, but also to establishing the rule of law in
Libya. The signing of the Libyan Political Agreement
and the formation of the Presidency Council and the
Government of National Accord represent major
advances. The international community must continue
to give its full support to the Presidency Council and the
Government of National Accord, in line with the Vienna
Ministerial Conference of 16 May, in the presence of
Mr. Fayyez Al-Sarraj, Prime Minister of Libya.

Secondly, it is necessary to encourage the Libyan
authorities to deepen their cooperation with the ICC.
France and its partners stand ready to support the
efforts of the Libyan authorities to build strong State
institutions guaranteeing the rule of law. We must also
encourage the Government of Mr. Al-Sarraj to give
every assistance to the ICC, as called for in resolution
2259 (2015). The cooperation of Libya with the ICC is
crucial to ending a long period of impunity in Libya
and to allowing the Court to carry out the mandate
entrusted to it by the Statute and the Council. It also
contributes to building a judicial system that respects
the rule oflaw in Libya.

The Court has jurisdiction to try Mr. Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and has requested that he be returned.
France reiterates that Libya must comply with the
judges" decision, as the Pre-Trial Chamber recalled in
its decision of 10 December 2014. France urges Libya
to pursue consultations with the ICC so as to remove all
obstacles to the execution of the decision to surrender
Al-Qadhafi to the Court.

Regarding the case against Mr. Al-Senussi, the
Prosecutor feels that she is not be able to say with
certainty that new facts have emerged that could
overturn the Trial Chamber's reasons for concluding
the inadmissibility of the case against Mr. Al-Senussi.
We note that the Prosecutor is continuing her work
of gathering information and that an appeal is also
under way.

Thirdly, good cooperation requires a more
integrated and coherent approach to justice matters
on the part of the different States and institutions
concerned. France recalls the importance it attaches to
the obligation of States to cooperate, as provided for in
article 86 of the Rome Statute, which addresses judicial
cooperation with the Court in its investigations and
prosecutions of crimes under its juridication.

France also shares the Prosecutor's desire for
an integrated approach at the national, regional and
international levels that is firmly anchored in the
principle of complementarity. As Prosecutor Bensouda
recalled in her briefing, with respect to the principle
of complementarity, it falls first and foremost to States
to investigate and prosecute their own nationals who
are implicated in the commission of crimes under
the Rome Statute committed on their territory and/
or by their nationals. Such an approach can provide
leverage at the national level and strengthen capacity-
building, without which no stability is possible. My
country is particularly committed to this approach, and
the Prosecutor's conclusion that the implementation
of the 2013 memorandum on the division of labour
concerning investigations in Libya helped facilitated
her work confirms us in that general direction. This
more integrated approach to justice issues at all levels
is at the heart ofa rebuilt judiciary that can serve as the
foundation of sustainable stability.

The terms of the Prosecutor's report and her
requests to that end are futher appeals that we must
pursue with resolve. France reiterates its full support
in that regard.

