Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would
first like to congratulate Spain and your delegation,
Mr. President, as you take on the work of the presidency
of the Council this month. You can be assured that New
Zealand will do all it can to support you. I would also
like to thank and commend the Russian delegation for
the very calm and efficient way in which they managed
the Council through a very difficult month.

I would like to thank Ms. Sandra Honore for her
briefing and her commitment to the reconstruction
of Haiti, as well as the staff of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the
troop-contributing countries for the important work
they are doing. Today's discussions on MINUSTAH
come at a very important time in Haiti's emergence
from a long period ofinstability as the country seeks to
consolidate its democracy and institutions.
New Zealand welcomes the positive trends in Haiti's
stabilization, in particular the commencement ofa long-
overdue election process. In that regard, the holding of
legislative elections on 9 August was a significant step
towards a renewal of Haiti's democratic institutions. As
we have heard, the elections were not completely free
of irregularities or violence, but the fact that they were
judged to be inclusive and transparent is nonetheless a
sign of genuine progress. We are also encouraged by
the performance of the Haitian National Police, which
has continued to develop, with MINUSTAH'S support.
We commend Haiti's electoral institutions for their
efforts and urge them to implement the lessons learned
from the August elections in preparation for the next,
more challenging phase of the electoral process. We
also urge all Haitian political actors to do everything
possible to ensure that the elections take place in stable
and peaceful conditions.

It is vital that the Haitian authorities lead the
management of the elections and appear at the forefront
of efforts to maintain Haiti's security and stability. It is
also clear that MINUSTAH has a role to play during this
period in supporting a secure and stable environment
conducive to free and fair elections. But as we said in
this Chamber in March (see S/PV.7147), MINUSTAH
will not be in Haiti forever. The Mission should evolve
as the situation on the ground allows and as the Haitian
authorities and institutions become ready to assume full
responsibility for Haiti's security. For that reason, we
too support the Secretary-General's proposal to conduct
a strategic assessment of the situation in Haiti after the
current electoral cycle and in close consultation with
the Haitian Government.

While we do not want to prejudge the outcome
of that assessment, should the positive trajectory
in Haiti's stabilization continue, New Zealand will
certainly welcome a discussion on the footprint of
the United Nations in Haiti, and in particular on the
future of MINUSTAH. The capacity of the Haitian
National Police to manage Haiti's security challenges
should be central to that discussion. In considering the
future United Nations presence in Haiti, it will also be
important to take into account some worrying aspects
of the humanitarian situation in Haiti, including those
relating to cholera and internally displaced persons.

I would like to conclude by reiterating that Haiti is
at a critical point on its path to restoring an inclusive
and representative democracy. We hope that, in the
coming months, it will complete a peaceful political
transition and show proof of the progress it has made
in taking full control of its future. We also hope that
the Council will continue to exercise due patience and
prudence, and be united in expressing its support to
Haiti at this important time.

