Mr. Nambiar (India): Please allow me, Mr.
President, to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. We have no
doubt that your presidency would allow a careful and
responsible consideration of the important issues on the
agenda of the Council. I would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate Ambassador Mamady
Traore of Guinea for his adroit stewardship of the
Council during a crucial period in the Council's
history.

Let me start by congratulating you on your
decision to include an open debate on the critical
subject of threats to international peace and security
caused by terrorist acts on the Council's work
schedule. My country, like most others, continues to
believe that the main threats to international peace and
security today emanate from the uncontrolled ravages
of terrorism. It is sufficient to refer to the Council's
presidential statements issued in recent months in
response to terrorist incidents in Bali, Moscow,
Mombassa and Bogota to be able to reinforce this
point.

The instruments crafted by the Security Council
in the form of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
and the Taliban/Al Qaeda committee are critical in so
far as they represent some of the most serious
multilaterally defined and accepted efforts to
collectively tackle a growing menace that respects no
national boundaries, region or religion.
I wish to take the opportunity here to join other
delegations in congratulating Ambassador Sir Jeremy
Greenstock for his wholly dedicated and selfless
involvement in the task of taking the Counter-
Terrorism Committee from a fledgling idea to a
recognized landmark in the international fight against
terrorism. The Security Council, the United Nations
and the membership it represents owe a great deal to
the structures and solid institutional foundations that
Sir Jeremy has laid down in the form of the CTC. We
are confident that Ambassador Arias, with his proven
competence, will take the Committee to ever greater
heights of achievement and effectiveness that the
second and subsequent stages of the CTC's functioning
call for.

My delegation has consistently and unequivocally
supported a strong international stance against
terrorism. My country believes that terrorism is a
common foe to all peoples, beliefs and religions, as
also of democracy, pluralistic societies and peace. But
this view is not confined to India alone. The countries
that participated in the Second Ministerial Conference
of the Community of Democracies, held in Seoul in
November 2002, agreed that "terrorism constitutes a
threat to international peace and security as well as to
humanity in general and indeed the very foundation on
which democratic societies are built". They also
underscored that "terrorism cannot be justified by any
cause or under any circumstances ...". Similar language
underpins Security Council resolution 1456 (2003)
adopted earlier this year.

India's experience of being at the receiving end of
externally-sponsored terrorism has demonstrated to us
the unalloyed terrorists' goal of disrupting normal
peaceful functioning of societies as a cynical tactic for
the achievement of their political objectives. They,
therefore, choose to launch their attacks upon places of
worship, parliamentary institutions and public
transportation, and to target voters and candidates
engaged in democratic electoral processes, as well as
isolated and vulnerable minority communities, women
and children. In the past two decades, India has lost
60,000 of its citizens to cross-border terrorism in the
Punjab, in Jammu and Kashmir and in other parts of
the country.

Only a few days ago, 24 members of a village in
the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir - 11 men, ll
women and 2 infants - were ordered out of their
homes and massacred by terrorists in full view of the
entire village. Their sole qualification for being
targeted for this extraordinary fate was that they were
Kashmiri pandits professing the ancient faith of their
land. The objective of the exercise was a selective
"cleansing" through mass murder, which has been the
objective of these terrorist groups and their sponsors all
along: to attack the basis of a secular state; to attack
the fabric of a society that has lived peacefully together
for centuries in intercommunal harmony.

Laced with the potent stimulant of
fundamentalism and religious extremism, this is the
hallmark of the terror being unleashed on India. What
other rationale can explain the attempt to replace the
prevalent peaceful Sufi religious beliefs traditionally
practised in many parts of Jammu and Kashmir with
the fanatical and uncompromising dictates of a
purported orthodoxy that requires an enforced
adherence to repressive social restrictions, and vile
impositions against women and society?

This incident has been noticed and, indeed,
condemned around the world. What has gone
unnoticed, however, is the tremendous restraint and
composure displayed by the Government of India, and,
indeed, by the various communities in India, in not
being provoked into reacting disproportionately to this
event, as can happen all to often in situations like this
one, which inflame religious and communal passions
around the country. By behaving maturely, our
common people have responded wisely to this latest
terrorist outrage. I would like to assure you, Mr.
President, that, much as we condemn the evil of
terrorism, we are conscious, in this context, as much of
Nietzsche as indeed of the Buddha and of Mahatma
Gandhi. We are confident that our democracy offers
systemic safeguards that will prevent us from
becoming mirror images of the "monster" we oppose.

Unfortunately, despite assurances provided at the
highest levels, the one country that has today emerged
as the epicentre of terrorism and is responsible for this
situation remains unprepared to live up to its public
pronouncements and commitments made to the
international community and to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee.

My Government has consistently pointed out that
the purpose of establishing credible multilateral
instruments to counter terrorism is not only to equip
States to fight terrorism effectively, but also to identify
those States that contravene the provisions of Security
Council resolutions in their sponsorship, support and
encouragement of terrorism.

India finds it difficult to accept a situation in
which a country professes to be part of the global
coalition against terrorism on the one hand, while
continuing to aid, abet and sponsor terrorism on the
other. The global fight against terrorism, spurred on in
large part by the horrors of the attacks of 11 September,
no longer leaves any space for ambiguity in a State's
record on terrorism. The time for double standards is
oven

India has held the View that the Counter-
Terrorism Committee needs to move beyond the stage
of reporting on to the stage of identifying violations of,
if not enforcing, resolutions 1373 (2001), 1456 (2003)
and other relevant Security Council resolutions.
Subparagraphs 2(b), (d) and (e) and 3(a) of resolution
1373 (2001) make specific references to cross-border
or transnational terrorism. These provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001) oblige Member States to take
action to prevent the facilitation of terrorism against
other States. We have noted that facile and often
mendacious assertions of the fulfilment of obligations
under resolution 1373 (2001) form an integral part of
the report of at least one respondent that has done
nothing to fulfil its commitments, both stated and
statutory. This has not gone unnoticed by the
international community.

India attaches the highest priority to the
functioning of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. It is
in this spirit that we wish to make a few comments and
to pose a few questions, the responses to which, we
hope, will contribute towards the Committee's
functioning. Our questions are the following.

First, while there is universal appreciation of the
work of the CTC in seeking to have the proper
legislative framework in place to implement resolution
1373 (2001), has the CTC considered the question of
how to deal with a situation in which a Member State is
not enforcing effective compliance by concrete actions,
even while professing to do so in its responses to the
Committee?

Secondly, while proceeding to Stage B of its
implementation of 1373 (2001), how would the CTC
ensure that it would receive relevant information and
assistance from Member States, while at the same time
avoiding an intrusiveness that could impinge on the
secrecy of information and procedures followed in
counter-terrorism measures by the States concerned?

Thirdly, while following international standards,
such as those of the Financial Action Task Force on
Money Laundering (FATF), can the CTC take into
account the need for internationally negotiated and
agreed arrangements acceptable to all Member States?
Fourth, while the CTC's meeting with
international and regional organizations was a
successful venture in terms of securing the
participation of the invitees involved, could the CTC,
in future, consider a more representative regional
balance? At the same time, must the Committee not
also note that not all regional organizations have the
mandate of the countries they represent to engage in
any discussions on the subject of terrorism?

Fifth, while it is understood that the CTC does
not need to move at the speed of the slowest Member,
it needs to consider whether it is desirable to move at
the speed of the fastest. Should not the Committee be
seeking to avoid a situation in which the overwhelming
majority of States having fulfilled their obligations
under Stage A belong predominantly to the developed
regions of the world, while those striving to comply
with the requirements are those that represent the
developing world?

Sixth, while the CTC's matrix of assistance
provides a useful assessment of assistance on offer,
perhaps the Committee should be examining whether
the bilateral assistance offered by one or two countries
is truly representative of the entire gamut of assistance
in this area offered at a bilateral level?

India has made considerable efforts to work with
the international community in its fight against
terrorism. India is a party to all 12 international
conventions on terrorism. The Government of India has
decided very recently to ratify the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism. India's proposal for the early conclusion of
a comprehensive convention against international
terrorism has been under active consideration of the
Sixth Committee of the General Assembly. The recent
Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Commonwealth Law Ministers' Meeting reiterated the
need for the early conclusion of the Convention and
called upon all States to cooperate in resolving the
outstanding issues. We are confident that the mutual
interest of Member States will enable the Convention
to be approved as a useful and effective multilateral
instrument in the near future.

Let me once again reiterate our warmest
appreciation for the work of Sir Jeremy in the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. We wish him every success and
have no doubt that he will apply his boundless energy,
valuable experience and the rare qualities of an
outstanding diplomat to whichever pursuit he chooses
to engage in after July this year. We wish also warmly
to welcome Ambassador Arias to the chairmanship of
this prestigious and critical Committee and wish him
the very best in his endeavour. I assure him that my
delegation will be prepared to offer him whatever
assistance he may require of us in the effective
fulfilment of his high function.

