Ms. Goolab (South Africa): Allow me to begin
by thanking Mr. Geir Pedersen for his briefing on
the situation in Syria. 1 would also like to take this
opportunity to thank the Special Envoy and the teams
supporting him in carrying out his responsibilities with
dedication and fortitude. We commend the efforts of
the Special Envoy towards creating an environment that
is conducive towards a Syrian-led and United Nations-
facilitated process to establish credible, inclusive
and non-sectarian governance and set a process for
drafting a new constitution and conducting free and
fair elections. I also thank Ms. Sabah Al Hallak for her
very informative briefing.

Iwill focus my remarks on the following three issues:
the security situation, the political and constitutional
processes, and the humanitarian situation.

Regarding the first issue, South Africa expresses
it grave concern at the recent reports of shelling and
missile strikes in Idlib that have resulted in the injury
and deaths of civilians, including children. We urge all
parties to adhere to their obligations under international
law, especially with regard to the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure. However, we also hope that
as the Syrian Government forces move to gain further
control of their territory, the threat of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham and other armed groups will be
fully destroyed. We must also note that while counter-
terrorism activities are vital to achieving that goal,
those activities must be undertaken in full compliance
with international humanitarian and human rights law.

On the second issue of the political and
constitutional processes, South Africa welcomes the
launch and convening of the first meeting of the Syrian
Constitutional Committee at the end of October. Reports
show that tangible progress has been made in the work
of the larger committee and that of the small group. We
urge all members of the Constitutional Committee to
faithfully carry out their duties in line with the code
of conduct that was adopted during their discussions.
We look forward to receiving regular updates on the
progress of their work.

While the work of the Constitutional Committee
progresses in earnest, the other aspects of the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) must also
continue, including the active engagement of all parties
in the continuing political process facilitated by the
Special Envoy. As a complement to the Constitutional
Committee, parties should consider bolstering that
progress with confidence-building measures, including
the release of civilian detainees, particularly women,
children, the elderly and the sick.

My delegation reiterates that the only sustainable
solution to the Syrian question remains the achievement
of a political solution through an inclusive Syrian-led
dialogue aimed at achieving a political transition that
reflects the will of the Syrian people, with guaranteed
protection for all groups of Syrian society. In that
regard, we welcome the representation of women as
well as the various religious groups in the peace talks,
and we reiterate that resolution 2254 (2015) remains the
road map for the political process in Syria.

On the third issue - the humanitarian situation and
the upcoming renewal of the cross-border humanitarian
assistance mandate - I would like to reiterate that
South Africa will continue to work with all interested
parties to find consensus on the matter. South Africa
remains committed to supporting the protection of
the fundamental interests of the Syrian people, the
maintenance of peace and security in the Middle East
region and upholding the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the basic norms
governing international relations, including respect for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence
of Syria. We call on all parties in Syria, including the
political and civil society sectors and all of the Syrian
people, to unite in order to stitch together a peaceful,
stable and prosperous future.

