Mr. Hill (Australia): We once again appreciate
the opportunity to participate in the Security Council's
deliberations on Timor-Leste. Like others, we are
particularly pleased to see President Ramos-Horta here
today and take the opportunity to acknowledge his
significant personal efforts to promote peace and
national reconciliation in Timor-Leste.

Australia is heartened by the Government of
Timor-Leste's progress in addressing long-standing
security and development challenges, including
resettling internally displaced persons and negotiating
a resolution with the petitioners. The Government's
quick and effective response to the attacks on the
Timorese leadership on 11 February 2008 has
contributed to the current stable security environment
in Timor-Leste. Improved stability has allowed the
Government of Timor-Leste to focus on much needed
socio-economic development.

Australia would also like to take the opportunity
to praise the efforts of Timor-Leste's partners, in
particular the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), under the very able leadership
of Mr. Atul Khare. It is UNMIT's ongoing support to
the Timor-Leste Government that provides the enabling
environment and stability to allow the Government to
move forward.

While Timor-Leste has made good progress, the
Secretary-General's report (S/2009/72) makes clear
that there is no room for complacency. We agree. Much
needs to be done before its longer-term stability and
economic development can be assured. Meanwhile,
Timor-Leste will require continued strong support from
the United Nations and bilateral partners.

In Australia's view, nowhere is that more
apparent than in the security sector. Australia
welcomes the Secretary-General's recommendations
for a 12-month mandate extension, with no reduction
to the authorized United Nations police levels. We note
that the United Nations is working with the
Government of Timor-Leste to ensure a phased
resumption of policing responsibilities, and we
welcome the negotiation of clearly defined criteria
between Timor-Leste and UNMIT to gauge the
readiness of the national police (PNTL) to assume
responsibility. The challenges facing PNTL should not
be underestimated and will be ongoing. Until the police
force has been significantly strengthened, it will be
vital to retain an ongoing strong United Nations police
presence to underpin security. Without that, other gains
will be jeopardized.

Australia sees itself as a steadfast friend and
neighbour of Timor-Leste and will continue to be at the

forefront of international efforts to assist it towards
long-term stability and greater prosperity. Through our
leadership of the International Stabilisation Force and
with the strong support of New Zealand, we are
pleased to have helped the Timor-Leste Government
and UNMIT stabilize Timor-Leste's security
environment. Also, Australia, as a leading development
partner, will continue to take a long-term approach to
addressing the many development challenges facing
Timor-Leste, including in relation to youth
unemployment and delivery of basic Government
services.

Given the importance of security sector
strengthening, assistance to Timor-Leste's police and
military forces will continue to be a particular focus for
Australia's enhanced engagement. We also welcome
the work to strengthen Timor-Leste's justice sector,
which remains fundamental to consolidating the rule of
law and preventing the re-emergence of political
violence. Australia will continue to offer assistance in
that regard.

As Timor-Leste turns its mind increasingly to
longer-term security and development challenges, the
international community will need to remain fully
engaged. Effective cooperation and coordination
between donors are crucial in ensuring that Timor-
Leste is well placed to address the challenges ahead.

