Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to express my appreciation to
Mr. Mkapa for his briefing. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan,
Mr. Menkerios, for his valuable preliminary remarks.

We would like to express our satisfaction with the
peaceful and impartial conduct of the referendum in
Southern Sudan, which has allowed the people to
exercise their right to self-determination in a free and
democratic manner. Such impartial and peaceful
circumstances are a clear result of the implementation
of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)
and the efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union and the League of Arab States. We further recall
that the pledge by the Sudanese President to accept the
results of the referendum is cause for optimism and a
step in the right direction in the post-referendum
period. We stress the importance of the bonds linking
the North and the South and of coexistence and
cooperation between them, irrespective of the results of
the referendum, including cooperation within a new
political framework in the service of their mutual
interests.

We also stress the importance of following up on
such pending matters as the situation in Abyei and
post-referendum issues, including citizenship, wealth-
sharing, oil and water revenues, debt and others. On
the subject of Abyei, we commend the role of
Mr. Menkerios and the parties to the CPA, as well as
the local leadership, in containing the recent clashes.
We call on those parties and local leaders to resume
their efforts to reach an agreement on Abyei.

We also welcome the efforts of the State of Qatar
to reach a peace agreement in Darfur, in parallel with
the new strategy of the Sudanese Government in this
matter, and we stress that such an agreement would
have positive consequences for the overall situation in
the Sudan.

In conclusion, we praise the work of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan and the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

