Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to convey best Eid al-Fitr wishes to you,
Mr. President, to the other members of your delegation
and to Mr. Ibrahima Fall. I wish also to hail your
initiative in organizing this public debate on the
situation in West Africa. Let me also thank Mr. Fall for
his comprehensive briefing this morning.

Today's debate is particularly valuable because it
is taking place within two days of the Dakar summit of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). Here, Mr. President, let me express on
behalf of my Government our great appreciation of the
role played in that organization by your country. We
pay tribute to President Konare, who has so
energetically carried out his responsibilities as
Chairman of ECOWAS. All Africans can be proud of
what that organization's effective work. The Security
Council should take this opportunity to acknowledge
the tireless efforts of ECOWAS to restore peace and
stability in West Africa, particularly in the Mano River
Union subregion, and to reaffirm its commitment to
maintaining and strengthening its partnership with that
organization, whose contribution has been crucial in
dealing with the relevant items on the Council's
agenda.

During the public debate on 14 May 2001,
members of the Council unanimously supported the
inter-agency mission's recommendation that a
comprehensive approach be taken to the problem so as
to provide a lasting response to the needs and priority
problems of West Africa. This approach, which we
welcome, encourages us to feel optimistic. It promises
increased momentum within the Security Council in
support of priority attention to conflict in Africa - a
priority set out in the declaration issued by the Security
Council following its Summit meeting in September
last year.

Almost eight months have passed since the
issuance of the most recent inter-agency mission
report. It would therefore be interesting to see to what
extent the Security Council and other actors involved
have taken specific measures to implement the regional
comprehensive approach recommended by the mission,
which was welcomed by all the parties concerned.
Given the constraints of this meeting and the fact
that the mission made so many recommendations in so
many different areas, we will not be able to go into
detail in our assessment of what has been done. I shall
therefore confine myself to making the following
observations.

Significant progress has been made in Sierra
Leone; the peace process has come a long way since
spring 2000; the programme of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration has so far proved
successful; State authority is gradually being extended
throughout the country; the Revolutionary United Front
has been cooperating as required; and there is every
indication that presidential and legislative elections
will be held as scheduled. At the subregional level,
positive developments have taken place and dialogue
among the leaders of the Mano River Union countries
has been resumed. Important decisions have been taken
jointly by the three countries to resolve the border
problems.

This progress is a credit to all the actors involved,
particularly the Security Council. However, the
Council's approach has not always had the necessary
regional dimension. The refugee problem in Guinea is
still almost entirely unresolved, despite the
commendable efforts of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. At the
subregional level, the situation of displaced persons
and refugees is deteriorating day by day as a result of
armed clashes in northern Liberia, a country in which
the threat of a resumed civil war is very real. The
Council has remained silent in the face of that complex
situation. Its action with regard to Liberia has been
strictly limited to the imposition of sanctions, and it
has completely ignored the grave situation prevailing
in the country.

This fragmented and sectoral approach may lead
eventually to the collapse of what has already been
achieved in Sierra Leone. We repeat what we have said
in the past: the problems of the Mano River Union
countries and of West Africa in general are interlinked.
The future of those countries must be a common future,
and lasting stability can be achieved only when their
political, social, economic and security problems have
been addressed comprehensively, going beyond mere
symptoms to tackle the underlying causes of the
existing crises.

ECOWAS remains an essential interlocutor for
the Council. We welcome that fact, and encourage such
interaction, which results in concrete action in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter.
ECOWAS, under the enlightened leadership of Mali
and its President, Mr. Alpha Oumar Konare, has been a
valuable partner and made a worthy contribution to the
Security Council. We believe, however, that
cooperation with that organization must be
strengthened further. Its opinions must be sought on an
ongoing basis. More importantly, its institutional,
logistical, material and financial capacities must be
strengthened so that it can discharge its serious
responsibilities as effectively as is required. In this
connection, we welcome the Secretary-General's
decision to establish a United Nations Office in West
Africa, as recommended by the inter-agency mission.

However, that initiative in itself will not be
enough. The United Nations and all actors involved
must seriously tackle the other recommendations made
by the inter-agency mission with regard to
strengthening the capacity of ECOWAS. Clearly, the
United Nations will eventually have to end its activities
in the subregion. We must therefore think about an exit
strategy so that a strengthened ECOWAS, capable of
effectively replacing the United Nations, can take over
and play the lead role.

The inter-agency mission recommended that its
report be submitted to ECOWAS, the Organization of
African Unity, the World Bank, the European Union
and other major bilateral and multilateral partners so as
to facilitate discussion with those actors about the
implementation of the comprehensive approach
recommended by the mission. We are sure that the
Secretariat will follow up on that recommendation. We
should note, however, that coordination of the efforts
of the various actors is still lacking, thus reducing the
effectiveness of individual contributions in response to
the situation in West Africa. We therefore await a
genuine debate among all those actors. The Security
Council can play a part in this regard by making those
involved more aware of the need to coordinate their
efforts within the framework of a concerted, coherent
and unified strategy.

Finally, I would like to commend you, Mr.
President, for your initiative of submitting a draft
presidential statement. My delegation is willing to
work with yours on finalizing that draft statement.
