Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this meeting and the
informative briefing by Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda.

Peru welcomes the political developments that have
taken place in the Sudan since the 17 August political
agreement aimed at the establishment of a civilian-
led transitional Government. We also welcome the
signing of the constitutional declaration and the Juba
Declaration for Confidence-building Procedures and
the Preparation for Negotiation, and the opening of the
country to humanitarian access. Also important are the
efforts of the Sovereign Council and the Government
to bring to the negotiation table armed groups that are
not yet party to those agreements, in particular the
Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid faction, which
continues to pose a security challenge, especially to
the civilian population and humanitarian personnel in
the Jebel Marra area, and whose actions are leading to
newly internally displaced persons.

We are also pleased that the new Sudanese
authorities have visited Darfur and expressed their
willingness to consolidate peace in that region, which
includes meeting the demands of victims for justice and
developing a constructive relationship of cooperation
with the International Criminal Court. In line with the
principle of complementarity, that involves allowing
the Court to fulfil its primary responsibility, which is to
prevent the most serious crimes from going unpunished.
In particular, we must ensure that the crimes of which
former President Omer Al-Bashir is accused, as well as
those of other suspects with a current arrest warrant,
are held to account.

Similarly, it will be necessary for the Sudanese
authorities - as well as all States - to spare no effort
to comply with the obligation to detain and hand over
fugitives suspected of crimes against humanity, war
crimes and genocide. Moreover, it will be important
for the International Criminal Court to cooperate with
the Sudanese Government to pursue those goals. In
that context, we wish to reiterate our support for the
important work of the Prosecutor of the Court and her
team. We encourage her to continue her efforts to fulfil
her mandate and uphold the values of the Rome Statute.

We believe it is necessary to reaffirm the need for
States, including members of the Security Council,
to cooperate with the International Criminal Court
and its Prosecutor to achieve justice for the crimes
perpetrated in Darfur. It is our conviction that the
primary responsibility of the Council to maintain
international peace and security and the competency
of the Court over the most serious crimes must be
understood as complementary and interdependent
tasks. That constitutes a commitment that we made to
universal jurisdiction and to the victims of the atrocities
committed in Darfur.

