Mr. Yakovenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I am pleased to greet you, Mr. Minister, in
the President's chair. We have listened to your
statement with great interest, and also to the
assessments put forward by the Secretary-General, by
President Abbas and by the various ministers.

The Russian Federation is deeply concerned by
the serious escalation of the crisis in Gaza since the
beginning of the Israeli ground operation. These
current tragic developments are fraught with potential
for further destabilization of the situation in the
Palestinian territories and in the Middle East in
general. The information coming in through the United
Nations channels attests to the many civilian victims.
The situation in Gaza has become a humanitarian
disaster.

Humanitarian deliveries and evacuations of the
wounded in Gaza must be allowed to ease the situation
in that sector. The civilian population's safety cannot
be ensured while there are widespread military
operations under way in Gaza. If this is not ended in
the near term, then the number of victims will be much
greater. In this alarming situation, Russia sent
humanitarian assistance on 2 January through Egypt to
the population of Gaza. We are preparing a second
delivery. An air-mobile hospital from the Russian
Ministry of Emergency Situations will also be
deployed in the conflict zone.

Today, the views put forward repeatedly by the
Council and the international community are more
relevant than ever in determining an end to the
situation. There needs to be a guarantee here that there
will be no resumption of violence. We are certain that
tanks and aircraft, just like rocket attacks, will not
resolve any of the challenges facing the region. The
advancement of a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the region is possible only via a peace
dialogue and implementation by the parties of all
relevant international obligations.

It is particularly concerning that the dramatic
situation in the Gaza area began when there were
increased international efforts for an Arab-Israeli
settlement. Essentially, preparations were under way
for convening the Moscow meeting. It is necessary to
ensure that these efforts will be successful. But for that
to happen, we need above all to address the Gaza crisis
through political means. In this regard, we have been
interested in the peace initiative advanced by President
Mubarak of Egypt and President Sarkozy of France.
The steps needed for a peaceful settlement to the crisis
in Gaza are being pursued actively by the Russian
leadership, which has been in intensive contact with all
Middle East and international parties without
exception. The end to this crisis is dependent upon
them.

