Mr. Ba-Jammal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I am
highly honoured to be afforded the opportunity to speak
at this special meeting of the Security Council devoted to
the issue of promoting Africa's capacity to transcend its
state of instability, increase the chance of peace and
establish peace in practical terms.

I am most gratified to see you preside over this
meeting, Sir, since your country, the friendly Kingdom of
the Netherlands, is linked to Yemen by close and firm
bonds. The motivation of the Republic of Yemen in
participating in these deliberations should be viewed
against the background of Yemeni-African relations,
which have historical, geographical, human, economic,
cultural and social dimensions, particularly with our
neighbours in East, Central and Southern Africa. Yemen
is thus an authentic participant in all aspects of the
historical process unfolding in these countries because it
is affected negatively or positively by all the political,
economic and social changes and developments which
those countries undergo.

The coastline of the Republic of Yemen extends
over more than 2,500 kilometres on the Red Sea, and its

 

maritime area contains no less than 133 islands, the nearest
to the African coast being those in the Gulf of Aden -
they are no more than about 22 kilometres from the
opposite coast. Thus, the Yemeni and African coasts, which
are clearly visible the one for the other, form a unity based
on proximity and on a territorial complementarity imposed
by the nature of life and by historical and geographical
factors, even though the relationship has lost its regional
political and economic framework.

The Yemeni political leadership has made intensive
efforts to achieve cooperation with a number of countries
and with regional and international bodies with a view to
finding solutions for the deteriorating situations in the Horn
of Africa and East and Central Africa. The tragic spectacle
of African life is daily aggravated by internecine wars
between States, races and tribes. We in Yemen must face
the effects of these conflicts daily since our country's shores
receive thousands of people fleeing these hotbeds of war
and dissension and from repugnant states of anarchy in
search of safe haven. Their only hope is Yemen, which
provides a sanctuary from this unremitting hell.

The burdens this puts on the Yemeni people and State
are very great. The weak Yemeni economy cannot sustain
the ever-increasing load. The tragedy is becoming ever
greater, and so far there is not a single ray of hope that
peace and stability will be established in the region -
especially in Somalia.

Regrettably, the major complications arising out of
blatant external interventions are no secret any longer.
These countries are presently experiencing further political
and social fragmentation, the collapse of their institutions,
economic and environmental backwardness, loss of human
rights and the spread of hostile and poisonous relations in
a most repugnant manner. This is the result of the chain of
havoc wreaked by the will to dominate on the part of some
States and groups.

The Government of the Republic of Yemen calls on
the Security Council to assume responsibility for saving a
situation where silence is no longer an option. It calls on
the Council to support the efforts by the Organization of
African Unity. It calls on the Council to expand the scope
of its participation in order to find solutions that will
safeguard the sovereignty of States and the unity and social
concord of peoples. It calls on the Council to alleviate, on
an ongoing basis, the harmful human and environmental
effects that translate into hunger, poverty, epidemics and
increases in the numbers of the displaced and the
oppressed. The Council must endeavour to eliminate the
causes of these conditions so as to halt their progression
because this situation is a blot on the face of humanity.

Despite the negative effects and economic and
environmental problems it faces, Yemen is fully prepared
to participate with international and regional bodies and
with active local forces in efforts to establish peace in the
Horn of Africa and East Africa. However, it calls on the
international community to assist it in coping with the
burdens the situation places on its economy and on its
available resources, and on the health of the human
environment and its natural assets.

We stress that should the situation remain unchanged
it will further endanger the maintenance of peace, threaten
the safety of international and regional shipping and result
in environmental pollution. Consequently, no one can
deny that leaving the situation in these regions as it is
will lead only to a more extensive and far-reaching
catastrophe.

The Republic of Yemen has contained the crisis over
the question of Yemeni Hanish with its African neighbour
Eritrea in a peaceful and legal manner by resorting to
international arbitration. Yemen feels that peace can be
consolidated only through international legitimacy and
respect for the values and principles of civilized people,
as an appropriate contribution to the cause of peace and
stability in the region. This is a grave responsibility that
should be appreciated by all and should be used as a
model for emulation. Let us imagine a war breaking out
between Yemen and its neighbour Eritrea: the effects of
such a war would engulf the whole area and would affect
the interests of other nations, especially since every 45
minutes a ship passes the island of Hanish loaded with
fuel or tourists or cargo or is involved in fishing or
research. Let us image then the catastrophe that would
occur if war broke out in the Red Sea. But we decided to
be prudent regarding this question. We must learn from
each other and make use of the lessons we have learned.
Reason and logic must prevail, as must peace, for the
sake of humanity at large.

Once again we reiterate our confidence in the
Security Council and we look to it to assume a more
effective and diversified role by facing up to the situation
in Africa and by helping its countries and peoples ensure
peace and stability, in the full realization that all the
African bodies and parties concerned must be aware of
the active role they must play and the enormous
responsibility they bear. This should be in the forefront of
all international and regional endeavours.

 

We hope that these deliberations on peacekeeping in
Africa will achieve the desired objectives and that the ideas
put forward will be transformed into operational measures
and effective mechanisms to safeguard the freedoms of the
African peoples, their natural rights and their security and
their stability.

