I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. China appreciates and supports the Special Envoy's efforts aimed at promoting the implementation of Security Council resolutions and advancing the Syrian political process. China welcomes the third round of meetings of the small body of the Syrian Constitutional Committee, which were held in Geneva in late August. We are pleased to note the areas of commonalities agreed by the two sides and their political will to participate in the next session. We hope the parties concerned will maintain close contact with the Special Envoy and cooperate with him to advance the political dialogue on the basis of existing consensus, so as to achieve positive progress as soon as possible. Meanwhile, the work of the Syrian Constitutional Committee must remain independent and free from foreign interference. Only by adhering to the principle of a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process and by respecting the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria, can we achieve a lasting peace in the country. The international community applauds the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire. It is hoped that all parties in Syria will heed this appeal and seize the window of opportunity afforded by it to enhance mutual trust and stabilize the security situation at an early date. Since March, the situation on the ground has been, by and large, calm. The Astana process has played an important role in settling ceasefire arrangements. China supports the Astana guarantors in strengthening coordination with the United Nations, including Special Envoy Pedersen, in order to produce synergy. The main threats to Syria's security lie in foreign occupation and terrorist activities. Foreign occupation violates international law and causes instability and unrest in the country and in the region as a whole. Terrorists are exploiting the pandemic and aggravating security risks in many parts of the country. It is Syria's right to defend its sovereignty and territorial integrity, combat terrorism and safeguard its national security. The international community should adopt uniform standards in counter-terrorism, in accordance with international law and Security Council resolutions, and support the efforts made by the Syrian Government. To promote the political process and restore peace and stability in Syria, the relevant parties and the international community must enhance dialogue, build consensus and improve collaboration. Unilateral sanctions will not solve problems; rather, they only impose suffering on the people. Unilateral sanctions make it more difficult for the Syrian people, who have already suffered immensely from the conflict, to fulfil their livelihoods. In the light of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, unilateral sanctions have severely weakened Syria's economic foundation and capacity for mobilization and hindered the Syrian people's access to medical supplies and services. Vulnerable groups, including women, children and internally displaced persons, bear the brunt of the impact of COVID-19. China once again urges certain countries to respond to the Secretary-General's appeal, heed the call of the vast majority of States Members of the United Nations and immediately lift the illegal sanctions against Syria.
