Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I am pleased to welcome the eminent
participants to this important discussion, preparations
for which took a number of years. We thank the
Secretary-General for finding the time to participate
personally in this discussion. We further thank the
Peruvian presidency for the initiative of convening
today's meeting.

Today, on the second day of deliberations in the
General Assembly, those present here already have a
View as to how Member States envisage the way ahead
in the important work of the United Nations in building
and sustaining peace. It is well known that those who
do not recall the past cannot count on a dignified future.
For that reason, I wish to turn to the very sources of
peacebuilding to recall how it began and the noble goals
set forth by the General Assembly and the Security
Council when they established these avenues of work.

Thirteen years ago, through General Assembly
resolution 60/180 and Security Council resolution 1645
(2005), two United Nations Charter bodies established
the Peacebuilding Commission to deliver assistance to
countries in the post-conflict period. The main aim of
this decision was to help set countries on the path to
development and recovery as expeditiously as possible.
The Commission was instructed to deliver assistance
in crafting peacebuilding strategies for host States on
the basis of their priorities, to bring together the key
stakeholders within and beyond the United Nations,
and to coordinate their efforts.

Ten years later, the identical General Assembly
resolution 70/262 and Security Council resolution
2282 (2016) specified the goals of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). Above all, States agreed on defining
the concept of sustaining peace to help them understand
differences among tasks implemented at the national
and international levels to achieve sustainable solutions.
For States, this is a matter of national ownership in
defining and implementing peacebuilding strategies,
the importance of considering public opinion and the
need to prevent the emergence, escalation, perpetuation
and recurrence of conflicts, and to eliminate their root
causes. To that end, it is important that the task of
sustaining peace lie not only with Governments, but
equally with all national stakeholders.

While international assistance in the area of
sustaining peace plays a supporting role, the same term
has a slightly different meaning at the United Nations.
It implies that such support must be based on the
experience of all bodies of the Organization and that
attention must be accorded from the very outset and
at all stages of conflict. In that regard, every United
Nations body must act strictly within its mandate.

Since the adoption of the twin resolutions two
years ago at the United Nations, there has been ongoing
debate on exactly how activities in this area should
change. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres has made
an important contribution to the discussion with his
recent thematic report (S/2018/43). His proposals and
recommendations will undoubtedly provide a basis for
further discussion among Member States to strengthen
the effectiveness and capacity of the United Nations in
the area of peacebuilding support. I will not pre-empt
our statement to be delivered at the General Assembly
tomorrow. I will note only the main points.

First, peacebuilding and sustaining peace are
inextricably linked. With the introduction of the new
term, traditional peacebuilding must not be relegated
to the back burner. On the contrary, as the work of the
PBC demonstrates, it is becoming ever more necessary.
We are therefore sceptical about the idea of positioning
sustaining peace as a new central task.

Secondly, conflict prevention is an independent
domain. Its principles are enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and United Nations resolutions. The
primary role in that respect is also played by States
themselves within their national territories. It is they
that determine whether or not they need international
support and what form it should take.

Thirdly, by definition, one-size-fits-all approaches
and reliable universal crises indicators do not exist.
Every case requires an individual approach, a unique
solution and, most importantly, a State's consent to be
provided with international support. That also applies
to human rights issues, which are often artificially
politicized to influence sovereign domestic political
processes. It is interference in the internal affairs of
others under the pretext of the protection and promotion
of human rights that has led to most of today's bloody
conflicts. There are many examples of such situations
and, unfortunately, many of them are to be found in
States neighbouring the Russian Federation.

Fourthly, the main task of resident coordinators
should be to step up the reliability and effectiveness
of State institutions without duplicating or supplanting
their work. Monitoring less-than-obvious indicators
instead of helping to resolve urgent issues is fraught
with the risk of reducing, not increasing, effectiveness.

Fifthly, concerning theoretical linkages connecting
human rights, development, peace and security, it is
important to understand that each of those areas should
be addressed by specialized bodies in full adherence to
their current mandates. Whether or not certain issues are
discussed in the Security Council should not determine
their importance to the international community.

The Security Council will soon adopt a draft
resolution identical to that agreed by the General
Assembly. We support the core message of those
documents that Member States closely follow
issues concerning peace and intend to continue to
discuss them. We appreciate the Secretary-General's
contribution to that discussion and hope that the
procedural consensus on procedural resolutions will
be properly interpreted. Peacebuilding and sustaining
peace are far too multidimensional in nature to operate
on what is largely an artificial consensus.

Much work remains to be done in the future, in the
course of which United Nations Member States and
bodies should learn to better understand and consider
one another's priorities. We believe that the primary
goal and purpose of peacebuilding, sustaining peace
and the United Nations as a whole are to help States
build their own capacities so that they can dispense
with international assistance and ultimately begin
helping those that continue to require such assistance.

