The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Argentina, the Bahamas, Bolivia,
Canada, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Guatemala, Haiti, Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Mexico,
Nicaragua, Peru and Venezuela, in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency The Honourable Keith
Desmond Knight, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Jamaica.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Knight
(Jamaica) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency The Honourable Frederick A. Mitchell,
M.P., Minister for Foreign Affairs and Public Service
of the Bahamas.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mitchell
(Bahamas) took a seat at the side of the Council
Chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alexandre
(Haiti) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
26 February 2004 from the Permanent Representative
of Benin to the United Nations, which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Security Council, that Ambassador Ridha
Bouabid, Permanent Observer for the
International Organization of la Francophonie, be
authorized to participate without the right to vote
in the public meeting of the Council on Haiti that
will be held today, Thursday, 26 February 2004."

That letter will be issued as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/2004/147.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Ridha Bouabid, Permanent Observer for the
International Organization of la Francophonie.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Bouabid to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in response to the request stated in a letter
dated 23 February 2004 from the Permanent
Representative of Jamaica to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
contained in document S/2004/l43. I should also like
to draw the attention of the members of the Council to
document S/2004/l45, which contains a letter dated 25
February 2004 from the Permanent Representative of
France to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, at this meeting.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber. I thank them for their understanding and
cooperation.

As another measure to optimize the use of our
time, I shall not individually invite speakers to take
seats at the table or invite them to resume their seats on
the side. When a speaker is taking the floor, the
Conference Officer will seat the next speaker on the
list at the table. I thank delegations for their
understanding and cooperation.

I shall now give the floor to His Excellency The
Honourable Keith Desmond Knight, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Jamaica.


