Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Allow me, at the outset, to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June.

My delegation wishes to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their reports on
the completion strategy of their respective Tribunals. I
also take this opportunity to congratulate Judge Vagn
Joensen on his election as President of ICTR and wish
him every success in presiding over the Tribunal at this
critical time.

The year 2012 has been a landmark year for the
Rwandan justice system. Eighteen years after the
devastating genocide perpetrated against the Tutsi, the
trust and cooperation between Rwanda's national justice
system and its foreign and international counterparts
has reached new heights.

For the first time since the inception of ICTR, and
after years of application by the Rwandan Government,
the ICTR has transferred a case to Rwanda for trial. The
decision to transfer Jean Bosco Uwinkindi has already
paved the way for other transfers and extraditions of
cases back to Rwanda, particularly the case of Bernard
Munyagishari, whose transfer was decided on just
yesterday. Rwanda welcomes those developments and
expresses its gratitude to the Tribunal for its utmost
vote of confidence in Rwanda and its justice system. I
particularly want to thank the Prosecutor and his team.

Rwanda also commends the ICTR for the transfer of
three other case files to Rwanda. They concern persons
alleged to have committed genocide who are still at
large, namely, Fulgence Kayishema, Charles Sikubwabo
and Ladislas Ntaganzwa. Rwanda, with the support of
Member States, vows to make every effort to apprehend
those fugitives and to bring them to justice.

Rwanda welcomes the decision taken in January
this year by the Quebec Superior Court to extradite Leon
Mugesera to Rwanda, a genocide suspect well known
for his November 1992 hate speech against the Tutsi.
Our Government further welcomes the decision taken
in March by the appellate court in Rouen, France, to
extradite another genocide suspect, Claude Muhayimana.

Both decisions follow the 27 October 2011 ruling
of the European Court of Human Rights on the case of
Silvere Ahorugeze, which determined conclusively that
his extradition to Rwanda would neither violate article
3 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
and Fundamental Freedoms, prohibiting inhuman and
degrading treatment or punishment, nor article 6 on his
right to a fair trial.

Based on that jurisprudence, Rwanda encourages all
United Nations Member States to arrest and/or extradite
all genocide fugitives and suspects living within their
territory, in order to assist in the fight against impunity
for the most serious crimes.

Rwanda has always recognized the tremendous
job done by the ICTR Tracking Unit and welcomes
its transfer to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, starting 1 July. Rwanda also
commends States Members of the United Nations that
have arrested genocide fugitives over the past years.
We urge all Governments to continue their cooperation
with the Tracking Unit in arresting and transferring the
remaining fugitives, including the most wanted, F e'licien
Kabuga.

The Government of Rwanda commends the work
done by the ICTR and ICTY in ensuring a digital
recordkeeping of archives and a successful transfer to
the Residual Mechanism. Rwanda is fully aware that the
location of ICTR archives is a sensitive issue, given that
various elements are at stake, such as the classification
of Governments' documents, the protection of witnesses
and easy access by the public. For all those reasons,
Rwanda believes that the ICTR archives shall remain
the property of the United Nations.

Nonetheless, as has stated on many occasions,
Rwanda reiterates its request to host the archives in
Kigali upon the completion of the work of the Residual
Mechanism. That location would ensure easy access
for genocide survivors to records that constitute an
integral part of our history and which are vital to the
preservation of our collective memory - not to mention
the education of future generations. As the archives will
serve as a research centre for scholars and the broader
international community, they will support, inter alia,
the fulfilment of the mission of the United Nations to
promote peace and ensure the prevention of genocide.

Rwanda has come a long way in the past 18 years.
The international community has lent its unwavering
support to the country's fight against impunity. After
nearly two decades of operation, the ICTR and the
Rwandan community-based jurisdictions - the Gacaca
court - are winding down this year. Thanks to both
jurisdictions and to tribunals in sister countries in Europe
and North America, thousands of genocide perpetrators
have been brought to book and thousands of survivors
have told their stories and contributed to the process of
truth, reconciliation and healing in Rwanda.

Together we must now ensure that the fight against
impunity does not flag. My Government reiterates its
continued commitment to supporting and expediting the
work of the ICTR and the Residual Mechanism.

