Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I am
very grateful to Mr. Kalomoh for his introduction and
to all those in the Secretariat who contributed to the
Secretary-General's report (S/2003/1147).

Much has changed in West Africa since the
Council's mission there last summer. The United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) has deployed to
Liberia, we are on the verge of approving a much-
needed peacekeeping operation for Cote d'Ivoire and
there is a new Government in Guinea-Bissau. All of
this offers real hope that lasting peace can be created in
the subregion. But it will require sustained
commitment from the Council and the international
community, backing up the efforts of the West Africans
themselves. This imposes a particular obligation on us
to support African solutions.

We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting so that we can take stock of the
progress made and remind ourselves of how much
more needs to be done. Naturally, in what I am now
about to say, I associate myself with the views to be
expressed later by Ambassador Ryan on behalf of the
European Union.

We are gradually seeing the Council's emphasis
on a regional approach being put into practice on the
ground, and this seems to us evident in three main areas.

The first area is tackling cross-border problems
more effectively. As mercenaries and small arms move
easily across borders in West Africa, so conflict and
chaos move with them, disrupting previously stable
countries. We need regional approaches to such
problems, such as countries of the region agreeing to
take fighters back to their home countries during the
process of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR). The Secretary-General recommended in his
report on small arms (8/2003/1217), that the Council
pursue more vigorously broader measures, such as
subregional arms embargoes, in cases like West Africa,
where borders are no barrier to arms traffickers and
mercenaries. We believe this should be considered
alongside Mr. Ould-Abdallah's imminent report on
tackling cross-border problems.

The second area is the more effective use of
United Nations assets across the region. We were
delighted that the Secretary-General appointed a
Special Representative for West Africa. The Special
Representative has since initiated valuable
coordination meetings with other missions in the
subregion. We also welcome Department of
Peacekeeping Operations efforts to exploit the
synergies between missions. For example, UNMIL
officers received pre-deployment training from the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL),
and UNAMSIL logistics were used to transport troops
to their new base in Liberia. The United Nations
Mission in Cote d'Ivoire (MINUCI) and UNMIL plan
to set up a coordination mechanism along the Liberia-
Cote d'Ivoire border. All of this makes not only for
cost-effectiveness, but for far better results. So we
encourage the Secretariat to do more of this, especially
as UNAMSIL draws down and UNMIL builds up.

The third area is closer links with the key
subregional organizations. We look forward to Mr.
Ould-Abdallah's separate report on how we can
strengthen cooperation with and support for the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). This is vital if we are to build lasting
stability that endures after United Nations
peacekeeping operations have left. Similarly, we
should encourage the countries of the Mano River
Union to revive their former good relations, starting
with their summit planned for February.

If I may, I would like to turn to some specific
issues raised by the mission. In Sierra Leone, a country
now at peace thanks to the enormous resources
invested there, that investment must not be wasted. We
shall examine carefully the progress made against the
benchmarks set by the Council for UNAMSIL's
drawdown. If these benchmarks have not been fully
met, we shall have to consider what kind of residual
United Nations presence may be required after
UNAMSIL's departure this December.

In Guinea-Bissau, the collaboration between the
Economic and Social Council and the Security Council
is one of the positive aspects of recent developments in
Guinea-Bissau. It demonstrates that no organ of the
United Nations has sole responsibility in many of these
areas and that, the more we can cooperate together, the
more effective we will be. Therefore, throughout the
whole region, where poverty and lack of development
have contributed to the causes of conflict, the Economic
and Social Council has an important role to play.

In Liberia, the next challenges ahead for UNMIL
are well known. As Mr. Kalomoh described it, we need
early and determined progress. DDR will be the most
important aspect of this. We welcome the appointment
of a deputy to Special Representative Klein, who is
also the resident coordinator on the ground. This
double-batting has worked well in Sierra Leone in
ensuring that humanitarian, development and other
peace-building issues are properly integrated into the
peacekeeping operation from the start.

Lastly, in Cote d'Ivoire, thanks to the sterling
work by the French forces, by ECOWAS and then by
MINUCI, the situation is improving. But to make
progress with implementing Linas-Marcoussis, it is not
enough simply to maintain the status quo. A
peacekeeping operation is much needed and should be
speedily confirmed. It is not a simplistic matter of a
balance between Sierra Leone, Liberia and cote
d'Ivoire. It is necessary, if we are to do more than
merely transfer problems from one country to its
temporarily more vulnerable neighbour, to act
coherently across the three countries.

Finally, may I say how much we value these
broader debates on regional topics. They are an
opportunity to hear the views of the States of the
region, to compare our approach to different regions
and to draw lessons in order to develop all the regional
synergies that are available to us, and we hope to
develop a model for United Nations interventions
elsewhere.

