The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Uganda.
I wish to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and Ms. Susana
Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for Field Support,
for their briefings this morning. I also thank the
Permanent Representative of Somalia, Mr. Elmi Ahmed
Duale, for his statement. I welcome the participation in
this debate of the Permanent Observer of the African
Union (AU) and of the Permanent Representative of
Sweden, representing the presidency of the European
Union.

The Security Council has spent a great deal of
time discussing the situation in Somalia. In the past six
months alone, the Council has adopted two
resolutions - resolutions 1863 (2009) and 1872
(2009) - and has issued one presidential statement -
S/PRST/2009/ 15 - and four statements to the press. In
spite of the attention paid to the situation in Somalia,
the conflict in the country continues to destroy lives
and to have a negative impact on the whole region. The
situation also continues to disrupt international trade,
through piracy, and poses a threat to international
peace and security.

The Djibouti peace process represents the best
opportunity to achieve lasting peace in Somalia. We
commend the efforts made by the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) to advance the political process in
the country. At the same time, we are concerned about
the fact that, despite the efforts at reconciliation made
by President Ahmed's Government, there are still some
elements within and outside Somalia that are bent on
taking the path of violence. Uganda condemns the
attacks on the TFG, the civilian population and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) by
violent opposition groups and foreign elements, in an
attempt to undermine the political process and
reconciliation efforts.

Uganda welcomes the support given to ease the
humanitarian situation in the country and the support
extended to the TFG and to AMISOM. We call upon
the United Nations and other partners to expedite the
support necessary to enable AMISOM. effectively to
implement its mandate. We also call upon AU member
States to provide the personnel required to enable
AMISOM. to reach its authorized capacity of 8,000
troops. As provided for in Security Council resolution
1863 (2009), the presence of AMISOM. in Somalia is a
transitional step towards the envisaged United Nations
peacekeeping operation. Therefore, the Security

09-3985]
Council should continue to make the necessary
preparations for the eventual rehatting of AMISOM.

The African Union Assembly, meeting in Sirte,
Libya, a few days ago, called upon the Security
Council to take urgent measures to address the grave
situation in Somalia. Uganda calls upon the Security
Council to respond accordingly.

Finally, we thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for the draft presidential statement, which
Uganda supports.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to Her Excellency Mrs. Lila
Ratsifandrihamanana, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations.

