Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Less than 24 days
before the date set for the referendums, we are at the
most critical stage of the peace process. The
determination of the parties to the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA) to achieve peace, stability and
coexistence will be the decisive factor. The United
Nations and the international community will of course
continue to strongly support the parties, the institutions
involved and the Sudanese people throughout the peace
process and beyond.

With regard to the referendum in Southern Sudan,
notable progress has been made. Voter registration took
place from 15 November to 8 December. The process
has generally gone well, without major disturbances or
violent incidents. The Secretary-General's Panel on the
Referenda in the Sudan, represented here by Mr. Mkapa
and responsible for observing the referendums in the
Southern Sudan and Abyei, has concluded that the
registration process was both transparent and free of
any organized fraud.

The Southern Sudan Referendum Commission is
in the process of compiling voter lists. According to the
latest unofficial published by the Commission, more
that 115,000 people were registered in the North of
Sudan and more than 2.9 million in Southern Sudan. To
clarify, however, this figure is based on only 60 per
cent of the voter registration centres in Southern
Sudan, so the final figure will clearly be between 3 and
4 million voters.

Voter registration was also completed on
8 December in Australia, Canada, Ethiopia, Kenya,
Uganda and Great Britain. The Commission has
adjusted the electoral timetable for other centres that
opened later, such that three centres in Egypt will close
on 18 December and five centres in the United States
will close on 22 December. The number of those on the
list in the eight countries other than the Sudan now
stands at more than 57,000 voters.

Preparations for the 9 January referendum itself
are also under way. Necessary equipment has been
obtained. Electoral equipment has arrived in the Sudan
and is being distributed. Additional staff has been
found for the voting centres, and their training began
on 13 December. Data collection centres in Khartoum
and Juba are operational. Voting and vote-counting
procedures, as well as plans for announcing the results,
are now being finalized.
3

At the same time, however, the Commission is

continuing to encounter difficulties in obtaining the

necessary funds as promised by the Government. The

two Governments must urgently provide the funding

required and fulfil their responsibilities in organizing
the referendum.

Despite the tight schedule, the success of the
voter registration is an example of what the North and
the South can achieve when they work together. It is
vital that the parties continue their efforts and maintain
a political environment favourable to holding a free
referendum without violence.

In order to ensure a smooth transition at the end
of the referendum process and the interim period, the
parties must agree on the key issues for the post-
referendum period, including resource-sharing, the
management of capital and debt, citizenship and border
security arrangements. It is vital that the parties reach a
framework agreement on those issues before the
referendums are held. Progress has recently been made
in the negotiations, facilitated by the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel with the support of
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), the
United States and other international partners.

The outcome of the negotiations will have
significant implications for a number of the
stakeholders. For example, one of the most serious
issues is that of citizenship. Possible changes in the
status of property rights will also be a major concern
for Southern Sudanese living in the North and Northern
Sudanese living in the South.

The current stalemate on the question of Abyei is
of major concern. We are particularly concerned by the
lack of any progress in setting up the referendum
commission for Abyei and the discussions by the
parties on the future status of Abyei. Despite some
apparent progress under the auspices of the High-Level
Implementation Panel, no agreement has yet been
reached and tension is growing on the ground.

Political sensitivities and historical complexities
related to the issue of Abyei make it even more delicate
for one of the parties to consider options that could be
seen by their constituents as being concessions. Given
this, the parties cannot allow themselves not to resolve
this issue. Tensions and frustration on the ground will
only increase, and that will make the issue of Abyei
more difficult to resolve, particularly because the
migration of the Misseriya has already begun.

In such an environment, any security incident
could derail the CPA process. The parties must
therefore demonstrate responsible leadership and
recognize that difficult compromises are required in
order to ensure peaceful coexistence among
communities. All efforts are being made by the parties
concerned, particularly by UNMIS, to encourage the
leaders to agree on a solution as soon as possible.

Other provisions of the CPA require immediate
attention. For example, finalizing the demarcation of
the North-South border, moving troops away from the
common border and the joint monitoring of those zones
by the two parties in order to avoid possible tension are
necessary to maintain border security between the
North and the South.

Popular consultations in the states of Southern
Kordofan and the Blue Nile are also being postponed.
Parties should pay more attention to those issues,
which represent an opportunity to enhance North-South
relations and future stability in the North.

It is important to point out that on 6 December
the parties signed a framework agreement on the
security arrangements for the oil fields and oil
installations located south of the current borderline.
That agreement stipulates that the Joint Integrated
Units will continue to provide security on the external
periphery of the oil installations until 9 July 2011,
while the security forces of Sudan's National
Intelligence and Security Services and the Sudanese
police will protect the internal periphery of those
installations.

(spoke in English)

We are concerned about the recent reports of
bombings by the Sudanese armed forces along the
border areas between Northern Bahr El Ghazal state
and South Darfur and in Western Bahr El Ghazal state.
Those attacks are allegedly directed against the Justice
and Equality Movement, but they have also resulted in
casualties among the Sudan People's Liberation Army.

We urge both Governments to exercise restraint
and prevent the situation from escalating. Either party's
support to rebel groups against the other constitutes a
violation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement.
Any such accusation should thus be brought to the
attention of the appropriate mechanisms established by
the CPA, instead of being dealt with unilaterally and
militarily. We are encouraged by the discussions held
on that issue during the Ceasefire Joint Military
Committee yesterday, 15 December, and the
prospective resolution of that dispute during the next
Ceasefire Political Commission meeting. However, we
need to emphasize that unilateral military action
constitutes a threat to the CPA and must stop once and
for all.

Restrictions on UNMIS freedom of movement
remain a major challenge, notably in Southern
Kordofan and Northern Abyei. I urge the Sudanese
authorities to prevent such incidents and hold those
responsible to account.

UNMIS is also experiencing long delays in the
receipt of Sudanese visas for its personnel, including
those most needed for the upcoming referendum. The
Government of the Sudan currently has a backlog of
348 visa applications for UNMIS. We have taken this
up both in Khartoum and here in New York. We urge
the Government to clear the pending visa applications
without delay.

Although the security situation in Southern Sudan
remains relatively calm, it continues to be fragile. We
also do not exclude the possibility that the political and
security environment could become more tense during
and after the referendum.

As the Council is aware, we are working on
options for a possible augmentation of United Nations
troops in the Sudan to prevent any deterioration in the
security situation after the referendum and to increase
our capacity to monitor possible ceasefire violations, as
well as to protect civilians throughout the mission area.
We continue to engage the parties on that issue. In the
meantime, UNMIS is increasing its presence in hot
spots, using its existing force, redeploying company-
size additional troops to Abyei, Southern Kordofan and
a new team site near the border between the states of
Upper Nile and White Nile.

The integrated Joint Operations Centre in
Khartoum and the Regional Operations Centre in Juba
have been strengthened to enhance information
collection and real-time analysis throughout the
Mission area and to support both conflict prevention
activities and rapid political, military and humanitarian
reaction to crisis. We are grateful to the Russian
Federation for agreeing to deploy four military
helicopters, previously with the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad, to
Juba. Their presence will contribute greatly to ensuring
the Mission's mobility. As of today, the four
helicopters are still in Entebbe, awaiting the permit
from the Government of the Sudan to deploy to Juba,
which, we understand, might come very soon.

While UNMIS continues those efforts, we must
emphasize that the presence of United Nations troops
by itself will not be enough to prevent a return to war,
should widespread hostilities erupt. Only a
demonstrated commitment by the parties to refrain
from inflammatory statements, uphold the CPA
ceasefire mechanisms and engage in dialogue to settle
differences will succeed in maintaining peace.

While the Sudanese authorities bear the primary
responsibility for the protection of their citizens,
UNMIS has stepped up its protection activities through
joint civil-military patrols and initiatives to foster
reconciliation at the local level. The overall goal of the
UNMIS protection strategy is, first, to prevent, reduce
and, when necessary, stop violence against civilian
populations in the Mission area; second, to ensure
humanitarian access to vulnerable populations; and
third, to assist both the Government of the Sudan and
the Government of Southern Sudan to assume their
primary responsibility to protect civilian populations.

To implement that strategy, it is essential that the
Mission be able to identify vulnerable communities
and individuals before disputes erupt or escalate. It is
also important to ensure State responsibility at all
levels -local, regional, national - to address those
concerns through dialogue and in consultation with the
communities. In light of that, UNMIS - while under
the direct supervision of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Haile Menkerios, and
benefiting from his direct engagement with the
Government at the highest level of Sudanese
authorities, as necessary - has decentralized its
protection activities at state and regional levels.

Given the uncertainties of the coming months, the
parties, the United Nations and the international
community are preparing to prevent, to the extent
possible, and to mitigate humanitarian crises. That
includes efforts by humanitarian and development
agencies to ensure that all population movements
across the border are voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable. Returnees from Northern Sudan to
Southern Sudan should be able to return in a manner
that does not overwhelm the capacity of local
communities to absorb them.

UNMIS and the United Nations country team have
developed a referendum-related contingency plan for the
period from November 2010 to June 2011. In the
unlikely event that the referendum leads to large-scale
violence, approximately 2.8 million people could be
internally displaced and another 3.2 million people may
be negatively affected by breakdowns in trade and social
service delivery. In that scenario, up to $63 million may
be required to provide emergency assistance to those in
need. Similar plans are also being prepared by United
Nations missions and other United Nations presences in
neighbouring countries, particularly by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The outcomes of the referendum and negotiations
on post-referendum issues will undoubtedly affect the
United Nations presence in the Sudan after the
conclusion of the CPA. UNMIS and the United Nations
country team are examining possible future conflict
dynamics in post-CPA Sudan, particularly in Southern
Sudan, where needs for capacity-building and
institutional development are paramount. We will make
further reference to those issues and possible options
for United Nations engagement, particularly in
Southern Sudan, in the forthcoming report of the
Secretary-General to the Council.

At this crucial stage in the implementation of the
CPA, we are encouraged by the continued commitment
of both CPA partners to resolve outstanding differences
in a peaceful manner. As the events in the early days of
2011 will be unique in the history of the Sudan, we
continue to urge all CPA partners to intensify their
efforts and provide support to all Sudanese in order to
successfully hold the referendum and respect the
choice made by the people by endorsing and
implementing its outcome.

