First of all, let me express my gratitude to the German presidency for the invitation to today's open debate of the Security Council. We commend it for the choice of this very timely and critical issue for consideration on this month's agenda. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, Antenio Guterres, the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer, and the African Union Commissioner for Social Affairs, Amira Elfadil Mohammed Elfadil, for their very informative briefings. Let me also thank the organizers of today's event for the opportunity to speak on the important topic of pandemics and security. We note with deep concern the threat to human health, safety and well-being caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which continues to spread throughout the world. We draw attention to the unprecedented consequences of the pandemic, including serious disruptions to public life, economic development, travel and global trade, climate change, humanitarian and migration crises, rising poverty and increasing inequality and to its detrimental effects on both human well-being and international security, which will reverse hard-won development gains and hamper progress towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals, within their given time frames. The advent and rapid spread of COVID-19 on a global scale has had a severe impact on the protection of civilians in conflict-affected States. We note with deep concern the continued spread of the coronavirus pandemic in all regions of the world, thereby posing a great threat to human health and safety. It is obvious that the people in conflict-affected States are paying the highest price in the fight against the pandemic, and this against the backdrop of ongoing armed conflicts. The current situation requires the immediate unifying of our efforts and the adoption of decisive actions by the whole international community. In this matter, the central role of the United Nations and its Security Council cannot be underestimated. Accordingly, the Kyrgyz Republic supports the call of Secretary General Guterres for a global ceasefire and enhanced international cooperation to successfully counter the COVID-19 pandemic. We recall the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and other relevant human rights instruments, which were designed to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms and should be taken into account in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic. There is a need to strengthen development cooperation and increase access to concessional financing, especially in the context of the global pandemic. We call upon donors that have not done so to intensify their efforts to fulfil their respective official development assistance commitments, particularly to least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States. We reaffirm General Assembly resolutions 74/270, on global solidarity to fight the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), and 74/274, on international cooperation to ensure global access to medicines, vaccines and medical equipment to face COVID-19, and recall that the pandemic and related global economic and commodity price shocks could significantly increase the number of countries in, or at risk of, debt distress. We are deeply concerned about the impact of high debt levels on the ability of countries - especially developing countries and those in special situations - to withstand the impact of the COVID-19 shock and invest in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We welcome the steps taken by the Group of 20 to provide a time-bound suspension of debt servicing payments, and by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank to provide liquidity and other support measures to ease the debt burden of developing countries. We call upon all relevant actors, including international financial institutions, to address debt vulnerabilities, with particular consideration for the countries in special situations, and to assist with the pandemic response and recovery. During this challenging time for international community, the Kyrgyz Republic fully supports the vital role of the United Nations and the Security Council in solving problems related to maintaining peace and security, developing friendly relations among nations, cooperating in solving development problems, reducing poverty, promoting respect for human rights, protecting the environment, fighting diseases and tackling the COVID-19 outbreak as it relates to peace and security in the world today. We believe that, given the existing and emerging risks resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic around the world, the role of the Security Council should be strengthened as much as possible. The COVID-19 pandemic has reminded us in the most powerful way that we are closely interconnected and only as strong as our weakest link. Only by working together and in solidarity can we end the pandemic and effectively tackle its consequences. Only together can we build resilience against future pandemics and other global challenges. The United Nations must be at the centre of our efforts. The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic intends to continue to support efforts and to work actively in cooperation with all Member States, the United Nations system and international partners to achieve our goals.
