Mr. Kolby (Norway): Norway aligns itself with
the statement by the European Union. However, I
would like to make some additional comments.

First, I would like to join in thanking Ambassador
Greenstock and his team for chairing the Counter-
Terrorism Committee in an excellent manner since its
creation in October 2001 and to congratulate him on
the remarkable progress achieved under his leadership.
I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome
Ambassador Arias of Spain as the new Chairman, and
to assure him of our full support in the work that lies
ahead.

The Committee's emphasis on cooperation,
dialogue, partnership and transparency seems to have
paid dividends. The strategy of cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations
on promulgating best practices, seeking synergies of
approach and the provision of assistance to Member
States requiring technical support seems to have been
very successful.

Norway welcomed the convening of the special
meeting of the Committee on 6 March, which brought
together representatives of international, regional and
subregional organizations with the aim of ensuring
effective and systematic cooperation in the fight
against terrorism. We are pleased to see that the contact
has been formalized through the Committee's follow-
up action plan. The action plan touches upon crucial
themes such as information flow, international best
practices, codes and standards and the role of regional
and subregional organizations, as well as facilitating
the provision of assistance.

We are mindful of the technical difficulties some
Member States may have in implementing the legal and
financial measures envisaged in resolution 1373
(2001). Implementation through national legislation
that covers all aspects and the establishment of
appropriate executive instruments is no small task. This
situation raises concerns that must be resolved through
positive and coordinated action. We are, therefore,
pleased to see that the action plan contains measures
for facilitating the provision of assistance.

Norway has provided technical assistance at the
regional as well as the bilateral level. We have
supported the African Union's work towards the
effective and comprehensive implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) by its member States and have
provided support for a project aimed at strengthening
the capacity of countries in the region of the Southern
African Development Community in order to follow up
the specific measures of the resolution.

Similarly, Norway has contributed bilateral
technical assistance in the implementation of the
obligations under resolution 1373 (2001) and related
international obligations, as well as in the drafting and
formatting of the national reports required by
resolution 1373 (2001). The process has provided
Norway with valuable knowledge and experience,
which we are prepared to share with the Committee
and its members.

