Mr. Kasemsarn (Thailand): Mr. President, allow
me at the outset to pay tribute to you and to the
Russian Federation for your presidency of the Security
Council this month. I should like to express my
appreciation to you for convening this timely meeting
of the Security Council on East Timor right before the
country joins the family of nations as an independent
State. I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his proposal for a United Nations successor mission to
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET). His wise counsel that the
international community must ensure that the
investment it has made does not go to waste should be
taken seriously by the Members concerned. I would
also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Hedi
Annabi for his thorough briefing last Friday on
developments in East Timor.

We regret that we cannot enjoy the presence of
President-elect Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao at this
meeting today. However, we should like to join the rest
of the world community in congratulating him on
having overwhelmingly won the presidential elections
on 14 April. His presence in the Council Chamber on
Friday attested to the resilience and fortitude of the
East Timorese people, with whom we will join in
celebrating the birth of that nation in less than a
month's time.

The birth of East Timor as a new nation-State is
the result of the strong political will and close
cooperation of many parties: the United Nations;
members of the international community, particularly
the neighbours of East Timor; and, most important, the
people and the leadership of East Timor themselves. In
that connection, I wish to pay special tribute to the
Secretary-General, Special Representative Sergio
Vieira de Mello and the rank and file of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) for their tireless efforts and determination
to ensure stability and security in East Timor and to lay
the groundwork and foundation for a democratic State.
East Timor is thus, by all accounts, a success story for
the United Nations, and we should all be proud of it.
Thailand took pride in making a contribution to that
success story through our participation in the United
Nations military component from the very beginning
and our provision of two Force Commanders.

The recent developments in East Timor augur
well for its political future and set in place important
building blocks for the creation of a sovereign and
independent East Timor on 20 May. The adoption of a
Constitution in March, and the successful conclusion of
East Timor's first-ever presidential elections not long
ago, are just two of the key events that give us
confidence in East Timor's future political
development. All those culminating events will help
ensure the seamless handover of UNTAET's
responsibilities to East Timorese and national
institutions towards a full-fledged independent East
Timor in charge of its own destiny, which we will
welcome wholeheartedly.

Let us not be lulled into a sense of complacency,
however. Much work remains to be done in East Timor,
not the least of which is the strengthening of its social
and economic infrastructure so that East Timor not
only will be a Viable economic entity but also, in time,
will fully participate in the regional and global
economy on an equal footing. And we should not, and
cannot, expect East Timor to do it alone. As my
country has stated on many occasions, East Timor, as a
nation-State, still needs the continued, unwavering
support, assistance and cooperation of the international
community. The United Nations needs to continue to be
engaged in East Timor in an appropriate manner during
this critical phase of transition as well as in the
immediate post-independence phase.

Bearing that in mind, my delegation supports the
Secretary-General's proposal to establish a successor
mission to UNTAET in the form of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET), as
described in his report dated 17 April 2002
(S/2002/432), in order to create a secure environment
conducive to the effective functioning of the nascent
East Timorese administration, especially after
independence. We hope that UNMISET will give equal
importance to economic security and to political
security.

The economic viability of a newly independent
East Timor will require strong and sustained
international support for the foreseeable future. Close
cooperation between UNMISET and the United
Nations Development Programme will also be a vital
component. In that connection, we attach importance to
the donors conference to be held in Dili on 14 and 15
May, and we call on members of the international
community to pledge assistance commensurate with
their respective capabilities. As for Thailand, we will
provide technical assistance within our means in such
fields as agriculture, public health and technical
expertise, on a bilateral basis or through tripartite
arrangements.

With regard to the military and civilian
components of UNMISET during the built-in phasing-
out programme parallel with the gradual build-up of
the capacities of local authorities, Thailand stands
ready, as ever, to contribute to UNTAET's successor
mission. In fact, we are discussing redeployment
options with the United Nations to meet changing
security requirements in the post-independence phase.

I believe that all of us look forward with great
anticipation to 20 May, which will mark the joyous
celebration of an independent East Timor. All are
willing to lend a helping hand to ensure that that event
takes place smoothly. On a lighter note, I am told that
even the Thai private sector will lend a helping hand in
terms of assisting in providing additional
accommodation facilities - a second "floating
hotel" - to meet the demand, with many dignitaries
expected to converge on Dili on 20 May.

In conclusion, Thailand will continue to lend its
support within its capabilities to assist East Timor and
to hope that the transformation to an independent and
viable East Timor will be a successful one.

