Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), and
Ms. Josephine Mbela, civil-society representative, for
their valuable briefings.

We are less than two months away from the most
important event in the history of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the holding of presidential and
legislative elections at the national and provincial levels.
We hope they will be held on schedule on 23 December
so that the Democratic Republic of the Congo can enjoy
the first democratic and peaceful transfer of power in its
history. The commitment of the Congolese Government
to the electoral calendar and the announcement by a
majority of political and national parties that they will
participate in the elections are positive and hopeful
signs. We hope they will culminate in secure, total
transparent and credible elections that can realize the
aspirations ofthe Congolese people to security, stability
and reconstruction.

Despite the fact that the presidential elections
are fast approaching, we will continue to stress the
importance of taking advantage of the remaining
time to make concrete progress in implementing
the confidence-building measures stipulated in the
political agreement of 31 December 2016, ensuring
that the political process includes all sectors of the
population of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The publication on 19 September of the electoral rolls,
along with the efforts of the Independent National
Electoral Commission - including a meeting with
presidential candidates or their representatives to share
information and views on the electoral process - will
all contribute to the smooth holding of the elections.
The issue of voting machines, however, continues to
pose a significant challenge. We hope the Government
will be able to deal with it by reaching a consensus
among all the political parties.

Given the significance of the event that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is about to go
through, the weight of which we felt first-hand during
the Council's recent visit, we hope that it will help to
end the political tensions and security challenges in the
country. We also hope that the Congolese Government
will support the election process by ensuring an
environment conducive to freedom of expression
and by allowing peaceful protests to take place. We
appreciate the Government's commitment to financing
the electoral process with its own resources. We are also
looking forward to seeing it cooperate with MONUSCO
so that the necessary logistical and technical assistance
for holding the elections is provided. In that regard,
we value the role played by regional organizations
at this critical juncture in the political process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The persistent humanitarian crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is extremely
worrying. The statistics on the humanitarian situation
of refugees, displaced persons and others in need
of urgent assistance are alarming. According to the
November Humanitarian Bulletin of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 10.5 million
people are receiving emergency assistance in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. That is disturbing
and makes it incumbent on the international community
and the Congolese Government to redouble their efforts
to deal with that difficult situation.

In conclusion, I would like to express my deep
concern about the persistence of Ebola in the country's
eastern regions, as well as the worsening security
situation there, which undermines efforts to counter the
epidemic and the return of refugees from neighbouring
countries. It poses a serious threat to civilians and a
direct problem for neighbouring countries. In that
regard, we greatly appreciate the joint efforts to
counter the Ebola epidemic of the Congolese Ministry
of Health, the World Health Organization (WHO) and
the United Nations, represented by MONUSCO. We
also commend the joint visit last week by the Director-
General of WHO and the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations to the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to assess
the Ebola outbreak. We hope that all such efforts will
continue in order to eradicate that epidemic as soon
as possible.

