Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I should like to express our solidarity and
our condolences to the people and the Government of
Bangladesh and to the families of the soldiers who died
recently in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I wish also to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, for his presentation of the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET). We
welcome also the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Timor-Leste, Jose Ramos-Horta. My
delegation is particularly pleased to see Mr. Ramos-
Horta seated at the Council table, as this reflects the
success of the whole process that led to the
independence of Timor-Leste, which began when my
country was a member of the Security Council during
the period 1999-2000.

Argentina wishes to reaffirm its readiness to
continue to provide assistance to Timor-Leste as it
consolidates its institutions and seeks to preserve the
gains it has made in the past five years, at the cost of
so many sacrifices.

In the period that has elapsed since the people of
Timor-Leste so courageously voted in favour of
independence, the country's Government, with the
assistance of the international community, has made
outstanding progress in consolidating its national
institutions and public administration. In that context,
we congratulate the people and the authorities of
Timor-Leste on everything they have done to overcome
the difficult conditions that prevailed at the time of
independence, thus advancing towards peace,
prosperity and democracy. We also wish to express our
gratitude to the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) for its work, and to all the
other organs of the United Nations system that have
made a significant contribution to those achievements.

As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2005/99) and the instructive briefing by
Mr. Hasegawa make clear, a number of tasks remain to
be completed. Timor-Leste continues to need
assistance from the international community in key
areas such as border control and management;
establishment of a professional police service;
development of key State institutions; and respect for
democratic governance and human rights. Progress has
been made in each of those areas. However, as the
Secretary-General notes in his report, Timor-Leste has
not yet reached the critical threshold of self-
sufficiency.

We also welcome the significant progress made
in the area of relations between Timor-Leste and its
neighbours Indonesia and Australia. In the case of
Indonesia, we should emphasize the good state of
bilateral relations, as attested to by frequent high-level
meetings between President Gusmao and Prime
Minister Alkatiri of Timor-Leste on the one hand and
Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono on
the other. However, outstanding issues, such as the
demarcation of the land border, remain. With regard to
the border issues, we appeal to Timor-Leste and its
neighbours to continue to work on the demarcation of
the land and maritime borders and on determining how
the natural resources of the continental shelf should be
distributed. We believe it is essential to resolve those
outstanding issues in order to enable Timor-Leste to
approach the future with a stronger economic position.

We would also like to welcome the creation, just
noted by the Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste, of a
bilateral Truth and Friendship Commission.

As noted earlier, although there has been
commendable work done by the United Nations in
recent years, there is still much that remains to be
done. We feel that premature withdrawal by the United
Nations from Timor-Leste could have negative
consequences for the future of the country, possibly
jeopardizing everything that has so far been achieved,
with such great effort. On other occasions, my
delegation has noted the need for the Security Council
to take a long-term approach, with proper assessment
of the possible consequences of a hasty decision for the
well-being of countries that have been working hard to
build their institutions.

With that in mind, we ought to draw a lesson
from the events of the 1990s in a country of my
country's region - Haiti - which we hope will not be
repeated in this instance. We must not forget that
Timor-Leste gained its independence only in May 2002
and that much that remains to be done. The country
continues to have the lowest levels of human
development in Asia, and constant work is needed in
the areas of health, education and other aspects of
human development. In that regard, it will be essential
to be able to continue to rely on international
assistance in support of the Government's efforts to
achieve those goals.

The view that there is a need for a continued
substantive United Nations presence after UNMISET's
mandate expires on 20 May 2005 is shared by the
Secretary-General. His report offers details of the
scale, mandate and features that the mission would
have. My delegation supports those recommendations
and is prepared to work constructively to achieve
consensus within the Security Council with a view to
establishing a United Nations mission along the lines
suggested by the Secretary-General and by the Timor-
Leste authorities.

In the short time that has elapsed since 1999, the
people of Timor-Leste have shown the international
community their devotion to peace and democracy and
their courageous determination to build a prosperous
nation. Argentina considers that the international
community should continue to lend its support to
Timorese institution-building. Withdrawing the
participation of the United Nations from that process
too soon could imperil the achievements and the
significant investment that the international community
has made in Timor-Leste.

