Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Security Council's agenda this month
was quite full. I would like to thank you personally,
Mr. President, as well as your entire delegation, for the
effective and skilful way in which you discharged your
duties as President. Your presidency was so good that
we did not notice the month's passing.

We would like to note that the Egyptian initiatives
were very topical. I refer in particular to the Security
Council meeting on preventing terrorists from acquiring
weapons (see S/PV. 8017) and the resolution we adopted
to that end (resolution 2370 (2017)). Our discussion
of this topic showed yet again that it is necessary to
adopt more stringent weapons-control mechanisms, as
weapons still manage to fill the arsenals ofa number of
terrorist organizations almost without hindrance.

The discussion on general issues of sanctions once
again allowed us to outline the issues in this area. Despite
certain differences of opinion, the majority of members
of the Council spoke in favour of further improving our
sanctions tools in order to make them more effective and
ensure that the humanitarian cost is as low as possible.
It is also important that it has been stated very loudly
and clearly that unilateral interpretations of sanctions
are unacceptable, as is the adoption of supplementary
unilateral restrictions. When it comes to reaffirming
that there is no alternative the political settlement of
conflicts, the open debate on the role of United Nations
peacekeeping operations in undertaking peacebuilding
tasks and sustaining peace (see S/PV.8033) was quite
useful.

We also saw in August another resolution on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea (resolution 2371 (2017)), which introduced unprecedented, strict
economic restrictions on that country. We are convinced
that the possibility of exerting further sanctions
pressure on Pyongyang has now been exhausted. We
cannot support the idea of economically suffocating
North Korea and its people. We need to concentrate
on the political track. There is no alternative to the
political settlement of all of the issues in the Korean
peninsula. This point was reiterated in the presidential
statement of 29 August 2017 (S/PRST/2017/l6).

Our discussions of Middle East issues showed that
the time is more right now than ever to take practical
measures to overcome the impasse in the Israeli-
Palestinian cluster of issues, which is key to resolving
many other issues in the region. In the Syrian conflict,
after de-escalation areas were created, we have noticed
positive developments there. In those areas and in other
local truce areas, we are witnessing a return to normal
life. Demining is being carried out, transport links are
being restored, the economic infrastructure is being
rebuilt, people are returning to their homes - all of
which enables us to concentrate on fighting terrorism.
We think that it is important to reinforce those trends,
which meet the preconditions necessary for moving
forward in the intra-Syrian dialogue in Geneva. We
supported the Egyptian presidency's proposal to
optimize Council meetings on Syrian issues.

We note that there is positive and constructive
interaction among all Lebanese political forces,
through which the country managed to break out of its
prior political stagnation. We think that all of the issues
on the country's national agenda, including those issues
related to security, need in future to be addressed in a
legal framework through dialogue among all the forces
in the country. We support the work being carried out
by United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.

As to the critical situation in Yemen, in particular
the humanitarian aspects, additional measures by the
United Nations are needed in order to make sure that
there is unimpeded humanitarian access to all areas
of the country. We need to exert pressure on all sides
to the conflict. It is only through an immediate, all-
encompassing ceasefire without preconditions that a
resumption of the political processes will be possible.
The resolution of the crisis in Yemen should be found
in the political sphere.

Also, in keeping with tradition, we discussed
African issues. The meetings on that topic confirmed
that African problems should have African solutions.
Furthermore, the idea that violating a State's sovereignty
or interfering in its internal affairs is unacceptable
remains axiomatic.

In conclusion, I would like to once again thank our
Egyptian colleagues and to wish every success to the
delegation of Ethiopia, which will take up the gavel in
September.

