Mr. Montafio (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Secretary-General for his report on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2013/493) and his recommendation that the
international community continue to support to that
fraternal country. I also appreciate the briefing by
Ms. Sandra Honore on the situation on the ground
in Haiti, which is clearly of great importance to the
Council.

As the report indicates, the situation in Haiti has
made encouraging progress in the area of security and
strengthening the rule of law. It is clear that MINUSTAH
has played a key role in achieving that progress. In
close coordination with the Government, the Mission
has supported the institution-building of the Haitian
National Police, in order that it may eventually ensure
security in the country. The Mission also has promoted
projects to assist stabilization, dealing with important
matters such as the protection of vulnerable groups,
community violence reduction and the prevention of
gender-based violence.

Mexico recognizes the will of the Haitian
Government to make progress in those fundamental
areas in order to strengthen democracy and to lay a
firm foundation to foster economic development and
improve the situation of those who remain in the camps
for internally displaced persons.

It is necessary to redouble efforts in order that
those initiatives may produce tangible dividends for
Haitian society. In that sense, there is concern that
a possible postponement of partial elections could
produce and exacerbate political tensions and hinder
further progress on priority issues.

It is clear that MINUSTAH and the international
community are prepared to support the electoral process
and the priority initiatives defined by Haiti's legislative
authorities, who have the final word in such matters.

I note that Mexico provides support to Haiti
through its electoral institutions, which help to
strengthen institutions and professionalize and
enhance the country's electoral system. On 4 July,
Mexico's Federal Electoral Institute and Electoral
Tribunal signed a cooperation agreement with Haiti's
permanent Electoral Council concerning electoral
systems, voter registration, organization and logistics,
the development of democratic political culture and
electoral voter education - which are all essential.

Along with the United Nations involvement in
promoting the democratic process, my delegation
emphasizes and reiterates the importance of the
relevance and presence of the Organization in Haiti
in promoting economic recovery strategies and
medium - and long-term projects to meet ongoing
needs in terms of humanitarian assistance, health, food
security and infrastructure.

In that regard, we support continuation of
quick-impact projects as well as the involvement
of MINUSTAH and the country team in Vital areas
such as education, food and agriculture, which, if not
addressed, can lead to instability in the long run.

The report of the Secretary-General indicates
progress in implementing MINUSTAH's consolidation
plan for 2013-2016, and suggests further reconfiguration
of the Mission, in View of a possible transition to a
different United Nations presence in Haiti. For the
transition to be successful, such evaluation must be
supported by both the institutional factors reflected in
the proposed indicators, as well as the actual conditions
prevailing on the ground. It is important not to neglect
unpredictable factors such as natural disasters, which
can trigger a loss of life and infrastructure, with
attendant social, political and economic consequences.

We also wish to emphasize the intrinsic link
between development, security and human rights as
a fundamental element in implementing measures to
ensure the restoration of stability and harmony in the
country.

Mexico considers essential the sustained presence
of MINUSTAH to consolidate the progress made
and to continue to support the Haitian Government
in addressing pending challenges. In that regard, the
Mexican Government reiterates its full support to the
Haitian Government.

Mexico reiterates its full support for the Mission
and highlights the contributions of its men and women
to improve the situation in Haiti.

My delegation also highlights the efforts of
the Haitian Government and reaffirms its strong
commitment to strengthening its institutions through
medium and long-term projects.

We hope that the Mission's consolidation plan
will result in a successful transition process leading to
the eventual departure of MINUSTAH, once we have
reached the goals of stability and development in Haiti
and achieved the long-term goals.

The challenges of the immediate future are
arduous; only international solidarity will help to
overcome them. We reiterate our commitment to that
end so that the efforts of the Organization and, above
all, those made by the Haitian people over decades, will
be rewarded by democratic stability and the country's
long-awaited development.

