We thank the Secretary-General and President Johnson Sirleaf for their briefings as we explore concrete ways to address the remaining pressing challenges in the protection of civilians in armed conflict as well as the new challenges that are emerging. We also thank Mr. Maurer and, through him, the men and women who are tirelessly working as promoters of the principles enshrined in the Geneva Conventions to protect the life and the dignity of civilians in armed conflict. In his report (S/2020/366) the Secretary-General refers to the current coronavirus disease pandemic as the "greatest test that the world has faced since the establishment of the United Nations" (S/2020/366, para. 1). It is clear for the Dominican Republic that the pandemic has brought many underlying and systemic vulnerabilities to the surface, particularly in countries affected by armed conflict, where the absence of timely and adequate actions to address the root causes of conflict creates greater challenges for the prevention and response measures required to protect the most vulnerable. And the pandemic adds yet another layer to the suffering of civilians already paying the highest price in so many contexts: the elderly, people living with disabilities, men, children and women living with other underlying diseases, the displaced, refugees, those living in overcrowded internally displaced person camps and those held in detention centres. All people need to be protected - in dignity, justice and solidarity and with respect for their fundamental rights. Due to the severe impact of the pandemic in conflict-affected countries, we continue to call for sustainable and long-lasting ceasefires in current situations of armed conflict. Attacks on health-care and humanitarian workers, hospitals and schools and the use of explosive weapons in highly populated civilian areas are gross violations of international humanitarian law that clearly undermine the prevention and response efforts aimed at overcoming the pandemic. The emergence of such atrocious methods of warfare as the use of starvation of civilians and the unlawful denial of humanitarian access to affected populations are just a few of the other violations that require our urgent attention and action. Violations to international humanitarian law should not be the norm; they should be the exception. We agree that respect for international law and accountability for serious violations are the two most pressing challenges to strengthening the protection of civilians. Without concrete actions in these areas, we will have little ability to make progress in building a culture of protection across the entire United Nations system, embracing, inter alia, parties to conflict, humanitarian organizations, United Nations peacekeeping and political missions and national armed forces, in order to strengthen the protection of civilians in armed conflict. This is our collective responsibility. In recent years, and despite the calls of international organizations and States Members of the United Nations, urban warfare has continued to have a devastating impact on civilians and critical civilian infrastructure. We join others in reiterating the necessity of all parties to conflict to immediately refrain from using urban settings as battlefields. Such use provokes massive displacements and has an increased and disproportionate impact on women and children. Allow me to highlight some additional points that require our decisive attention when considering this critical issue. There is mounting evidence that conflict-affected populations are especially vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change. At the same time, climate change acts as a risk multiplier, when competition for scarce resources becomes the root cause of conflict and violence between communities. For instance, the combination of conflict, extreme weather events, economic shocks and natural disasters is a major factor in food insecurity and mass displacement. Accordingly, for the Dominican Republic, it is crucial that we achieve a better and more holistic understanding of how these factors interact and come up with possible actions to strengthen the protection of those affected by them. The protection of civilians is not a one-size-fits-all issue. The United Nations system, including its peacekeeping and political missions, needs to be equipped to address the specific protection needs of the populations it serves, particularly, and most important, in armed conflict.
