Archbishop Auza (Holy See) (spoke in Arabic):
My delegation thanks the presidency of the Russian
Federation for organizing the open debate on the
item "The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question" and for calling the attention of the
entire international community to this issue.

The gradual movement away from the two-State
solution proposed by the United Nations in 1947 is a
cause for very grave concern. The straying from the
Madrid Peace Process and the Oslo Accords of the
19905 has served to increase the level of frustration
and desperation among the Palestinian people. A unity
Government in the West Bank and Gaza is essential
for advancing the negotiations and for bringing peace
and prosperity to its people. It is the responsibility of
the international community to respond generously
to the appeal launched recently by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East in order to face the ever-growing
humanitarian needs.

My delegation would like to underline once again
that the Holy See believes that the two-State solution
holds the best promise. If Israel and Palestine do not
agree to exist side by side, reconciled and sovereign,
within mutually agreed and internationally recognized
borders, peace will remain a distant dream and security
an illusion. While the focus of today's debate is how
to urge Israel and Palestine to stop making unilateral
decisions and taking independent actions that endanger
the resumption of meaningful negotiations, the
Palestinian question can be viewed only as part of the
Middle East conflict.

The Middle East is the cradle of civilizations and
the birthplace of Judaism, Christianity and Islam, and
yet it has become a theatre of incredible barbarism.
Utter disregard for international humanitarian law has

reached new levels of barbarity. Corpses buried under
ruins and drifting refugees are clear evidence of the
cynical contempt for and violation of international
humanitarian law. Pope Francis has reiterated his
appeal for an immediate ceasefire in Aleppo and other
parts of Syria, saying,

"With a sense of urgency, I renew my appeal,
pleading with all my strength to those responsible,
for an immediate ceasefire that can be imposed and
respected at least for the time necessary to allow
the evacuation of civilians, especially children,
who are still trapped under the bloody bombing."

In this Chamber and in other United Nations
forums, we continue to debate, while Christians and
members of other ethnic and religious minority groups
in the Middle East are on the verge of total annihilation.
The intentions of the terrorists and extremists groups to
banish them from the region have been unmistakably
manifest since the start of the barbaric persecution. The
Council, which is mandated to maintain international
peace and security, is called upon to lead the entire
international community's efforts to stop the bloodshed
and destruction. Therefore, States supporting terrorist
groups must stop the flow of weapons and munitions
into the region. Madmen preaching hatred and inciting
violence in God's name must be stopped. All States
are summoned to do their part in fostering respect for
fundamental human rights in the region, including
freedom of religion and of expression.

My delegation would like to conclude with a remark
made by Pope Francis on the fundamental importance
of dialogue:

"Dialogue is what brings peace. Peace is
impossible without dialogue. All of the wars,
conflicts and troubles that we encounter with each
other are due to a lack of dialogue."

Such dialogue is still possible and must be urgently
pursued for the sake of the people of Syria and all
inhabitants of the region.

