Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
To start, I wish to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Kubis for his briefing, and
Ambassador Tanin for his important contribution.

Afghanistan is moving steadily forward in preparing

for the political and security transition to be completed
in 2014. Only two days ago, an historic landmark was
reached when the Afghan forces assumed responsibility
for security throughout the land for the first time since
2001. We welcome that important step on the road to
full sovereignty. In parallel, over the next few weeks,
the country's politicians will be taking important
decisions aimed at creating a legal framework to
guarantee the convening of credible elections that will
be accepted by the entire Afghan population. That will
mark the beginning ofa new phase in the strengthening
of democracy in Afghanistan.

Together with such progress, my country believes
that a transition ensuring that Afghans will be fully
responsible for their future and their destiny must also
generate the conditions necessary to enable the country
to free itself of its dependence on donors and to work
towards independent economic development, within
a framework of regional cooperation and integration.
Along those lines, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/350) offers a comprehensive overview of the
circumstances of the transition, the goals achieved and
the challenges that remain.

Many aspects are covered in the report. While
acknowledging the importance of all, I would like on
this occasion to emphasize just a few.

First, on security, we acknowledge the progress
made in the professionalization and capacity-building
of the Afghan forces to enable them to deal with
security issues. At the same time, we must voice our
deep concern at the number of civilians who continue
to be killed in armed conflict. The figures show that
the situation remains far from resolved; instead, it has
worsened. An about-turn is required so that the Afghan
people can have full confidence in the protection
provided by its own security forces in the long term.
In our view, it is important to join the appeals to the
anti-Government forces that are responsible for the
highest number of victims to end their indiscriminate
attacks against civilians. They must scrupulously
respect the difference between combatants and civilians,
which is clearly established under international law. It
should not be manipulated to justify acts that constitute
war crimes.

Secondly, after more than a decade of conflict, it
is clear that Afghanistan's long-term stability demands
a negotiated peace emerging from a political process
to end the violence. Any initiative must be led and
conducted by Afghans themselves. We therefore support
the endeavours and role of the High Peace Council of
Afghanistan in creating favourable conditions to enable
the process to take place. We trust that the principal
national and international actors will overcome their
differences, which have made progress difficult in
efforts to open effective channels of dialogue with the
Taliban.

Thirdly, we welcome the progress made in the past
decade in gender equality and women's empowerment
in Afghanistan. However, both in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on sexual violence in
conflict (S/20l3/149) and in reviewing certain recent
developments related to the Law on the Elimination
of Violence against Women, we are reminded that
the goals that have been achieved have not been
secured. Maintaining and firmly establishing those
achievements is not only a human rights imperative;
it must also be a strategic priority of the transition to
ensure the full participation of women at all levels and
in all economic sectors. It is an essential element in
building solid economies and strengthening stable and
equitable societies.

Under its Government's leadership and with
the driving force of its people and the support of the
international community, Afghanistan has travelled
a long road and is preparing to embark on a new
phase of independence and sovereignty. Through its
presence and ability to interact with every sector of
Afghan political and social life, UNAMA has played a
fundamental role in helping to reach this moment that
will be even more vital as the transition progresses. We
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and all his staff and urge them to
continue their important work.

