Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to start by
expressing Sweden's immense appreciation to Special
Envoy Staffan De Mistura for his tireless efforts for
the people of Syria. I want to thank Mr. De Mistura
for his perseverance, creativity and energy, and may I
add, civility and dignity in circumstances where those
values have been in short supply.

We, of course, welcome incoming Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen, and we assure him that he will have
Sweden's full support. It is important to maintain focus,
momentum and, I believe, the unity of the Council in
backing him in his difficult task.

After almost eight years of conflict, we fully
understand those who claim that the international
community has failed the Syrian people. The
international community has a responsibility now to
remain actively engaged on Syria. That is the only way
to ensure that the grievances of the Syrian people that
led to that tragedy can be addressed and that all of the
people of Syria can come to feel trust in the future.

Since the beginning of our tenure on the Security
Council, we have tried to leave no stone unturned in
seeking progress towards bringing the conflict in Syria
to an end and ensuring that the humanitarian needs
are covered. Today, I will focus on the importance of
immediate military de-escalation, the urgent need for
progress towards a sustainable political solution, and
the necessary conditions for lasting peace.

First, on the importance of de-escalation, we call
on all parties to the conflict to de-escalate and show
restraint, as well as to fully respect their obligations
under international law. We welcome the Astana
guarantors' renewed commitment to uphold the
ceasefire in Idlib, and we reiterate our expectations of
the guarantors in that regard. We are encouraged that
the agreement to cease hostilities continues to hold,
although there have been worrying signs of violence
recently.

We are therefore deeply concerned by continued
military operations by Syrian Government forces
and allies, particularly in Idlib, where there are
reports of civilian casualties. We are also concerned
by Turkish statements regarding a possible military
operation in north-eastern Syria. Turkey is a critically
important actor in that crisis and a key partner of
the European Union. As stated by European Union
High Representative Mogherini, we expect Turkey
to refrain from any unilateral action that would risk
further instability in Syria. A safe, calm and neutral
environment on the ground is necessary for progress
towards a political solution.

Secondly, a sustainable political solution to the
Syrian conflict that is acceptable to the international
community can happen only through a United Nations-
led political process, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Women's full and effective participation in that process
is critical, and I want to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura
for dedicating all his efforts to that agenda.

We appreciate the update on the constitutional
committee. It is deeply disappointing that, one year after
Sochi, that committee has still not been established. As
just stated by Mr. Staffan de Mistura, there is still an
extra mile to walk to ensure a credible, balanced and
inclusive committee. We fully trust the United Nations
judgement in ensuring that the committee's composition
and its rules of procedure meet the requirements needed
for international legitimacy. There is not much time
left. Every effort must now be made to establish the
committee in a way that satisfies the United Nations
criteria. The committee must then be swiftly convened
in Geneva under United Nations auspices.

The failure to establish that committee would,
however, rest fully with the Government of Syria, owing
to its lack of constructive engagement and willingness to
compromise to date. We urge the Government of Syria
and those with good relations with Damascus to ensure
full collaboration. Constitutional reform represents a
stepping stone towards elections, which must be free
and fair, with all Syrians eligible to participate. In that
connection, the 12 principles referred to and repeated
by Staffan De Mistura today are fundamental to efforts
to move the entire process forward.

Thirdly, on the conditions for sustainable peace,
the conflict has led to a disaster far beyond Syria's
borders. Six million people have been displaced within
the country, and five million have fled to neighbouring
countries. The conditions for the safe, voluntary
and dignified return of refugees are not yet in place,
according to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. Let us be clear. The
primary reason why refugees and internally displaced
persons are not returning is not primarily the lack of
schools, hospitals and roads. It is first and foremost
because they fear for their safety. They fear retribution,
persecution and detention. They would now also face
discriminatory legislation undermining their housing,
land and property rights.

They all know family and friends who have been
arrested, imprisoned and tortured. There are no excuses
for the Syrian authorities to hold those unlawfully held
in prison. The authorities should release those detainees
and uncover the fate of all of those Syrians who have
disappeared. In order to create the conditions for the
return of refugees, a political solution and respect by
the Syrian authorities for international law, including
international refugee law and international human
rights law, is therefore fundamental.

As part ofbuilding sustainable peace, we recognize
that the reconstruction of Syria will eventually be
needed. Sweden, like the rest of the European Union,
will be ready to assist only when a comprehensive,
genuine and inclusive political transition, in line
with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex), is firmly under
way - as that is deemed necessary in order to reach
sustainable peace.

Finally, accountability is also necessary for
sustainable peace. The conflict in Syria has been
characterized by a flagrant disregard for international
law and by disrespect for human life. The Special
Envoy recently stated that he has never, in his long
United Nations career, seen a conflict with the use of
such indiscriminate brutality as in Syria.
Upholding the international rules-based order is
fundamental to efforts to end conflicts and prevent new
conflicts from unfolding. Sustainable peace can happen
only if the perpetrators of the horrible crimes witnessed
in Syria are brought to justice. The international
community must not allow impunity. We encourage
increased funding and support for the mechanisms
established to ensure that evidence is preserved for
future criminal proceedings, and we believe that
the Council should refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.

It is only through a United Nations-led process,
trusted by all Syrians and supported by the international
community, that we can achieve a political solution in
Syria - one that addresses the fundamental grievances
of the Syrian people, guarantees their rights and
aspirations, and creates the conditions for peace and
stability for them. The Security Council must therefore
wholeheartedly support the United Nations-led political
process and remain actively engaged.

