At the outset, permit me, on behalf of the three African countries that are members of the Security Council, that is, the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia, and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1), to thank Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary- General for Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Dang Dinh Quy, Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan, for their comprehensive presentations. The A3+1 welcomes the recent positive developments in the South Sudan peace process. In particular, we commend the parties to the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan for their resolve to complete the formation of the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity and to address the issues surrounding the establishment of the Transitional National Legislative Assembly and the Council of States. Such developments testify to the strength of dialogue in the quest for lasting peace and sustainable development, as well as the Transitional Government's commitment to setting differences aside and fully implementing the Revitalized Agreement. As we have previously underscored, South Sudan is a maturing democracy, determined to confront the trials of these unpredictable times, especially in the light of the unprecedented coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We therefore look forward to the convening of a national conference in Juba for all communities of Upper Nile state to address outstanding issues and finalize the appointment of their Governor. We also reiterate the importance of ensuring that the 35 per cent minimum quota for women in institutions of the Transitional Government is observed. Further, we applaud the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification Mechanism and the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission for meeting those benchmarks with a 41 per cent and a 35 per cent proportion of women respectively. The peace process is at a very crucial stage and will benefit from the inclusion of the parties that remain on the periphery. Accordingly, the A3+1 calls on the non- signatories to the Revitalized Agreement to capitalize on the current momentum, resolve their differences and join the peace process. Despite the positive developments, South Sudan continues to be confronted by multifaceted challenges, as reflected in the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/1180). The A3+1 notes with concern those challenges and would like to share some perspectives. In terms of security, we welcome the maintenance of the ceasefire and the overall decrease in political violence prevailing throughout the country. Such developments are essential to ensuring the advancement of the peace process. However, we note deficiencies in the pace of the implementation of security-sector reforms and urge the authorities to advance initiatives to tackle intercommunal violence in states such as Eastern Equatoria, Jonglei, Lakes, Unity and Upper Nile. We also call on the international community to provide support in that regard, especially in facilitating the full operationalization of the unified forces, which are cantoned in various training sites and awaiting graduation and deployment. On the socioeconomic and humanitarian front, we are very concerned about the dire humanitarian situation, which has been further compounded by the pandemic; the adverse effects of climate change, which have resulted in devastating floods, affecting more than | million people; the deteriorating economic situation, catalysed by plunging oil prices; and grave violations of human rights. We stress the importance of respecting international law, including adhering to international humanitarian and human rights law, as well as the status of forces agreement. Equally, the protection of civilians, especially the groups that are most vulnerable, including women and children, remains paramount. In that context, we applaud the operationalization of South Sudan's first gender-based violence and juvenile court, which represents a landmark decision and highlights the Transitional Government's commitment to ending impunity for gender-based crimes and holding perpetrators accountable in South Sudan. Finally, the A3+1 notes with appreciation the responsiveness of humanitarian partners to South Sudan and encourages the international community to continue contributing to South Sudan's humanitarian response plan to achieve its $1.9 billion target. We also call for the lifting of unilateral coercive measures in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic in order to enable the Transitional Government to meet the people's needs. Our contemporary realities demand that we strengthen our assistance to South Sudan. The COVID-19 pandemic is a monumental obstacle and complicates the work ahead. However, South Sudan is showing its commitment to achieving the aspirations of its people. To ensure lasting peace in the country, the Revitalized Agreement must be implemented comprehensively and in a timely manner. In conclusion, the A3+1 stands in solidarity with the Government and people of South Sudan. We reiterate our appreciation and support for the meaningful efforts of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the African Union, the European Union and the Community of Sant'Egidio to bring durable peace and stability to the country.
