Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I wish to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, and your friendly country,
Guatemala, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I also express our appreciation
to Germany for its wise stewardship of the Council last
month.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
for his briefing to the Council today and reiterate
our appreciation to Mr. Robert Serry, United Nations
Special Coordinator and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing last month (see S/PV.6835) and for his efforts on the ground on behalf
of the United Nations and within the Quartet.

Let me also add that we agree with the conclusion
of the statement by Mr. Feltman.

Let me also welcome the new Ambassador of
Pakistan among us, His Excellency Mr. Masood Khan.

We regret, once again, that we are unable to report
any positive developments to the Security Council.
Since our last open debate, in July (see S/PV.6816),
the political process has remained deadlocked and
the situation on the ground has sharply deteriorated.
Israel's flagrant flouting of the law has obstructed
the resumption of peace negotiations and intensified
hardships for the Palestinian people in all aspects of
life. It has also thwarted the Palestinian leadership's
efforts to strengthen national institutions and realize
the legitimate aspirations and rights of our people. That
has, in turn, diminished hopes in the peace process and
in the prospects for achieving the two-State solution,
as indicated by Mr. Feltman, the physical and political
viability of which is being severely, if not permanently,
undermined by the illegal measures being carried
out by Israel, the occupying Power, in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.

Alarming developments in this period have sharply
raised tensions and further destabilized the situation on
the ground. Extremist Israeli settlers continue to wreak
terror and destruction. Military attacks and raids by
the Israeli occupying forces, in particular against the
Gaza Strip, including over this past weekend, continue
to cause civilian casualties and the destruction of
property, threatening to fuel another deadly cycle of
violence. Thousands of Palestinians remain captive
in Israeli jails, subject to deplorable conditions and
gross human rights violations, with recurring hunger
strikes a matter of the utmost concern. All the while,
Israel has continued its illegal colonization of the
occupied Palestinian territory, further fragmenting its
unity and contiguity and gravely impairing the efforts
for socioeconomic rehabilitation and development,
compounding the humanitarian crisis.

Despite all the appeals and demands by the
international community, including by the Security
Council in numerous resolutions and by the Quartet,
for an immediate and complete halt to settlement
activities, Israel has not only continued but intensified
its expansionist, colonial drive in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including in and around occupied
East Jerusalem. In grave breach of numerous provisions
of international humanitarian law, the occupying
Power persists with its expansion of settlements and
construction of so-called outposts, with thousands more
units built and planned this year alone; its construction
of the wall, which is dissecting and isolating East
Jerusalem and walling in Palestinian communities in
separated enclaves; its confiscation of vast tracts of
Palestinian land, especially fertile agricultural land and
areas above water wells and basins; and its demolition
of Palestinian homes and displacement of Palestinian
families, in particular from East Jerusalem and other
vulnerable communities, such as in the southern hills
of Al-Khalil and villages in what is often referred to as
Area C of the West Bank, including the Jordan Valley.
That deliberate land grab continues, under the same old
and some arrogant new, empty pretexts, all aimed at the
de facto annexation of more Palestinian land and the
further blurring and breaching of the pre-1967 borders,
on which the two-State solution is founded.

Occupied East Jerusalem in particular remains
a central target of that illegal settlement campaign,
as the occupying Power persists with attempts to
artificially and forcibly alter the natural demography,
historic character, legal status and Palestinian-Arab
identity of the city in order to cement its illegal de
facto annexation, which remains unrecognized by the
entire international community to this day. We reject
all such illegal Israeli measures in the Holy City and
demand their immediate cessation, while we reaffirm
once again that East Jerusalem is an integral part of the
Palestinian land occupied since June 1967 and is the
heart and capital of the State of Palestine.

At the same time, we draw the Council's attention
to the rising instability and pressure in occupied East
Jerusalem following an escalation of attacks on Muslim
and Christian holy places by Israeli settlers and other
extremist Jewish groups. Recent months have witnessed
repeated attempts by extremists to take over Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, which houses the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the
Dome of the Rock, as well as acts of violence and
desecration against mosques and churches in the city.
Those vile actions have led to several confrontations,
including between Jewish extremists and Palestinian
worshippers at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, raising alarm
throughout the region and the Islamic world, as stressed
by His Excellency President Mahmoud Abbas and His
Majesty King Abdullah II of the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan before the General Assembly. Those serious
concerns have led the Palestinian leadership to call for
an emergency high-level meeting of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, as well as of the Al-Quds
Committee, chaired by His Majesty King Mohammed
VI of Morocco, to determine the necessary measures to
address those deplorable actions and to protect the holy
sites in occupied East Jerusalem from acts of aggression
by the occupying Power and its extremist settlers.

Illegal, destructive actions by the settlers have, of
course, not been confined to occupied East Jerusalem.
Regrettably, fanatical settlers also continue to rampage
throughout the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory.
They constantly terrorize and harass Palestinian
civilians, including school children, elderly persons
and farmers. They launch attacks against Palestinian
property and agricultural land, with particular ferocity
unleashed against olive groves and orchards, with
hundreds upon hundreds of trees being torched and
uprooted, destroying the livelihoods of thousands
of families. Moreover, settlers continue to commit
violent acts of desecration against mosques, churches
and monasteries in our land, defiling those properties
with racist, hateful and provocative slogans that are
inflaming tensions and inciting religious enmity. The
potential for an escalation of settler terror remains
dangerously high, as Israel continues to provide excuses
and protection for that depraved lawlessness, rarely
holding settlers accountable for their vicious crimes.

The recent period has also witnessed another series
ofIsraeli military assaults against the Gaza Strip. Missile
airstrikes and artillery bombardment of Palestinian
civilian areas have continued, killing and injuring
dozens of people, including children and women, and
destroying homes and infrastructure. Such attacks are
traumatizing our people, who also continue to suffer
the multitude of social, economic, humanitarian and
psychological impacts stemming from the continuing
illegal blockade and Israeli military aggression against
Gaza. We reiterate our demands for the lifting of the
inhumane Israeli siege on our people and for respect for
international humanitarian and human rights law and
the protection of the Palestinian civilian population.

In sum, the political, humanitarian and security
situation being faced by the Palestinian people under
Israeli occupation remains grave. We remain adherent
to our conviction that action by the international
community is imperative to preventing the crisis from
deepening. Serious efforts must be made to overcome
the paralysis in the international community, including
in the Security Council, especially with regard to
ending Israel's impunity and compelling its compliance
with international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, and with the relevant United Nations
resolutions. This is a matter of urgency because, in
the midst of turbulent crises wracking the region
that are also affecting our refugees in the diaspora,
the instability and steep decline of the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, portend an explosive situation that must be
prevented at all costs.

On its part, the Palestinian leadership has
continued to act with utmost responsibility to serve its
people, uphold its legal obligations and international
commitments, and preserve security and calm. It has
consistently acted in good will for the sake of peace,
repeatedly reaffirming its adherence to the long-
standing parameters of the peace process embodied in
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road Map,
and to the two-State solution on the basis of the pre-
1967 borders.

All of this has been steadily pursued despite the
countless illegal actions to the contrary by Israel,
the occupying Power, and the serious obstructions
it has imposed. Those include Israeli actions that
have debilitated economic activity and development,
including continuing restrictions on the movement
of persons, goods and commercial flows, which have
undermined the Palestinian Authority's efforts on
the ground, undermined donor support for crucial
development projects, and contributed to the grave
financial crisis we now face.

Indeed, despite all these challenges, as reaffirmed
by President Abbas before the General Assembly
(see A/67/PV.12), the Palestinian leadership remains
committed to the pursuit of a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement by peaceful political,
diplomatic and non-violent means. Thus, our efforts
have continued to salvage the two-State solution and to
create an environment conducive to the resumption of
credible, fair negotiations between the two sides.

In early September, President Abbas once again
met with Arab foreign ministers in Cairo to consult on
the way forward. That resulted in Arab endorsement
of Palestinian efforts to secure non-member State
observer status for Palestine in the General Assembly
during the sixty-seventh session as an interim step, in
light of the obstacles before Palestine's application for
full membership, due to the situation in the Security
Council. We have now embarked on wide consultations
towards that end, including the establishment of an
Arab ministerial committee and a similar committee
here in New York, to assist with consultations with the
geopolitical groups.
It is our intention to engage all concerned Member
States as we seek the broadest support for this important
multilateral initiative, and we hope that it can be acted
on by the Assembly as soon as possible. We believe
that this effort is positive and constructive, in line
with relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions and consistent with the goal of the peace
process - that is, the two-State solution of Palestine
and Israel living side by side in peace and security on
the basis of the pre-1967 borders. In fact, we believe
that this effort constitutes a significant contribution to
actually preserving the two-State solution, at a time
when Israel is incessantly and recklessly undermining
that solution and the prospects for achieving a just
peace.

Furthermore, we stress that this initiative is neither
an alternative nor contradictory to the peace process,
to which we remain committed. We believe that
enhancement of the status of Palestine in the United
Nations system is our right, consistent with the long-
standing historic international covenant with Palestine.
Yet, at the same time, we fully understand the need
for, and remain ready for, negotiations between the
two sides to achieve ajust resolution of all final status
issues, Jerusalem, the Palestine refugees, settlements,
borders, security and water. Thus, last week President
Abbas publicly declared the Palestinian leadership's
readiness to proceed to peace negotiations with the
Israeli Government immediately following the adoption
of such a resolution by the General Assembly.

We therefore reiterate our call on the international
community, including the Security Council, to do its
part to uphold the Charter, to uphold international law,
to uphold United Nations resolutions and to uphold the
collective responsibility to Palestine. The Palestinian
people continue to await justice and to seek their
independence and freedom, the fulfillment of their
inalienable human rights, and peace and security - the
same desires shared by all peoples of our region and
the world. At this very critical juncture, we renew our
appeal to the international community to support our
legitimate efforts to achieve the national rights of our
people, including to self-determination and to return,
and realize the independence of the State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital - achievements that
will undoubtedly usher in a new era in a Middle East
that has long sought peace, stability and security.

