Ms. Meitzad (Israel): On behalf of my delegation,
I thank you for your leadership, Sir, as President of the
Security Council, and I commend you for convening
this important debate.

In recent years, innocent persons across Africa have
endured unrelenting conflict due to the proliferation of
terrorist groups in their countries. From Boko Haram
in Nigeria to Al-Qaida affiliates in the Sahel region,
to Al-Shabaab in Somalia and Da'esh throughout the
continent, terrorists continue to pose an urgent and
increasing threat to peace and security in Africa. The
consequences are devastating. Children are recruited
into radical organizations, teenaged girls are forced
to marry men often four times their age and countless
innocent lives are stolen every day. While the dangers
of terrorism pose immediate and obvious threats to
security, the long-term effects can prevent crucial
economic and social development in Africa.

Africa is a continent on the rise. Israel and Africa
share many similarities in our experiences, especially
as they relate to security challenges. It is in the strategic
interests of Israel to build robust and lasting partnerships
with Africa. As a young country in a region plagued by
conflict, Israel was compelledto develop comprehensive
counter-terrorism solutions. With Hamas and Hizbullah
right on our doorstep, Israel is well-versed in the threats
that terrorist groups, like Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab,
can pose to peace. With unique know-how, technology,
research and development, Israel seeks to contribute, as
much as possible, to the global fight against terrorism,
especially in Africa.

Israel supports the partnerships between the
African Union, regional groups, partner nations and
the United Nations to advance security collectively.
Regional, local groups and initiatives can play a crucial
role in countering terrorism and overcoming security
threats by helping improve police and border control,
confronting the financing of terrorism, halting the
proliferation of weapons and more.

As many have stated in the past, there can be no
security without development and no development
without security. My country shares that understanding
and will continue to share lessons learned with our
friends and allies throughout Africa. Last year, Prime
Minister Netanyahu visited East Africa to discuss
counter-terrorism and development initiatives with
regional leaders. This year, the Prime Minister had
the honour to participate in last month's Economic
Community of West African States Heads of State
meeting in Liberia. In his address, the Prime
Minister stated,

"Our goal here is not merely to join forces to fight
the bad, but to work together to advance the good."

Collaboration in Africa should not focus solely
on combating terrorism, but must also work to bolster
development. African-Israeli partnerships have already
internalized that lesson. Whether through official
channels or non-governmental organizations, Israel
is fully present and active in the effort to encourage
innovative technologies, inspire entrepreneurship and
empower communities.
Israel believes that, while talent can be found
anywhere, opportunities must be created. Therefore,
Israel's international development agency, Mashav,
emphasizes the power of human capital - an abundant
resource on the African continent. Mashav programmes
in Africa seek to empower communities, especially
youth, strengthen high-tech know-how and capacity-
building and provide specialized training.

It is the long-standing belief of Israel that the
inclusion of women is key to sustaining peace, in Africa
and around the world. In that regard, we commend
the Secretary-General's initiative for prioritizing
women's roles in peacekeeping in the United Nations.
One of Mashav's critical projects, in partnership with
UN-Women, reflects that view. Through its annual
workshop, Mashav provides a platform for African
women to engage actively in politics, peacebuilding,
mediation and conflict resolution.

Along with Government efforts, civil society
activities are a major driver for fostering development.
Various Israeli non-governmental organizations
have been working on the ground together with local
communities to advance water, energy and health
solutions. It is through such initiatives that youth and
women become leaders, start-up founders and agents
for change for sustainable peace and development in
Africa. Support from the international community,
regional organizations and partner States is vital to
the development and stability of Africa. However, we
believe it is equally important that African challenges
be met with African-led solutions.

Israel is committed to working together with our
friends in Africa to shape a safer and more secure and
prosperous future.

