Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salame', as
well as the African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, Mr. Smai'l Chergui, for their briefings, which
come at a time of difficult circumstances in sisterly
Libya. I would also thank Ambassador Juergen Schulz,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
for his briefing on the latest activities of the Committee.

It is no secret that there has been a great deal of
regional and international support for the United
Nations, represented by the statement that Mr. Salame
made on 20 March at a recent open meeting of the
Security Council (see S/PV.8488), in which the date and
place for convening the inclusive national conference
that has been so long awaited were determined. That
came after many rounds of negotiations with a number
of Libyan actors and great effort on the part of the
United Nations Mission in Libya for more than a year.
The purpose was to ensure the conditions necessary for
finding an effective and lasting solution to the conflict,
which has now entered its ninth year, and as a way to
reach a political settlement that will respect the Libyan
national constants.

The international community is ready to hold the
national conference and the Security Council also
urged its convening in press statement SC/13749, which
welcomed the resolve of the Libyan parties to actively
and seriously participate in the conference. It further
welcomed the visit of Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres to Tripoli and Benghazi to pave the way for
the conference and encourage all parties to participate
in it and accept the envisaged outcome.

However, we were surprised by the military
confrontations in and around Tripoli during the first
week of April, in which more than 400 people were
killed, more than 2,000 injured and nearly 70,000
displaced. The military clashes spilled over beyond
the zones of confrontation, thereby exposing citizens
and their property to great danger and hampering the
political process. Such repercussions could undermine
all the efforts of recent years to end the crisis.

I reiterate what Mr. Salame said in his briefing to
the effect that there will never be a military solution
to the crisis. With that in mind, we appeal to all the
warring Libyan parties to exercise restraint and respect
their commitments under international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We call on
them to not target civilians and civilian facilities and
to prioritize peaceful solutions based on dialogue and
rejecting violence. We ask the Libyan parties to also
respond in a constructive and concrete manner to the
calls and efforts of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya to implement an immediate ceasefire and
de-escalate the military situation.

Furthermore, they must cooperate with the Mission's
efforts to establish the necessary guarantees for
convening the national conference, which represents a
genuine historic opportunity to move on from a past that
depleted the resources and capabilities of the Libyan
people. The conference also constitutes a promising
path towards a better future that can seriously address
the differences and the institutional divisions in Libya
without excluding or marginalizing any component of
Libyan society.

We would also like to mention the increase in
terrorism and the growing number of subversive
operations by the Da'esh terrorist group, which
took advantage of the current security situation and
launched a number of terrorist attacks on certain
regions in Libya, such as Al-Fuqaha, Sabha and the
oil field in Zillah. Those terrorist operations must be
condemned by the Security Council and require that
all necessary assistance be provided to the relevant
Libyan authorities in order to overcome that challenge,
which threatens regional and international security and
stability. In conclusion, we reiterate our support to the
efforts being made by Mr. Ghassan Salame in order to
facilitate the comprehensive political process in Libya
according to the United Nations plan. We recognize
what he mentioned about the necessity to ensure the
security circumstances as a main condition to hold the
national conference. We appreciate his tireless efforts
in that regard and urge all Libyan parties to demonstrate
their goodwill towards a peaceful political solution
and to participate seriously and constructively in the
political and security processes in accordance with the
arrangements agreed in Paris, Palermo and Abu Dhabi
to hold transparent, inclusive and peaceful elections so
as to build a united and stable Libya.

