Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I wish to congratulate
you, Madam President, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of December. We
are very pleased to offer you, Madam, our full support,
and I wish you good luck. Allow me also to congratulate
Ambassador Karen Pierce on her able leadership and
thank the United Kingdom team for their commitment.

I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert;
the Archbishop of Erbil, Monsignor Bashar Matti
Warda; and the Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Robert Mardini, for
their comprehensive briefings.

It is with deep concern that Poland is following
the current developments in Iraq, where the people
have exercised their fundamental right to express their
concerns. We are alarmed by the high number of deaths
and injuries during the demonstrations and by the
continued use of ammunition against protesters, which
has led to further loss of life. We strongly condemn
all acts of violence, including the reported attacks by
armed entities against demonstrators, which undermine
the expression of legitimate demands. We call on all
actors to exercise maximum restraint and urge the
Iraqi authorities and security forces to protect the
lives of demonstrators, respect the rights to freedom
of expression and assembly, and swiftly conduct
independent and credible investigations in order to
ensure accountability for all acts of violence.

Developments over the past two months are a stark
reminder that the legitimate aspirations of Iraqi citizens
for an efficient and accountable Administration, better
job opportunities and the delivery of basic public
services remain unfulfilled. It is therefore paramount,
in our view, to step up efforts to address those
legitimate concerns through peaceful and inclusive
dialogue that would yield tangible benefits for all Iraqis.
Providing good governance, creating job opportunities,
improving living conditions for the population, fighting
corruption and promoting economic development
should be given the highest priority. We take note of
the measures undertaken by the Iraqi authorities to
meet the demands of the protesters, including efforts
to find legislative solutions that address public calls
for credible, free and fair elections, and we encourage
the political class of Iraq to come together to ensure
the swift implementation of much-needed reforms.
We also welcome the appointment of the first female
member of the Iraqi Government, Ms. Suha Khalil, as
Education Minister.

A key factor in ensuring long-term stability in Iraq
is promoting national reconciliation and social cohesion.
We encourage the Iraqi authorities to continue to work
towards addressing this important issue, including
through ensuring accountability for human rights
violations and providing protection for vulnerable
groups, including religious and ethnic minorities.

Advancing the stabilization and reconstruction
of areas recaptured from Da'esh is also of critical
importance. Rebuilding damaged infrastructure and
restoring effective administration, security and public
services are indispensable for creating the conditions
for the voluntary, dignified and safe return of internally
displaced persons, as well as their local reintegration
and resettlement.

What Iraq needs now more than ever is calm and
stability in order to overcome challenges and pave the
way for sustainable peace, development and prosperity.
I would like to commend the efforts of the Iraqi
leadership aimed at promoting a balanced regional
policy and a constructive engagement with all its
neighbours. In that context, we welcome the significant
progress achieved to date on the issue of Kuwaiti
missing persons and property.

In conclusion, we reiterate our steadfast support
for Iraq's unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity
and express our appreciation for the tremendous
work that the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in particular, have been doing in assisting the
Iraqi authorities.

