Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): My delegation
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council in the first
month of the new year and the first month of your
country's term as a non-permanent member of the
Council. I should like to add that my delegation is also
pleased to see the representative of a sister
Commonwealth nation directing the work of this body.
I would like to assure you, Mr. President, of our
cooperation in addressing the complex problems on the
Council's agenda, including those pertaining to Sierra
Leone. Allow me also to pay tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Lavrov of the Russian
Federation, for the efficient manner in which he
conducted the Council's affairs during the month of
December.

As the Security Council meets to begin
preliminary consideration of the report of the Panel of
Experts set up to collect information on the possible
link between trade in Sierra Leone diamonds and trade
in arms, I think it is relevant to cite the following lines
from President Kabbah's broadcast message to the
people of Sierra Leone on 21 February 1999, almost
two years ago - this was immediately after the
mayhem that killed over 5,000 people in Freetown in
January 1999. This message was subsequently
circulated as a document ofthe Security Council:

"I would like to appeal to the United
Nations Security Council, especially the
permanent members who have the political and
military means at their disposal, to exert pressure,
first of all, on those States and individuals that
continue to supply the weapons and logistics that
are being used to kill our people. It is no secret
that without such external support, the RUF
[Revolutionary United Front] and its allies would
not have had the capacity to maintain their
military campaigns and wreak such havoc in
several parts ofthe country." (S/1999/186, annex)

President Kabbah went on to say,
"The atrocities have been horrendous.

"The Security Council should act before it
is too late. The consequences of inaction or of
continued lukewarm responses would be
disastrous, not only for the people of Sierra
Leone, but also for millions of their neighbours in
the entire West African subregion." (ibid.)

This was in 1999.

In the view of my delegation, the report of the
United Nations Panel of Experts on Sierra Leone
Diamonds and Arms, which is now before this Council,
is a loud and clear response to President Kabbah's
appeal for further action against those who continue to
support the RUF in prolonging the brutal conflict in
Sierra Leone through illegal trade in diamonds and
weapons and in exporting terror to neighbouring
countries in West Africa.

The Government of Sierra Leone has studied the
report carefully. Its findings are credible. Its
recommendations are far-reaching but viable. We
maintain the view that the report constitutes a landmark
discovery regarding the major impediments to the
restoration of peace and stability in Sierra Leone.
Members of the Panel performed their assignments
responsibly and as objectively as possible, and we
commend them for a job well done. In the same vein,
we would also like to commend Ambassador
Chowdhury, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee.

For almost 10 years, and notwithstanding the
brutality of the rebel atrocities committed in Sierra
Leone, the Government of Sierra Leone did not openly
name any State or individual involved in supporting the
RUF. In the name of diplomacy, in the name of African
brotherhood, in the name of African solidarity, in the
spirit of good-neighbourliness, and with the hope that
reason would soon prevail, the Government of Sierra
Leone, albeit reluctantly, refrained from subscribing to
the tactic of "name and shame".

But then we had to ask ourselves how long
African solidarity should be allowed to overshadow the
plight of the victims of the conflicts and prolong their
suffering. How long should the identities of those
directly and actively involved in blood-diamond
transactions and illicit arms transactions across our
borders be concealed under the cloak of African
brotherhood? Indeed, how long should anyone,
including members ofthe Security Council, continue to
ignore those who support rebel movements that abduct,
hold hostage, humiliate, disarm and even hurt and kill
United Nations peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers? As we know, many of those peacekeepers are
from the developing world, including Africans who
have left their homes and families to help keep the
peace in our countries under the flag of the United
Nations.

Today, against the background of the painful
events of the past several years, the revelations
contained in the report of the United Nations Panel of
Experts and the serious humanitarian crisis now
emerging along the borders of the Mano River Union
States, we are compelled to say, enough is enough. I
would like to repeat: enough is enough.

Therefore, the Sierra Leone delegation would like
to state for the record that it concurs with the findings
of the United Nations Panel of Experts. In particular,
we agree with the experts that there is

"unequivocal and overwhelming evidence that
Liberia has been actively supporting the RUF at
all levels, in providing training, weapons and
related materiel, logistical support, a staging
ground for attacks and a safe haven for retreat
and recuperation". (S/2000/1195, enclosure, para. 20)

In this regard, we concur with the Panel that the
Security Council should take effective and appropriate
mandatory measures to deal with this serious threat to
international peace and security.

We take this position, first, because it is the truth
that whatever terminology or euphemism is used to
describe relations between the RUF and Liberia, there
is evidence that Liberia has been providing the RUF
with military and other types of assistance to wage and
prolong the conflict in our country. This is the truth.
We have a saying in Sierra Leone: telling a friend the
truth should in no way destroy the friendship.
Secondly, we have taken this position because of
the repeated calls for the international community to
assist Africa in ending its armed conflicts and in
dealing with the root causes and socio-economic
consequences of those conflicts. In this connection, we
are reminded of what Secretary-General Kofi Annan
told the summit ofthe Organization of African Unity in
Lome' last July:

"My friends, let us face some unpleasant
facts. Africa is the only region where conflicts are
not decreasing. Africa contains almost half of the
world's refugees and internally displaced
persons." (SG/SM/7485/Rev.1)

A third reason for taking the position I have just
outlined is that Sierra Leone would like the Security
Council to seriously consider endorsing the
recommendations of the Panel in a binding resolution
under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter. By
doing so, the Council would be helping to avert further
escalation of the conflict in the West African
subregion. Here my delegation recalls that a large
number of States and organizations have been asking
the Security Council to change the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone from
peacekeeping to peace enforcement. In other words,
they want more effective action to end the conflict in
Sierra Leone.

I should also add that our subregional
organization, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), has recently told the
Secretary-General of the United Nations that in order
to successfully discharge their mandate, there is every
likelihood that the ECOWAS troops to be deployed
along the border areas of Guinea and Liberia may need
to employ strong rules of engagement to help stop
further armed incursions and restore peace in those
areas.

For those who, for one reason or the other, have
reservations about the recommendations ofthe Panel of
Experts, which advocate strong measures by the
Security Council, my delegation would like to recall
the following.

Some delegations say that sanctions should not
hurt innocent people. We agree. But weapons bought
from the sale of our diamonds are being used to maim
and kill thousands of our people in Sierra Leone. Sierra
Leoneans have lives too. There are thousands of Sierra
Leonean refugees and displaced persons who are
unable to return to their homes because of the
prolongation of the conflict in Sierra Leone and the
escalation of cross-border skirmishes.

The people of Sierra Leone, including
traumatized victims of the rebel war, are suffering as a
result of the continued occupation ofthe main diamond
areas of the country by the RUF and the illegal export
of diamonds from those areas, mainly through Liberia.

For three months last year, while the RUF and its
supporters were engaged in the traffic of so-called
conflict or blood diamonds and weapons, the
Government of Sierra Leone, under the provisions of
Security Council resolution 1306 (2000), was not
allowed to export any diamonds.

The diamond certification regime instituted by
the Government of Sierra Leone last October is under
the scrutiny of the United Nations and subject to
periodic review by the United Nations sanctions
Committee on Sierra Leone.

While Liberia continues to freely support the
RUF in the acquisition of arms, in violation of Security
Council resolution 1171 (1998), the Government of
Sierra Leone is complying with the provisions of that
resolution relating to the stipulation that the
importation of arms and military equipment by the
Government for its legitimate self-defence should be
done through prior-named points of entry and that
relevant information about such imports should be
communicated to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, who shall then promptly notify all Member
States.

My delegation holds the view that these and other
points should be taken into account in any discussion
by the Security Council about the imposition of
sanctions based on the recommendations of the Panel
of Experts. In short, we are saying that Sierra Leone is
itself under certain constraints as a result of existing
mandatory Security Council measures relating to arms
and diamonds. However, I can assure the Council that
the people of Sierra Leone consider such constraints to
be temporary hurdles along the path towards peace and
security in Sierra Leone and neighbouring countries.

My delegation has no doubt that the endorsement
by the Security Council and the implementation of
most of the measures proposed by the Panel of Experts
will help to bring about genuine peace in Liberia and
Sierra Leone and to stabilize the entire West African
subregion.

