Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you for convening
this meeting, Madam President, and for the invitation
to briefthe Security Council in my capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jose'
Ramos-Horta, for his briefing and his outstanding
leadership at this very crucial moment of Guinea-
Bissau's history.

As has been mentioned, I accepted the invitation
from the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to visit the country late last month. I take this
opportunity to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, all personnel of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea Bissau and
the Peacebuilding Support Office for their support to
the visit. I also thank Assistant Secretary-General Judy
Cheng-Hopkins for joining me, in a demonstration of
her ongoing commitment.

During my four-day visit to Bissau, I spoke with a
wide spectrum of interlocutors, including transitional
authorities, political actors, civil servants, civil society
organizations and international partners. In each of
those meetings, I stressed that free and transparent
elections and a return to constitutional order were
essential for the full resumption of much-needed
international cooperation.

I found a country in serious economic distress,
in spite of its human and material resources and
potential. The consequences of the 2012 coup hit the
poorest and most vulnerable the hardest, and do not
seem to have affected its perpetrators in significant
ways. It seems that an urgent reflection on the part of
the international community is needed to avoid such
twisted consequences.

In contacts with international partners I was able to
identify a scenario of improved regional and subregional
coordination. A positive regional context is a key factor

for stability in Guinea-Bissau. I will continue to work
for such positive trends to gain even more traction.

In meetings with various transitional authorities,
including in the military, I could observe the very
complex realities related to the modernization of the
security and defence sectors. While there seems to be
a national consensus on the urgency of, and even the
main modalities for, the modernization of the security
sector, simplistic notions about the role of the military
in politics, with little consideration of civil-military
relations and the conduct of political elites, are of
limited practical assistance.

A more comprehensive approach is necessary.
Meaningful modernization entails an adequate
understanding of the underlying historical and
sociological factors contributing to political instability
since independence, and also since the conflict of 1998.
It will require sustained support to political dialogue,
State reform and the modernization of key State
structures, from the police and the judiciary to public
administration and services.

Any effective process will have to ensure that no
social group or stakeholder be - nor perceive itself as
being - relegated to second-class citizenship, and that
the various contributions to the process of institutional
progress be recognized in a plural and democratic
national environment with equal opportunity for all.

International coordination among key actors
supporting security sector reform in Guinea-Bissau
will remain important. The Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) is positioned to play
a central role, including through the strengthened
presence of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau.
The international community should be ready to rally
behind the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General's lead and support efforts decisively and
swiftly.

I was impressed by the willingness of key regional
and international partners in Bissau, such as ECOWAS
and the European Union, to heed that call. Following
the elections, my own country, Brazil, will reassess the
prospects for resumed cooperation in that field.

International crime and drug-trafficking remain
major concerns among international interlocutors,
in spite of assessments pointing to a relative decline.
The issue of irregular fishing and logging licenses
was raised by national interlocutors as an emerging
challenge. Institutional constraints, the political
situation and the lack of law-enforcement resources
remain significant obstacles. A focus on increasing
transparent revenue-collection and strengthening local
capacities to promote social and economic development
stands a good chance of garnering support.

I am all the more convinced that impunity in
Guinea-Bissau is a result of persistent political
instability, weak institutions and unresolved hurdles
in civil-military relations. An integrated approach
capable of reinforcing national ownership of a renewed
commitment to democracy and a more inclusive society
will yield the best results.

While in Bissau, I could testify to Timor-Leste's
invaluable contribution in support of the voter-
registration process. The importance of the registration
process transcends the upcoming elections. It enables the
exercise of civil and political rights, but can also serve
planning and policy-making purposes. I commend the
people of Guinea-Bissau for the enthusiasm with which
they participated in the registration process, which
allowed for a historical expansion of the electorate
throughout the country. The next elections therefore
have the potential to be the most significant step for the
consolidation of democracy in Guinea-Bissau's history.

In the light of the extension of voter registration, the
resulting rescheduling of elections does not necessarily
imply a lack of commitment. The technical quality of
elections, for which the registration process is key, is
just as important.

I welcome the election of a new leader of
Guinea-Bissau's major party, the African Party for
the Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde. The
nomination of candidates by various parties and
the success of the registration process in difficult
conditions can help to generate positive dynamics
for the restoration of democracy, in spite of the many
challenges ahead.

I fully concur with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General's call on all political actors to
overcome their political divides, move to the next phase
and march peacefully and decisively to a new chapter
in the country's political life without further delay - a
new chapter that is possible and in which I believe the
PBC can play a constructive strategic role.

On the economic front, the impact of political
instability on the economy is devastating. Public
finances are in a very poor state. The withdrawal of
international assistance has had a direct impact on
public services and economic activity.

Food insecurity in fertile Guinea-Bissau is a
glaring contradiction. Dependency on the cashew nut
was pointed out as a major challenge. As stated in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2014/105), nearly half
of the population relies on cashew nut sales for their
primary income. Alternatives aimed at diversifying
the economy range from processing cashew nuts,
stimulating the production of other crops, including
rice, cassava and beans, and promoting fishery, to
investments in the mining and tourism sectors. The
logistics services sector can play an important role,
with the planned construction of a deep-water port in
Buba, where natural conditions are favourable.

In the absence of legitimate authorities, I was
not able to discuss strategic, long-term peacebuilding
priorities with national decision makers. Nevertheless,
I would like to present some conclusions that may
help provide a strategy for our collective engagement
with Guinea-Bissau and measure progress in the
peacebuilding agenda, including with a view to
engaging with legitimate authorities in future.

First, Guinea-Bissau's international partners,
especially those in the region, have a decisive role
to play in fostering stability. For that contribution to
materialize in the most effective way, strong political
coordination is central. That is one clear area for the
immediate engagement of the PBC.

Secondly, I wish to highlight the vision of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ramos-Horta
of intensive international support to a State-rebuilding
programme following the elections. The Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the PBC can play an important role in
supporting the Special Representative's vision.

Thirdly, I would like to propose for further
discussion three achievable, modest, medium-term
strategic objectives in the institutional, socioeconomic
and security areas, which can guide the PBC in
its resumed engagement and also contribute to the
Council's subsequent deliberations.

On the institutional track, one objective is the
completion of a full democratic cycle with a constitutional
transfer of power to elected officials. Apart from the
strong international political engagement, in which
the PBC finds a natural place, that can be supported
by technical cooperation in public administration,
aligned with the Special Representative's proposals,
and support to political dialogue, including through
social communication. Let me highlight, in that
regard, the importance of sustained engagement by
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
including in making technical expertise available.
The Security Council plays a key role in that regard
by helping ensure that electoral results are respected
and continuing to monitor closely the post-electoral
political developments.

On the social and economic track, one objective
is to make significant strides on social and economic
indicators, with a focus on food security and rural
development. The World Food Programme should be
able to envisage its departure from Guinea-Bissau.
Responsible economic diversification is key. The
economic empowerment of women, who are responsible
for more than 80 per cent of the workforce in cashew nut
harvesting, is an essential dimension. Moreover, I was
impressed by women's organizations in Guinea-Bissau
and the way they bring together different ethnicities,
religious denominations and political affiliations under
the common objective of economic empowerment.
They are obviously an important driving force for
peacebuilding efforts.

On the security sector track, an objective is to
provide a platform for coordination and strategizing on
the international support to the modernization of the
security sector. The Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the PBC can help bring key actors together, deepen the
understanding of the political and social dynamics in
play and assess the need for comprehensive mechanisms
of support to the reintegration of retired military
personnel, along with political civil-military dialogue
and reconciliation.

Once again, and especially after visiting the
country, let me stress that, in contrast with the current
crisis, Guinea-Bissau has clear potential as a stable
and prosperous nation. With modest resources invested
in national capacities, a great deal can be achieved.
I was struck by the conversations I had with deeply
committed, highly educated officials, dynamic civil
society organizations and wise cultural and religious
leaders. A pluralistic, peaceful and vibrant society is
ready to fully emerge from decades of poverty and
instability and deserves our active solidarity.

