Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to start by saying that France also aligns itself
with the words of condolence conveyed to the Russian
Federation in the light of the criminal attack that struck
its Ambassador in Turkey.

I had not intended to take the floor here today in
the Chamber, as I really only wanted to speak in the
consultations, but it is not every day that the Secretary-
General sends us such a powerful public message. The
Secretary-General, as well as, of course, the Under-
Secretary-General, delivered strong messages warning
us that we have to assume our collective responsibility.
It is a call for action.

For us, the serious nature of the situation in South
Sudan requires collective mobilization not only by the
Security Council but also by the whole of the United
Nations system and by the region itself, starting with the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
along with the African Union. First and foremost,
however, resolute action by the Government of South
Sudan is essential. For us, collectively speaking, there
are five or six axes on which we need to act rapidly.
The first - stated quite clearly by the Secretary-
General - is the arms embargo. We regret the fact that
for almost a year we have been discussing the embargo;
the Secretary-General has advocated for it, and we have
called for it. We regret that the arms embargo has not
yet been imposed. Let me make it clear that for us the
arms embargo is not a punitive measure or a lever to
obtain some sort of political advantage. It is a measure
of common sense that is intended to help a country
ravaged by war and awash in weapons. The flow of
weapons needs to be halted, and an end needs to be put
to the arms trade circulating in that war-torn country. It
is necessary, therefore, that the arms embargo be put in
place as soon as possible.

The second element is a political process.
We know, of course, the roles that the region, the
subregion, IGAD and the African Union have played
in undertaking rather encouraging developments in
terms of national dialogue. What we would like to see
are those encouraging developments actually being
converted into actions. What is certain in any case is
that, in the face of the obstacles created by some parties
and the hate speech, which might hinder or undermine
the peace process, the Security Council will have
a role to play. We do have an instrument - targeted
sanctions - that will enable us to intervene in support
of a peace process, which we all desire.

The third element is the central question of the
protection of civilians. That is, after all, at the very heart
of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS). We decided last August to deploy
the Regional Protection Force to bolster UNMISS
capabilities. Since then, the Transitional Government
of South Sudan has given its formal consent to that
deployment, but unfortunately things have not moved
forward, and now it is high time for plots of land to be
provided so that we are able to deploy the Force. That
is, of course, a test of the good faith and will of South
Sudan, namely, to enable the deployment of the Force,
and it is very important that Juba demonstrate that.

The fourth element is linked to my previous point.
The implementation of the UNMISS mandate will
require the unfettered ability to move and act. All
obstacles that might hinder the deployment of the Force
must be lifted. That is a core element of the message
sent by Security Council members during their visit to
South Sudan in September. Obstacles to the status of
forces agreement must be lifted, and targeted sanctions
by the Security Council will ensure that that takes
place. In the case of confirmed obstacles, we could use
sanctions to ensure that the peacekeeping operation
that we have deployed is able to operate fully.

The fifth point I wanted to make is related to
humanitarian issues. After I heard the point made by
the Under-Secretary-General regarding the difficulties
and obstacles that we face and the unacceptable
price being paid by humanitarian workers, it is quite
clear that it is absolutely essential to ensure that full
access and cooperation be granted to the whole of the
humanitarian community, at a time when the situation
is quite disastrous.

My lastpoint concerns the question ofaccountability
and impunity. The transitional agreement adopted
earlier this year provided for a hybrid court, the
establishment of which is absolutely essential. South
Sudan requires a judicial mechanism commensurate
with the grave crimes being committed. The African
Union will have an important role to play. It will enjoy
the support of the Security Council in that regard, but
there must be progress towards the establishment of the
hybrid court.

All of these messages are contained in resolution
2327 (2016), adopted a few days ago, but the Security
Council will have to make them more concrete and
operational, first by voting in favour of the draft
resolution on an arms embargo, and secondly by
remaining mobilized and prepared to use leverage,
starting with targeted sanctions, to curb a spiral of
violence that could well lead to the disastrous situation
described by Mr. Adama Dieng a few days ago.

