Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation joins
previous speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting. We also wish to welcome Mr.
Miranda, Minister for External Relations of Angola, to
our deliberations.

My delegation pays tribute to Ambassador Robert
Fowler for his re-energizing of the sanctions Committee
established under resolution 864 (1993) and thanks him
for introducing the draft resolution before us today. We
fully endorse the draft, as we believe that it is important
for us to send a strong message that breaches of the
Council's sanctions will not go unpunished.

Already the work of the Panel of Experts has borne
fruit, as Governments and others have begun to focus on
what they could do to improve the enforcement of
sanctions and to curtail existing violations. As the report
of the Panel reminded us, the purpose of the sanctions
was to provide a peaceful settlement to the conflict in
Angola by requiring UNITA to comply with the
obligations it undertook and by limiting UNITA's ability
to pursue its objectives by military means.

The Security Council has given UNITA and Jonas
Savimbi all opportunities to bring peace to the long-
suffering people of Angola. But we must recall that the
 

leaders of UNITA rejected the results of free and fair
elections held in 1992. They took advantage of the Lusaka
Protocol to regroup their forces, and they were aided and
abetted in evading the arms embargo, the travel and
financial sanctions and the embargo on diamond exports.
Those who aided and abetted UNITA in violating sanctions
are equally culpable, along with UNITA, for the
humanitarian tragedy in Angola. It is reported that over the
past 25 years, some 1.5 million people have lost their lives.
There has been a dramatic increase in infant mortality, food
shortages and starvation, and the number of internally
displaced persons was last year estimated at 1.7 million out
of a total population of 12.6 million.

It is in this context that the Security Council, by its
action today, will clearly indicate that the international
community strongly repudiates the actions of Mr. Savimbi
and is determined to cut off his sources of finance and
arms. But the measures in the draft resolution with regard
to the trade in arms, petroleum and petroleum products and
diamonds, and with regard to travel, representation and
financial measures, can be effective only if all Member
States adhere to the terms of the draft resolution.

The monitoring mechanism is an innovative one, and
we believe that it can provide an example for other
sanctions regimes. We therefore hope that it will be set
up expeditiously in order to allow it to report to the
Council by November 2000. We wish to commend the
Southern African Development Community countries, and
those geographically close to Angola, for the steps they
have already taken to tighten the sanctions.

The draft resolution before us has been carefully
drafted, providing, as it does, an opportunity for those
named in the report to respond before any action is taken
against sanctions busters, while at the same time
reminding States of the mandatory nature of sanctions
imposed by the Security Council. Twenty-five years have
gone by. A whole generation of Angolans has not known
life without war. We owe it to them to seek to ensure that
the riches of their country are used for their economic and
social development, and not to perpetuate conflict.

The meeting was suspended at 1.45 pm.
