Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to thank
Malaysia for holding this open debate. I also thank the
briefers for their presentations.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

Armed conflicts continue to have a horrific impact
on children and, as we heard today from both the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, last
year was one of the worst in recent memory. Recruited
as child soldiers, stunted by malnourishment and
starvation, forced to witness the death of their parents
and siblings, abducted and turned into suicide bombers,
sold in slave markets like cattle, children in conflict
zones are denied the most basic of human rights.

Granted, in recent years there have been some
positive steps in the protection of children in armed
conflicts, and we would like to express our appreciation
for the dedicated and passionate work of Special
Representative Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui
to that effect. The incorporation of child protection
provisions into peacekeeping mandates, the inclusion
of crimes against children among sanctions designation
criteria, the campaign "Children Not Soldiers", child
protection advisers, national action plans - these have
all been important developments. And yet countless
children across the Middle East, in Africa and even in
the middle of Europe continue to suffer from conflict-
related violence.

In eastern Ukraine foreign aggression and the reign
of lawlessness imposed by illegal militants have caused
massive displacement, primarily impacting the elderly
and children. The latter account for more than 161,000,
or some 18 per cent, among registered internally
displaced persons, while the total number of children
affected by this conflict amounts to 1.7 million. The
restricted access to medical services and education,
life in temporary shelters and basements of damaged
buildings and continued psychological trauma are the
daily reality for those children in eastern Ukraine. Child
soldiers have been recently spotted by the monitors
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe among the ranks of the illegal militants.

In Syria, the worst humanitarian crisis of our time,
7.5 million children are in need of humanitarian aid,
2.6 million are deprived of education opportunities and
close to 2 million are living as refugees in neighbouring
countries. Across Yemen, 9.5 million children require
humanitarian assistance, 3,600 schools, or 76 per cent
of the country's total, have closed due to insecurity
and 1.83 million children lost over two months of
school. More and more young boys are seen manning
checkpoints and involved in armed groups.

Those are but a few cases where conflicts are
taking a heavy toll of children's lives. The list of
such cases, however, is devastatingly long. If we
remember yesterday's statement by the Executive
Director of UNICEF on atrocities in Unity state, South
Sudan - boys castrated and left to bleed, girls as
young as eight gang-raped and murdered, some 13,000
children forced to participate in a conflict not of their
own making - it reminds us once again of the darkest
depths of inhumanity that we humans can reach.

Abductions of children are being increasingly used
by armed groups and terrorists as a tactic of war, to
impose their murderous rule and to target particular
ethnic or religious groups. The Chibok girls abducted
by Boko Haram in Nigeria and the abduction of
Kurdish boys and Yezidi children by Daesh are among
the best known recent atrocities and crimes against
humanity. The Lord's Resistance Group (LRA), which
the Council discussed only last week, is known to have
abducted some 30,000 children, boys and girls, some as
young as six, over two decades. Abducted children are
forced to commit rape and torture and a re forced into
regular combat to kill, often blurring the lines between
the victim and the perpetrator. Daesh, known for its
exceptional wanton brutality, has been widely reported
to turn abducted girls, some as young as 10, into sex
slaves, sold and resold on slave markets, some as many
as 20 times.

It is hard to find the right words to describe the
psychological trauma and the impact on children's
minds in such situations. Over time, some of those
children turn from victims into victimizers themselves,
as was the case of Dominic Ongwen, who was abducted
at the age of 14 on his way to school and later became
a notorious LRA commander. Former abductees face
tremendous challenges of reintegrating into normal
life. They are often shunned and rejected by their
own families and communities, especially former girl
soldiers and repeated rape victims.

A recent article by photojournalist Marc Ellison
provides a telling story of several former LRA girl
child soldiers, including one called Mary, who was
abducted before she was 10 and forced to become a
rebel "wife" at the age of 12. No longer a child soldier,
she is rejected by her own community. "If she comes
back to live, people have said they will burn her alive in
our own hut", says that girl's mother.

No doubt it is a story common to many former
abductees and child soldiers, who suffer ostracism and
exclusion because of their past. Some of them even wish
for the time they were wielding the gun as child soldiers,
missing the false sense of empowerment it provided
over the lives of others. Today such worrying signals
are beginning to emerge from the Central African
Republic where the lack of options and opportunities
to reintegrate into civilian life may be pushing some of
the released former child soldiers back into the hands
of armed groups.

While the release of children is of the utmost
importance, it is no less important to acknowledge
that release must be accompanied by comprehensive,
creative programmes aimed at addressing the profound
damage inflicted upon the children, combining
measures of reintegration, training, livelihood
opportunities, psycho-social assistance and community
education. The role of civil society, non-governmental
organizations and community leaders, including
on tackling the stigma carried by such children, is
extremely important.

We must remember to treat children as victims
first, not as perpetrators. In that regard, we welcome the
steps taken by the Government of Chad in signing the
protocol agreement with the United Nations regarding
the handover of children associated with armed forces
or groups to child protection actors. Such protocols
could be a valuable tool for child rehabilitation.

As mentioned in the recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/409), accountability for Violence
against children remains far too rare, even in countries
that have criminalized the recruitment of children.
Protecting children from serious crimes and preventing
such crimes from being committed go hand in hand with
tackling impunity and ensuring that the perpetrators
are held to account.We welcome the transfer of Dominic
Ongwen to the International Criminal Court (ICC) for
crimes against humanity and war crimes. Yet, as some
colleagues said earlier today, more needs to be done
to combat impunity. While the perpetrators are many,
the cases and judgments against them remain few and
far between. The preventive, deterrent effects of such
judgments on would-be perpetrators has yet to be felt.
As some cases remain pending, we look forward to the
continued work of the ICC to this effect, but also to
greater national efforts to pursue accountability.

Child recruitment, killings, maimings and attacks
against schools are listed as sanctions triggers. In that
context, we welcome the adoption of today's resolution
2225 (2015), which draws attention to abductions as a
disturbingly prevalent feature ofmodern armed conflict
and includes abductions as an additional listing trigger.

In conclusion, we have a wide range of instruments
to tackle impunity for conflict-related crimes against
children. We must close the gap between the existing
legislation and their application, in order to put an
end to Violence against children and restore them the
biggest gift they can have: a safe and secure childhood
and the right to be who they are - children.

