The President: I should at the outset like to extend,
on behalf of the Council, a warm welcome to the new
Permanent Representative of Cote d'lvoire to the
United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Kacou Houadja
Leon Adorn. We very much look forward to working
with him, and we wish him every success.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Central African Republic

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

(spoke in French)

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern regarding persistent violence perpetrated
by armed groups, in Bangui and in the rest of
the country, against civilians, United Nations
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers, as well as
violations of international humanitarian law, abuses
and Violations of human rights, including those
committed against children and those involving
sexual and gender-based violence in conflict,
resulting in an unacceptable number of deaths,
injury and displacement. The Security Council also
strongly condemns the rise of incitement to ethnic
and religious hatred and violence that threaten the
peace and stability of the Central African Republic,
as well as manipulated hostility towards the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and other international actors.

"The Security Council urges armed groups,
in Bangui and in the rest of the country, to cease
all forms of violence, destabilizing activities
and restrictions on freedom of movement of
people, lay down their arms, immediately and
unconditionally, and engage constructively in the
peace process. The Security Council reiterates the
urgent and imperative need to hold accountable

those responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of
human rights. The Security Council also recalls
that committing acts of incitement to violence,
in particular on an ethnic or religious basis, and
then engaging in or providing support for acts that
undermine the peace, stability or security of the
Central African Republic is a basis for sanctions
designations pursuant to resolution 2399 (2018).

"The Security Council reiterates its support to
President Faustin-Archange Touadera in his efforts
to promote lasting peace and stability in the Central
African Republic and calls on the Central African
authorities to take all the necessary steps, without
delay, to advance the dialogue with armed groups
and promote national reconciliation, the extension
of State authority, the reform of the security sector,
and the fight against impunity, as the highest
priorities. The Security Council further stresses
the need for the definitive operationalization of the
Special Criminal Court and the establishment of
the Truth, Justice, Reparations and Reconciliation
Commission, as well as to bolster the other
national accountability mechanisms. The Security
Council calls on the Central African authorities
to implement the reform of the security sector in
order to put in place multi-ethnic, professional,
representative and well-equipped national defense
and internal security forces, the disarmament,
demobilization and repatriation of members
of armed groups, as well as the acceleration of
the implementation of the National Strategy for
Recovery and Peace Consolidation.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support to
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic and its road map
that was adopted in Libreville on 17 July 2017,
which both constitute the main framework for a
political solution in the Central African Republic,
as agreed by the Central African authorities and
under their leadership. The Security Council
welcomes the conclusion of the second round of
consultations by the Panel of Facilitators of the
African Initiative and underscores the urgent need
for further progress in an ambitious and inclusive
dialogue between the Central African authorities
and the armed groups, as well as all segments
of society, promoting the full and effective
participation of women, with continued support
from MINUSCA and other partners, in order to
reach a comprehensive political agreement without
delay. The Security Council also encourages
President Faustin-Archange Touadera to cement
and broaden national ownership of the peace
process and calls for an enhanced coordination of
efforts to support the African Initiative.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of the role and of high-level commitment
of the African Union, the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, and
neighbouring countries for the promotion oflasting
peace and stability in the Central African Republic
and calls on them in this regard to step up their
coordination and efforts for the next steps of the
implementation of the Libreville road map.

"The Security Council welcomes the first
meeting of the International Support Group to
the Central African Republic, co-chaired by the
African Union, ECCAS and the United Nations,
which took place in Bangui on 11 April 2018, to
promote coherent and sustained engagement for the
ongoing stabilization and recovery efforts in the
Central African Republic. The Security Council
welcomes in this regard the call to reactivate
joint bilateral commissions between Cameroon,
Chad and the Sudan with the Central African
Republic and encourages the concerned countries
to cooperate in order to address cross-border
issues. The Security Council also welcomes the
joint visit in Bangui of Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
and African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, Smai'l Chergui, from 10 to 13 April 2018
and underlines the importance of the synergy
between the two organizations to support the peace
process in the Central African Republic.

"The Security Council renews its strong
support to Special Representative Parfait Onanga-
Anyanga and MINUSCA in the implementation of
the mandate of the mission in support of the Central
African authorities, in particular the protection of
civilians, including through a proactive and robust
posture, support to the peace process, and the
creation of a secure environment for the delivery
of humanitarian assistance in accordance with
resolution 2387 (2017).

"The Security Council pays tribute to the
bravery of United Nations peacekeepers who
sacrificed their lives in the service of peace and
welcomes in this regard the extradition by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to the Central
African Republic of anti-Balaka commander
Wekanam Cre'pin and associated people suspected
of involvement in an attack that led to the death
of five United Nations peacekeepers and in attacks
against civilians. The Security Council welcomes
the efforts undertaken to improve the safety and
security of United Nations personnel. The Security
Council also encourages the efforts undertaken
to continue optimizing MINUSCA's performance
and looks forward to the reporting on troop- and
police-contributing country performance. The
Security Council also welcomes current efforts by
the Secretariat to generate the additional authorized
forces without delay to increase MINUSCA's
flexibility and mobility pursuant to operative
paragraph 32 of resolution 2387 (2017).

"The Security Council notes the various
measures taken by MINUSCA and troop- and
police-contributing countries to combat sexual
exploitation and abuse, which has led to a reduction
in reported cases, but still expresses grave concern
over numerous allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse reportedly committed by peacekeepers
in the CAR, as well as by non-United Nations
forces, and reiterates the need for troop- and
police-contributing countries, and as appropriate,
MINUSCA, to promptly investigate those
allegations in a credible and transparent manner
and for those responsible for such criminal offences
and misconduct to be held to account, and further
stresses the need to prevent such sexual exploitation
and abuse and to improve how these allegations are
addressed in line with resolution 2272 (2016).

"The Security Council welcomes the work
carried out by the European Union Military
Training Mission in the Central African Republic
(EUTM-RCA), as well as the support of other
international and regional partners to the training
and the enhancement of capacities of the national
security and defence forces, and encourages
effective coordination with MINUSCA and
EUTM-RCA in this regard. The Security Council
welcomes the ongoing good collaboration between
the Central African authorities and international
partners, including MINUSCA and EUTM-RCA,
for the progressive and sustainable redeployment
of the Central African armed forces and internal
security forces trained by EUTM-RCA and other
internationalpartners,withinthebroaderframework
of the extension of the State authority and security,
and underlines the importance of capacity-building
actions in support of internal security forces. The
Security Council expresses in this regard its intent
to review the recommendations that the Secretary-
General transmitted to the Security Council, as
requested in operative paragraph 43 (a) (iv) of
resolution 2387 (2017).

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern for the humanitarian situation in the
Central African Republic, including the alarming
situation of refugees and internally displaced
persons, where nearly half of the population is
in need of humanitarian assistance. The Security
Council reiterates its demand that all parties
allow and facilitate the full, safe, immediate
and unhindered access for the timely delivery of
humanitarian assistance to populations in need.
The Security Council encourages Member States
to scale up funding to urgently respond to the
humanitarian needs in the country identified in the
2018 humanitarian responseplan.

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of the Central
African Republic, and recalls the importance
of the principles of non-interference, good-
neighbourliness and regional cooperation."

(spoke in English)

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2018/14.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.

