Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia, the candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey, the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and
Montenegro and the European Free Trade Association
country Iceland, member of the European Economic
Area, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union and the countries aligned
with this statement welcome the readiness of the
Council to respond to requests for an open debate on a
draft resolution on the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD). This is a critical issue, and, given
the impact that such a resolution will have on all States
Members of the United Nations, it is particularly
important that the wider United Nations membership
be consulted and be given an opportunity to have their
views heard in advance of action on the draft
resolution. In this context, we appreciate the outreach
efforts to the wider United Nations membership that
have already been made by the sponsors.

The European Union therefore welcomes and
strongly supports this initiative by the Security Council
to address the problem of the potential acquisition of
nuclear, chemical or biological weapons or materials
by non-State actors. Measures are needed to address
this important issue, and enhanced international
cooperation is required.

At their meeting in Thessaloniki in June 2003,
European Union heads of State or Government agreed
that the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and means of delivery, such as ballistic missiles, is a
growing threat to international peace and security.
They have also recognized that the risk that terrorists
will acquire chemical, biological, radiological or
nuclear materials adds a new critical dimension to this
threat. EU heads of State or Government have resolved
to take action to address this threat, using all
instruments and policies at the disposal of the Union,
the objective being to prevent, deter, halt and, where
possible, eliminate proliferation programmes of
concern worldwide.

The European Union has since developed a
strategy against proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, which was adopted in December 2003.
Strengthening the role of the Security Council,
including in relation to issues of non-compliance with
multilateral disarmament and non-proliferation treaties,
is an important element of the EU strategy. We are
pleased, therefore, to find in the draft resolution many
points of commonality with that strategy, while
recognizing at the same time that the focus of the draft
resolution is more specific.

Integral to the strategy is our conviction that a
multilateralist approach to security, including
disarmament and non-proliferation, provides the best
way to maintain international order. Convinced that
non-proliferation and disarmament are mutually
reinforcing, the EU welcomes the fact that the most
recent version of the draft resolution now includes
reference to the role of disarmament.

The EU strategy reaffirms the EU commitment to
uphold and implement the multilateral disarmament
and non-proliferation treaties and agreements and the
multilateral institutions charged respectively with
verification and upholding compliance with these
treaties.

Accordingly, the EU believes that all States
should be asked to promote the universal adoption and
full implementation of the multilateral treaties, and not
only those States that are party to them. The EU
welcomes the explicit assurance that nothing in the
draft resolution should be taken to conflict with or alter
the rights and obligations of States parties to existing
treaties and conventions or with the responsibilities of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW).

The EU adopted in November 2003 a Common
Position on the universalization and reinforcement of
multilateral agreements in the field of non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and means of delivery.
Accordingly, the EU is working independently, but in
the spirit of the draft resolution, for the
universalization and, when necessary, strengthening of
the main treaties, agreements and verification
arrangements on disarmament and non-proliferation.
We are also committed to enhancing political, financial
and technical support to verification regimes -
including, in particular, the IAEA and the OPCW.

The EU is already working to strengthen export
control policies and practices in coordination with
partners of the export control regimes, and is
advocating, where applicable, adherence to effective
export control criteria by countries outside the existing
regimes and arrangements. We also strongly endorse
the need to enhance the security of proliferation-
sensitive materials. We support efforts to strengthen
identification, control and interception of illegal
trafficking of WMD-related material. The EU decided
in November 2003 to include in its agreements with
third countries a non-proliferation clause, which
requires, inter alia, the establishment by States parties
of an effective system of export controls.

The European Union is committed to reinforcing
its cooperative threat reduction programmes with other
countries and plans to set up a programme of assistance
to States in need of technical knowledge in order to
ensure the security and control of sensitive material,
facilities and expertise.

On such a critical issue, it is important that the
language and explanation of the draft resolution is as
clear as possible to ensure an accurate understanding of
its scope and its clear interpretation following
adoption. The draft resolution places far-reaching and
legally binding demands on States, and clarity of
language is therefore important. We appreciate the
continuing efforts of the Council in that regard.

We believe that the resolution should be endowed
with an effective follow-up mechanism, firmly
anchored in the Council. That would also help reassure
Member States that the resolution will be implemented
in a transparent, cooperative and consistent manner. We
also strongly believe that a committee of the Council
would require a mandate of two years. Ways might also
be explored to improve ties with non-Council members
in the work of the Committee.

Member States have a direct and vested interest
in this draft resolution. The proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction is a global threat that requires an
effective global response. We are confident that the
Council, in its ongoing deliberations on the draft, will
continue to take account of the concerns of Member
States so that the resolution, when adopted, will enjoy
widespread support and so that truly collective action
to combat the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction will be assured. The security of our States,
our peoples and our collective interests demands no
less.

