Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): At the outset,
I would like to pay tribute to His Royal Highness
Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah II of Jordan
for convening this timely meeting on the important
role of young people, who are both victims and
perpetrators of Violence, in combating extremism and
promoting peace. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive briefing and acknowledge with
appreciation the efforts of Mr. Ahmad Alhendawi, his
Envoy on Youth, in mobilizing young people to engage
in peace processes.

Discontent and radicalism among young people
today arise, in particular, from poverty and a sense of
hopelessness. The stark statistics of unemployment call
for a coordinated regional and global effort to generate
job-creating economies by the United Nations system
and its country teams, together with regional groups.
Such measures must be put into practice at the national
level, and in that context I would like to mention some
initiatives that have been developed in my country.

Kazakhstan has adopted a State programme that
we call a Road Map to Employment, which enables
young people across the country to obtain free
education and vocational training while focusing on
intensive job creation and fostering entrepreneurship
and microcredit. We have also made provisions for
health care, including mental health, social facilities
and housing for young people, aimed at ensuring social
stability. Such services are part of our new economic
policy, Nurly Zhol, or Path for the Future.

We believe that investing in people- and youth-
centred development is crucially important if we are to
win an ideological war. Kazakhstan has launched a key
national programme on countering religious extremism
and terrorism for the period 2013 to 2017, allocating
some $600 million for preventive measures, including
among our youth population. Our goal is to defeat the
intangible causes that create a fertile environment for
the growth of extremism and to foster young people's
sound physical, psychological, cultural and spiritual
development. We want to utilize mass media to help
to transform young people's attitudes in the interests
of fostering harmony. My country's youth congress
today comprises active movements and organizations
that are shaping policy directives on young people. We
have developed a counter-narrative approach in the
Government's numerous activities designed to dissuade
young people from using Violence to serve extremist
causes and to work for peace instead.

Being a multi-ethnic and multi-religious nation,
Kazakhstan enjoys peace and stability, since it has
always worked to make tolerance and respect its
guiding principles. What is perhaps most important in
this ideological struggle is addressing the emotional
and spiritual needs of young people who feel defeated
and angry. In Kazakhstan we are trying to provide
educational and peace programmes that give young
people the opportunity to interact with genuine religious
leaders who treat them with respect, addressing their
needs through round tables, dialogues and seminars.
The vulnerability and strengths of young people will be
discussed at the Fifth Congress ofLeaders ofWorld and
Traditional Religions, to be held in Astana in June on
the theme of political and religious leaders for peace and
development. The overall outcome recommendations
should add to United Nations and multilateral thinking
on rapprochement among civilizations.

In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
of Kazakhstan's readiness to participate in multilateral
action aimed at transforming our young people's lives
so that they may become responsible leaders in the
promotion of peace, stability and prosperity.

