Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to welcome the convening of this debate and
thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto and Mr. Yury Fedotov
for their very enlightening briefings. I would also like
to thank Ambassador Triansyah Djani, Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011), for his report, and our colleague
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Mrs. Raz, for the particularly enlightening information
that she has just shared.

Just 18 days from the presidential elections in
Afghanistan, Cote d'Ivoire would like to commend the
outstanding work done by the Independent Election
Commission in registering 9.6 million people on the
electoral roll, including in areas where the security
situation remains precarious. We encourage the
Commission to continue its efforts by stepping up
awareness-raising among the electorate regarding the
use of and safeguards provided by the voting machines.

As we look ahead to the elections scheduled for
28 September, my country calls once again on Afghan
political actors to help establish an environment
conducive to the holding of free, transparent and credible
elections despite the latest developments regarding
the Doha talks. The security context continues to be
characterized by persistent attacks against the security
forces and civilians, particularly since the launch of the
electoral campaign on 28 July, which is indeed a source
of profound concern.

The electoral milestones represent without doubt
an essential link in the chain of requirements for
establishing lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan.
They must nonetheless be accompanied by a set of
initiatives aimed at achieving an inclusive approach for
ending the crisis. Cote d'Ivoire would therefore like to
welcome the establishment by President Ashraf Ghani
of a Ministry of Peace - an institutional tool that
will further enhance the coordination of Government
actions in implementing programmes aimed at
strengthening peace and stability as well as ensuring
national reconciliation and social cohesion.

In this regard, my country is of the view that the
Government's peace and security initiatives, far from
being mutually exclusive, could have been strengthened
by the conclusion of an agreement between the United
States and the Taliban; such an agreement could have
opened the way to possible peace talks between the
Taliban and the Afghan authorities. Alas, it seems the
macabre accounting is not yet over given the ongoing
killings perpetrated by the armed opposition. It is the
civilian population, particularly women and children,
that pays the highest price for such barbaric acts. That
is why Cote d'Ivoire condemns in the strongest terms
the recent attacks, especially those that took place on
2 September in Kabul, for which the Taliban claimed
responsibility even as it had for weeks been engaged in
talks with the United States in Doha. Everything must
therefore be done for the resumption of the political
process in order not to destroy the international
community's tremendous efforts for the benefit of the
Afghan people, who have suffered so much.

As with any country emerging from crisis, peace,
security and development in Afghanistan require the
multifaceted and ongoing support of the international
community, particularly the United Nations. To be
effective, that support must be in line with the strategic
priorities of the Afghan Government and help to create
sociopolitical and security environments that are
conducive to foreign investment. Peacebuilding efforts
must also be supported by economic recovery measures
so as to overcome the most pressing challenges,
particularly combating poverty and ensuring access to
health care and education for all, including girls.
Cote d'Ivoire shares the concerns expressed by
the Secretary-General with regard to the southern,
eastern and south-eastern regions of Afghanistan,
where attacks by armed groups undermine peaceful
coexistence among communities and exacerbate the
humanitarian situation. The support of the United
Nations and international partners for the restoration of
State institutions is therefore essential. That is the main
purpose of cote d'Ivoire's call for the Resolute Support
Mission's ongoing support to the capacity-building
of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
and to the improved capacity of judicial institutions,
particularly those specializing in the fight against drug
production and drug trafficking.

My country also stresses the importance of an
enabling environment for constructive cooperation
among States and with subregional organizations.
In that regard, we welcome the improved bilateral
relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan, as well as
the counter-terrorism and counter-narcotics efforts of
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.

In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the logistics
and operational support of the Resolute Support Mission
to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces.
We commend the unity of the Council, which remains
unwavering in its support for UNAMA and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. Cote d'Ivoire
hopes that such momentum within the Council will be
reflected in the renewal of the UNAMA mandate so that
the United Nations mission can continue to contribute
towards restoring peace and stability in Afghanistan.

