Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Allow me also to
welcome the Prime Minister of Djibouti and thank him
for visiting us in New York. We still have very fond
memories of the hospitable and gracious way in which
the Government of Djibouti treated us when we visited
that country. We are very thankful for that. We also
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Djibouti
and thank him for also having come to this meeting.
We are pleased with the participation in this meeting of
the representative of Eritrea and the representatives of
the League of Arab States and of the African Union.

The situation that is being faced by the Council,
and indeed by the African Union, is a very difficult
one. That is why we support the holding of this
emergency meeting today.

We wish to appeal to both Djibouti and Eritrea
and to emphasize that the use of force in resolving
disputes is both unworkable and indeed unsustainable.
We join others in expressing our concern over the
escalation of tensions in the Horn of Africa and
condemn the use of force to solve disputes.
Unfortunately, this involves part of our continent,
which has seen its own share of troubles.

We appeal to both parties to exercise restraint. We
support the call of the African Union for the parties to
immediately return to the situation prevailing before
this dispute began. We urge the parties to engage in
dialogue in an effort to resolve their differences. We
encourage the efforts of the Secretary-General and
thank Mr. Honwana for his briefing. We believe that
the good offices of the Secretary-General must be
encouraged to help these two friendly neighbours
resolve their dispute.

We also wish to point out that both the League of
Arab States and the African Union have also offered
their good offices in this dispute. We can only express
the hope that the two countries will heed the call of the
international community, not allow their differences to
balloon into major disputes and do everything in their
power to resolve their problems in a peaceful manner.

