Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): On
behalf of the United Arab Emirates, I congratulate
Uruguay on its presidency of the Security Council this
month and reiterate the importance of the topic under
discussion today.

The United Arab Emirates is deeply committed
to the protection of civilians and medical care in
conflict situations, which is why health-care provision
around the world, particularly for women and children,
is a critical element of our foreign aid and why we
co-sponsored resolution 2286 (2016). We are naturally
very concerned about the challenges we face in our
region, which have severe implications for health care
in communities in need.

In Syria, the United Arab Emirates condemns the
targeting of medical care in the conflict. We call for the
unobstructed delivery of humanitarian aid, including
health care, to all Syrians, as well as accountability for
crimes committed by the Syrian regime with the help
of Iran.

In Yemen, the United Arab Emirates continues to
condemn the use of hospitals by Iran-backed Houthi
rebels and militias to hide military supplies. Ensuring
humanitarian access to civilian populations in Yemen
must be the priority for all parties, and the Houthis
must stop this practice immediately.

Medical care is also at risk in other conflicts in
our region, including Afghanistan and Somalia. The
targeting of medical personnel and facilities by terrorist
groups not only threatens the welfare of civilians but
also the long-term stability of these countries. My
country's ambassador to Afghanistan recently paid
the ultimate sacrifice, losing his life while he was on a
humanitarian mission in Kandahar, and we honour his
service to his country.
The situation in the occupied Palestinian territories
also demonstrates the devastating impact of obstructing
access to health care. We call on Israel to end its
blockade of Gaza, which has exacerbated the damage to
health-care infrastructure caused by successive attacks,
thereby imperilling the well-being of Palestinians.

The crucial component of resolution 2286 (2016)
was its confirmation of the pillars of international
humanitarian law. The United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its respect for, commitment to and compliance with
its obligations under the rules and principles of
international law and international humanitarian law.
The United Arab Emirates also recalls paragraph
nine of resolution 2286 (2016), which strongly urges
Member States to investigate and ensure accountability
for violations of international humanitarian law.

However, it is not just the legal frameworks that
must underpin health-care delivery. The United Arab
Emirates emphasizes the importance of gender-
responsive medical care in armed conflict to ensure
that women and men have equal access to health
services. To that end, the United Arab Emirates
urges Member States, United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations to commit to including
women in the design and delivery of health care and
humanitarian relief.

Because we believe special consideration must be
given to refugee women and children, the United Arab
Emirates established the Mrajeeb Al Fhood refugee
camp in Jordan, which is exclusively for Syrian families
and women arriving alone, offering them the full range
of medical and psychosocial services.

The United Arab Emirates recognizes that States
must safeguard medical services in armed conflict.
That is why, as a member of the Coalition to Restore
Legitimacy in Yemen, my country is committed to
working with health-care and aid agencies operating
in the country to safely address the needs of the
civilian population.

The United Arab Emirates welcomed
recommendation 13 of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2016/722, annex) submitted pursuant
resolution 2286 (2016). My country's relief efforts
in Yemen have focused on restoring and improving
medical facilities and infrastructure, and, to date, the
United Arab Emirates has built or reconstructed 40
hospitals and clinics in that country, equipping them
with new operating rooms, supplies, medicines and
emergency vehicles. We have also received 1,500
Yemenis in the United Arab Emirates for medical
treatment, as have other coalition members - this in
addition to my country's delivery of basic supplies and
facilities necessary to ensure the health and well-being
of civilians.

There is much more to be done to implement
resolution 2286 (2016), and to that end the United Arab
Emirates is committed to protecting health care in
armed conflict in three ways.

First, we are committed to building the United Arab
Emirates capacity to uphold international humanitarian
law, and, as part ofthese efforts, a national committee for
international humanitarian law was recently established
to disseminate the fundamentals of international
humanitarian law and ensure implementation.

Secondly, the United Arab Emirates is committed
to advancing my country's partnerships with the United
Nations and support for humanitarian organizations on
the ground in Yemen and elsewhere. Collaboration is
especially crucial during outbreaks of disease, as was
seen in the recent outbreak of cholera in Yemen.

Thirdly, we are committed to continuing our
work in elevating women in the design and delivery of
health care and humanitarian relief. The United Arab
Emirates commends the work of the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee's Reference Group on Gender
and Humanitarian Action and in its advancement of a
gender-sensitive approach to medical care. However, the
United Arab Emirates recommends that the Standing
Committee consider including UN-Women among its
members. Member States must work to address the
disproportionate impact of conflict on women and
children, and not enough is being done to coordinate
this objective.

Mr. President, I thank Uruguay for its leadership
and wish you continued success for the remainder of
your presidency.

