Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank the Chairmen of Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), the 1267 Committee and the 1540 Committee
for their very informative briefings. Switzerland
supports the statement to be made by the Netherlands
on behalf of the like-minded States. I will limit myself
to highlighting a few political and legal challenges that
Switzerland is facing.

Many States in Europe and elsewhere face major
political and legal challenges in implementing the 1267
sanctions regime. In Switzerland, a decision by the
Swiss Parliament requested the Swiss Government to
cease implementing sanctions against individuals
included on the 1267 list in cases where certain criteria
had not been considered.

Parliaments are not alone in being increasingly
concerned by the issue of reconciling United Nations
targeted sanctions with human rights principles. The
Kadi and Al Barakaat ruling of the Court of Justice of
the European Communities of September 2008 is well
known. Switzerland itself is a defendant in a case
before the European Court of Human Rights in
Strasbourg. The applicant there is challenging the
legality of our domestic measures implementing United
Nations sanctions, but is in fact attacking the United
Nations sanctions system as a whole. According to the
tenth report of the Monitoring Team, other cases are
pending in other countries.

Member States' Governments find themselves in
a serious dilemma when parliaments or courts
challenge the legality of domestic measures that
implement United Nations targeted sanctions. Member
States today may risk having to choose between the
option of satisfying obligations imposed by the
Charter, or acting in conformity with decisions of their
parliaments or courts upholding human rights. The
Council could still remedy this problem if it introduced
the necessary changes. If it does not, there is a risk of
uneven application of United Nations sanctions, which
would undermine the credibility and efficiency of the
entire system.

Switzerland and its like-minded partners have
approached the members of the Security Council in
recent months in order to exchange views on a broad
range of options to improve the current listing and
de-listing procedures. I would like to highlight in
particular, the proposal to create an independent expert
panel on the de-listing issue.

While bearing in mind the unique role of the
Council in maintaining international peace and
security, we believe that such an expert panel would
not weaken the Council's authority. This opinion is
shared by, among others, the Monitoring Team in its
tenth report. Such an expert panel, appointed by the
Security Council, would assist the Committee in the
consideration of de-listing requests. It would be up to
the Council to decide upon the competencies of the
panel. One element is clear: the greater the
independence and the effectiveness of the panel, the
more likely it will be that targeted sanctions will find
the necessary acceptance in national and regional
parliaments and will be able to withstand appeals in
national and regional courts.

Switzerland remains committed to its efforts to
safeguard and further enhance the legitimacy and
effectiveness of the sanctions system as an invaluable
element in the fight against terrorism. We therefore call
upon the Security Council to take into account the
concerns expressed in that respect when it adopts the
new resolution at the end of the year.

