Mr. Dauth (Australia): The Israeli-Palestinian
conflict has taken a savage turn. Let us hope that this
upsurge of violence will give everyone pause for
thought.

In the two most recent terrible suicide bombings
in which innocent lives were lost, there were three
Australians among the injured. Let me take this
opportunity to convey my deepest condolences to the
families of all the innocent victims of this terrible and
long drawn-out conflict.

Australia is disheartened that this latest upsurge
in violence has come at a time when the Quartet's road
map to a peaceful settlement, including a secure Israeli
State in coexistence with an independent Palestinian
state, was showing some promise. No one expected the
way forward to be easy, but there was a growing sense
of the need to persevere despite setbacks.

The latest setbacks have been bitter ones. We in
Australia experienced last year's terrible Bali
bombings and we know how difficult it is to look past
such traumatic events to a future in which we work
together to ensure they no longer happen. But this is
what we must all do.

Australia shares the concern of other countries
about the Israeli cabinet's decision in principle to
remove Mr. Arafat and the subsequent statement by Mr.
Olmert, Israel's Deputy Prime Minister, that expulsion
was one option, liquidation another. Let me be clear:
Australia supports neither of these options. They will
not advance the road map. All parties must cooperate
to bring an end to terrorism.

We welcome the support in the Palestinian draft
resolution for the road map. We support, too, the call
for an end to all violence. Last year, we said we hoped
that the road map would be given a chance to work.
The road map is the only available internationally
endorsed path to a peaceful settlement. It has to be
made to work - we must all help to ensure that it
does. There is really no rational alternative.

Central to prospects for the road map's success
will be credible guarantees for the security of the
Israelis. Australia makes no apology for its abiding
commitment to Israel's territorial integrity and its right
to exist in peace and security. We have also called for a
viable and independent Palestinian State and have said
that we would be generous in our support for a new
Palestinian State.

