Mr. Chua (Singapore): I thank Portugal for
convening this important debate, and I thank you
personally, Sir, for your leadership. Singapore fully
subscribes to the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Switzerland, who spoke on behalf of
the group of five small nations (8-5).

The call for improved working methods of the
Security Council and the reasons for that call have
worn a deep groove in the Council and the General
Assembly. Unless improvements are made, there is a
real risk that the Security Council and the United
Nations as a whole will end up sounding like a broken
record to the rest of the world. To remain relevant, the
Council needs to ensure, through reform of its working
methods, that it is accountable, transparent, inclusive
and effective.
However, this refrain has fallen on deaf ears.
Progress in working methods reform remains uneven
and slow. Some may argue that the Council should not
be marching to the tune of the General Assembly, as
the Council is master of its own procedures. However,
the effective functioning of the Council directly
impacts not just relations between the General
Assembly and the Council, but also each and every
Member State with a stake in international peace and
security. If the Council is to act for the benefit of the
wider membership, it should be willing to engage
members in open and honest dialogue and create a
virtuous cycle of feedback and effective decision-

making.

In that spirit, we in the 8-5 have set out in our
draft resolution specific suggestions on how the
authority and effectiveness of the Council could be
improved. I will mention one proposal that is closely
tied to inclusiveness.

The growing complexity of today's global
challenges means that the Council must consider many
factors and actors, if it were to address any problem
comprehensively. When considering peacekeeping
mandates, for instance, there is a need to systematically
factor in peacebuilding considerations. The Council
could regularly invite Chairs of the country-specific
configurations of the Peacebuilding Commission to
participate in relevant discussions. It would also be
good if the Council sought out Member States' views
on their ability to implement Council decisions.

Some will point to the increasing number of open
debates in the Council as evidence of the Council's
reformed working methods. But open debates in
themselves do not necessarily enhance the Council's
accountability, transparency, inclusiveness or
effectiveness. Given that outcomes are often
predetermined, it is difficult to see how open debates
can give Member States insight into the Council's
deliberations or enable the Council to benefit from
Member States' views on its work.

To be honest, the so-called open debates seem to
substitute for genuine dialogue between the Council
and the wider membership. Such suboptimal
communication between the Council and the General
Assembly cannot continue. If we are unintelligible
even to ourselves, we will not be able to send the
strong and coherent messages that the world is in dire
need of today.

It is clear that there are still many working
methods issues to be addressed. We need a sustained
and genuine dialogue between the Council and the
wider membership on working methods that can help
us reflect on where we are, review what has yet to be
done, and figure out what more we should do. The 8-5
stands ready to engage constructively with the Council
on that important endeavour.

The world is undergoing a profound transition
and transformation. We are at an inflection point. The
Security Council needs to adapt to changing
geostrategic circumstances. The ultimate solution that
we all look towards is, of course, broad-based Council
reform, but working methods need to be improved now.
Otherwise, the Council and the United Nations both
risk becoming a broken record. In this wired and
networked age, the Council and the United Nations
should be working on a digital platform, not an analog
turntable.

