Mr. Schwarz-Schilling: I first spoke to the
Council a year ago, as Bosnia and Herzegovina was
facing the challenges of transition: transition by the
Bosnian authorities towards ownership, towards
exercising the rights and responsibilities of a
democracy and towards becoming a functioning
European State. The international community was also
facing the challenges of transition, namely, handing
over the reins to the Bosnian Government - not doing
their job for them when there were difficult decisions
to make but standing close by to assist, advise and
guide where needed.
07-34383

Ownership is a difficult learning process, as
recent experience has shown. An election year that saw
the resurgence of nationalist rhetoric and ideological
arguments has proven that. The ongoing prominence of
discussions about events of the recent past - about
who is to blame and who are the victims - has created
a hostile political environment. And, finally, the long
and difficult process of forming a Government took
many months. The result of all that is that political
reforms have now been blocked in Bosnia and
Herzegovina for over a year.

That does not mean that the ownership path is
wrong, but it is a warning we should not ignore: a
warning that transition cannot be taken for granted,
that the Bosnian authorities must increase efforts to
live up to their responsibilities to govern their own
country and that serious long-term international
engagement must continue.

Last June, the Peace Implementation Council
took a decision in principle to close the Office of the
High Representative in June 2007. That was done in
the context of positive developments and solid progress
in Bosnia and Herzegovina towards joining the
European Union (EU) and NATO.

But nationalist and backward-looking rhetoric on
all sides did not recede after the elections last autumn.
Political tensions increased through continued
confrontational attitudes by the leaders in both
Republika Srpska and the Federation. Tensions
continued to rise this year following reactions to the
judgement of the International Court of Justice, which
some politicians have sought to exploit.

As my concerns for the political stability of
Bosnia and Herzegovina grew, I discussed the situation
with members of the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board. After in-depth consultations with
capitals and with the Bosnian authorities, I
recommended to the Peace Implementation Council to
continue the Office of the High Representative, based
on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
region. The Council agreed, with the goal of closing
the Office by 30 June 2008, with reviews in October
2007 and February 2008.

The continuation of the Office of the High
Representative is intended to assist Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take those final, but significant, steps
from peace implementation to Euro-Atlantic
integration as soon as possible. Progress can come
07-34383

soon if the politicians step up to the task. Bosnia and
Herzegovina has a unique chance and an historic
window of opportunity to move an important step
closer to Europe. Its leaders must seize this moment.
The EU has approved the text of a stabilization and
association agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and the agreement is ripe to be initialled. But political
conditions must be met.

Concrete progress is urgently needed on police
reform and on full cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. European
Commissioner Rehn reminded Bosnian leaders again
last week of the urgent need to overcome their
differences and show real unity in order for the country
to progress towards the European Union. Party leaders
came close to a compromise solution on police reform
on two occasions, but a solid agreement was prevented
by a lack of political will, by an unwillingness to
compromise for the sake of the country as a whole and
by a lack of vision to make the changes that will serve
their citizens better and bring them closer to Europe.

On the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, coordination has improved
between relevant law enforcement agencies in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. However, the remaining fugitives,
chiefly Mladic and Karadzic, remain at large. The
International Court of Justice (ICJ) judgment
confirmed the essential obligations of the Republic of
Serbia to cooperate fully with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Let me
be clear: Serbia has not delivered on that obligation.
Serbia was found guilty of not preventing genocide.
Serbia should be active in supporting the International
Criminal Tribunal in carrying out its mandate to
prosecute those responsible for the genocide. That is
more than a moral and ethical obligation; it has
significant implications for the stability of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the region.

Against that background, and in my capacity as
High Representative, I wrote to President Tadie of
Serbia last month. I asked him to inform me of
measures being taken. However, President Tadic did
not write in response. I would ask the Security Council
to remind all parties to the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
comply with their obligation to cooperate with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. I would also ask the Council to take note
of the fact that no results have been forthcoming since
3
the International Court of Justice, another principal
organ of the United Nations, issued its judgment over
two months ago. I believe that the Security Council
needs to consider very seriously how Serbia can be
brought to implement the ICJ judgment. Again, this is a
matter of stability in the region, and the Security
Council must live up to its responsibilities in that
regard.

Radical rhetoric has poisoned the political
environment, and the issue of Srebrenica has returned
to the headlines. There has been ruthless political
manipulation of the issues by politicians motivated by
their own ambitions. That only distracts from the real
issues that require concrete action. I have appointed an
envoy, former United States Ambassador Clifford
Bond, to play a coordinating role with local actors on
the ground, political leaders and the international
community. We have set up a high-level coordination
mechanism between the relevant local authorities
supported by the international community. Key
recommendations are being developed to improve the
situation in real terms.

The Bosnian authorities must carry out their
responsibilities and ensure that concrete measures are
taken to improve conditions in the area. That is about
justice and law enforcement institutions doing their
work. It is also about the rights of returnees being
upheld. And it is about economic livelihoods and
decent social standards being restored to the region.
But it is not about changing the constitutional and
territorial order of Bosnia and Herzegovina. A
unilateral change of the Dayton Peace Agreement
would pose grave risks to peace and stability. The
Security Council should consider making that point
very clear.

The International Court of Justice verdict
acknowledged that genocide occurred in Srebrenica.
Srebrenica was a United Nations safe area. The United
Nations had special responsibilities to the people of
Srebrenica. I would like to take this opportunity to urge
the Council to establish a United Nations Day of
Srebrenica to commemorate the tragic events that
occurred there in 1995 and to pay respects to the
victims of genocide and their families.

I would like to take this opportunity to urge the
leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to act responsibly
and constructively to improve the situation on the
ground in the Srebrenica area. They can do this, as
events last weekend showed. Constructive cooperation
between the relevant authorities at all levels of
government, with the international community on hand
to facilitate, ensured that the families of victims were
able to bury their loved ones in peace and dignity in
Bratunac. That happened last Saturday. We were all
happy about how it was done.

But such constructive cooperation is needed on a
wider scale across the country. It is high time that
Bosnian leaders returned to discussing concrete action
for all of their citizens, and across political, social and
economic issues. Economic reforms have not been
completed on paper or in practice. Necessary laws for
local and foreign investment are not yet in place. More
effective efforts are needed to implement reforms in
public administration and public broadcasting, and
education reform requires serious engagement by the
Bosnian authorities, supported by the international
community. This lies at the heart of the country's
regeneration and prospects for the future.

I would like to remind the Council of the simple
words that stand at the entrance to the Kabul museum:
"A nation is alive if its culture is alive". Those words
were recently praised by a director from the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research, who
recommended that the far-reaching implications of
these simple words should become the mantra of all
aspiring nation-builders.

Despite the blockages, there is a positive
difference between where Bosnia and Herzegovina
stood when I took over on 31 January 2006 and where
it stands now. There have been steps forward. Bosnia
and Herzegovina held elections last October in line
with international democratic standards. Though
government formation was a long and partly frustrating
process, it was carried out by Bosnian politicians
without international intervention. Such are the painful
learning experiences that accompany the lessons of
ownership.

Bosnia and Herzegovina joined the NATO
Partnership for Peace programme last December. That
recognized key achievements in the field of defence
reform and marked a significant step forward on the
path to Euro-Atlantic integration. In regional
development, Bosnia and Herzegovina has the
opportunity to play a central role. Last December,
Bosnia and Herzegovina joined other countries in the
region to sign the Central European Free Trade
Agreement (CEFTA) to create a free trade area in
South-eastern Europe. That economic and political
achievement should promote economic development
and contribute to stability. Just last week, the Regional
Cooperation Council, now known as the Stability Pact,
decided to have its seat in Sarajevo, placing Bosnia and
Herzegovina at the heart of regional integration.

There has been movement on other long-standing
issues as well. In particular, I would like to thank the
Security Council for its constructive role in issuing a
presidential letter on 30 April on the issue of police
officers denied certification by the United Nations
International Police Task Force. To reach such a
solution, my staff worked together with the institutions
of Bosnia and Herzegovina for several years. I would
also like to commend the Council of Europe, the
European Union Police Mission, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the United Kingdom
presidency of the Security Council. I am confident that
the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina will abide
by their international obligations and carry out the
provision of the Security Council presidential letter.

It is my understanding that the Security Council
expects the decision taken by the Bosnian Government
last December to establish a national review
commission to be annulled. The Office of the High
Representative stands ready to assist with
implementation.

Finally, I would like to emphasize one significant
reform that remains without progress - one of the
most difficult, yet one of the most important, and one
that leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina urgently need
to start: constitutional reform. It will not be resolved
quickly, but it is my strong conviction that this reform
is critical to ensuring that Bosnia and Herzegovina
serves its citizens better and becomes an effective,
functioning State capable of full membership in Euro-
Atlantic institutions.

I believe that Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to
establish a constitutional reform process within its own
institutions that would provide the political parties,
parliament and wider society with the forum for both
substantive debate and technical preparations on the
complex issues involved. Of course, the leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina need to take full ownership of
any process to reform their own constitution. And
Europe and the United States stand together as partners
with the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
provide advice on standards and share our experience
and expertise with them. I hope that party leaders will
agree to establish a process. I intend to start political
talks and work to set that process in motion during my
remaining time in office.

In conclusion, the road to Europe must be
unblocked. Police reform must be agreed upon so that
the stabilization and association agreement can be
signed and implemented. The remaining indictees must
be urgently transferred to the Hague tribunal.
Constitutional reform must be set on track. Transition
must be completed.

It is time for the Bosnian leaders to step up to the
plate. Of course, the international community must not
waver from its commitment to assist. It must continue
actively its policy of advising and guiding the Bosnian
authorities to the point where the Office of the High
Representative is no longer needed.

And Europe, above all, must understand the real
responsibility that comes with supporting Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its journey towards the European
Union. Moreover, Europe must appreciate and respond
to the complex and unique demands of assisting
European integration in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There remain many challenges in this critical
period when Bosnia and Herzegovina is trying to stand
fully on its own two feet. The international community
should not look away or get impatient at this point,
even though its role is changing. The job is not yet
done. There will be further hurdles and obstacles, but
Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress towards Euro-
Atlantic integration will be determined by its own
achievements and by those alone. It is the Security
Council's responsibility to ensure that it is not decided
by outside factors.

There are many challenges for the newly elected
Bosnian Government. There will also be many
challenges for my successor, Ambassador Lajcak of
Slovakia, who was appointed by the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board last week and
to whom I will hand over my post in July.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
the Security Council for the support I have received
during my mandate. I have been engaged in Bosnia and
Herzegovina for 15 years in various roles and it has
been a particular honour to serve there as High
Representative and European Union Special
Representative. I shall continue to assist in whatever
way I can. I fully intend to stay close to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, a country I have come to know and love
so well. I will watch closely and share its journey as it
travels on the challenging but promising path to a
brighter future.

