Mr. Ling (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Allow me
to welcome you as President of this meeting of the
Security Council. The delegation of the Republic of
Belarus is convinced that the topic you have proposed
for our discussion will further enrich the significant
contribution made by the Kingdom of the Netherlands
towards rationalizing the work of the Council.

It is extremely important, in a discussion of this
important topic, namely the Council's strategy for the
termination or significant alteration of the mandate of
peacekeeping missions, that all Member States of the
United Nations be able to participate in an open and
transparent atmosphere. We are convinced that this
approach to the format of the meeting will make for the
most effective analysis and development of acceptable
approaches towards the further improvement of the
work of the principle organ of the United Nations
whose responsibility it is to maintain peace and
security.

Today it is clear to all that the entire concept of
United Nations peacekeeping is undergoing qualitative
change. New types of conflicts - of a predominantly
internal nature - cannot fail to affect the very basis of
the activities of the missions established by Security
Council resolutions. It is precisely in this connection
that the termination phase of United Nations missions
looks somewhat different now than it did at the very
beginning of United Nations peacekeeping.

In practice, this means that we need to retain a
United Nations presence after the end of the hostilities
themselves, and there must be coordination by the
United Nations of the process of post-conflict peace-
building. Convincing examples of such activities
already exist in Kosovo and in East Timor.

There are also a number of potential regions
where this practice can be applied in the future. The
concept of "mission completion" is thus undergoing
some significant changes and requires that the United
Nations make significant efforts for rehabilitation of a
specific region. This reality is recognized by the
Brahimi Panel. We think it is also important to note, in
looking at these problems, that the considerations of
countries participating in a mission must be taken into
account, as well as the views of the Governments of the
parties to the conflict. Belarus endorses the
recommendations of the report, whereby the Executive
Committee on Peace and Security should submit to the
Secretary-General a plan for reinforcing the permanent
capacity of the United Nations for working out peace-
building strategies and for carrying out programmes in
support of these strategies.

Discussing the problem today of determining exit
strategies for United Nations missions, we cannot fail
to ask ourselves: should we give thought only to an exit
strategy? Or does it make sense to analyse an entry
strategy? In other words, to consider the start of a
peacekeeping operation. We see the key role to be
played by the Security Council in improving the
process of winding up a mission as well as in
improving the mandate of a United Nations mission so
as to prevent, as far as possible, an unsuccessful exit
from a crisis region.

The importance of the options offered by the
Brahimi report are beyond doubt. We are convinced
that the Council's resolution should be adopted only
after all the various links in the chain - the Secretary-
General, the Secretariat, the field services - are
convinced of the total willingness of Member States of
the United Nations to carry out fully the mandate that
has been established. Then, the mission can be
completed successfully.

