Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Iwould like
to begin by expressing our appreciation, Mr. President,
for the way in which you have conducted the work of
the Council during the month of June, during which
there were several events of note and the adoption
of several important resolutions and decisions. My
congratulations also go to the team assisting you, who
have contributed to the success of the Council's work
this month.

I take this opportunity to welcome the Malaysian
initiative of holding an open debate on the protection
of children in conflict situations (see S/PV.7466),
given the scarcely credible increase in the number
of crimes and violations against children in armed
conflicts, in particular in the Middle East and Africa.
In that regard, I note the rise in the number of civilian
victims, particularly children, resulting from arbitrary
bombardments in Syria, and the Syrian regime's use of
barrel bombs, especially in populated areas and against
hospitals, schools and basic infrastructure. We also
reaffirm the need for the parties to the Syrian conflict
to cease their violations of international law and to
comply with the resolutions of the Security Council.
The Secretary-General's Special Envoy for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, needs international support to
reach a solution on Syria that complies with the First
Geneva Convention.

The information provided regarding peacekeeping
operations has clarified what such operations have
been doing in recent years to address the threat posed
by non-State groups and their effects. It has also been
established that there is a correlation between armed
conflict, organized crime and terrorism. Jordan
reaffirms that it will continue to contribute effectively
to peacekeeping operations in support of the efforts of
the United Nations and the international community as
a whole to achieve objectives of such operations.

I would also like to express our appreciation for the
briefing on post-conflict peacebuilding (see S/PV.7472),
which gave us an overview of progress in that area.
It was established that the United Nations working
procedures related to peacebuilding must be improved
and modernized, and that peacekeeping operations
need adequate financial and human resources. In that
regard, we welcome the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Lastly, I congratulate the delegation of
New Zealand on its forthcoming presidency and wish it
every success next month.

