Mr. Berger (Germany): I would like to add my
voice to those who have condemned the terrorist attack
on the United Nations compound in Mogadishu, and my
condolences to the families of those killed and affected.

The effective and transparent management of
natural resources matters. Natural resources are
still fuelling conflicts, both internal and between
States. Many countries rich in natural resources are
immersed in poverty because of mismanagement of
these resources and corruption. We therefore welcome
today's open debate and the United Kingdom's initiative
to explore - in the context of maintaining international
peace and security - ways how to strengthen
responsible management of extractive industries. We
also regret that it was not possible to agree on a draft
presidential statement.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I
would like to stress the following points.

Financial transparency in the extractive industries
and the transparency of supply in case of mineral
imports from conflict regions are in our view crucial
to help reduce the potential for conflict and to deter
corruption. Germany therefore supports the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative and the Kimberley
Process, and we very much welcome the discussion that
took place at the Summit of the Group of Eight.

In the Security Council, we have actively
supported setting out clear standards of supply-chain
due diligence for businesses using minerals from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in accordance
with the guidelines of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development. Furthermore, Germany
is leading a certification and traceability initiative to
establish certified trading chains in Rwanda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for minerals and
natural resources, fostering the efforts of the local
mining authorities and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR).

However, such technical solutions alone cannot
stop the trade in minerals from fuelling conflicts. That
requires governance in resource-exporting countries
based on the rule of law to make such technical
solutions feasible. In this context, sufficient capacity is
indispensable to ensuring compliance. Corruption needs
to be fought and impunity ended. Closer cooperation
among countries in which actors exploiting and using
natural resources operate should be pursued. With
regard to due diligence mechanisms, quality and the
independence of audits need to be ensured. Addressing
the problem of conflict minerals therefore also requires
political solutions and further steps.

In Africa, the African Union and subregional
organizations have an important role to play in this
field. Germany welcomes their efforts and supports
them, as well as projects to strengthen good governance
of mineral resources in a number of countries.
Germany also backs the United Nations Global
Compact, which assists companies and investors and
facilitates constructive discussions on how to engage
in conflict-affected and high-risk areas in compliance
with United Nations standards, including the principles
of anti-corruption, human rights and respect for the
environment.

The support of United Nations actors also
remains key. We want to specifically encourage the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to engage in the
capacity-building of national administrations as the
successful implementation of control and regulating
initiatives depend on functioning administrations and
their integrity. PBC engagement to support the fight
against corruption in affected countries also remains
crucial.

Furthermore, we believe that sanctions against
traders of natural resources and companies dealing
with armed groups could contribute to strengthening
the effective management of extractive industries.
Existing sanctions regimes, including the regime for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, provide for
this option. It should be applied wherever feasible. In
this context, we would also like to raise awareness of
a growing concern that, like poorly managed natural
resources, contributes to conflicts and regional
instability - namely, poaching and the illicit trade of
wildlife. We urgently need new strategies and more
international efforts to address the increase in illegal
wildlife exploitation. Exploring options for the United
Nations to address the negative impact of poaching on
peace and security will be at the core of a policy forum
we will hold in cooperation with the International Peace
Institute tomorrow at the Institute's headquarters. All
Member States are cordially invited to attend.

