The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti, Spain and Uruguay, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Me'rores
(Haiti) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/60l, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Argentina, Belgium,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, Ecuador, France, Guatemala,
Italy, Panama, Peru, Spain, Uruguay and the United
States of America.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2007/503, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it
(S/2007/601). Unless I hear any objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Congo, France, Ghana,
Indonesia, Italy, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1780 (2007).

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
07-53998

