Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Jan Eliasson, for the
thorough briefing on progress on the political track for
a settlement in Darfur. We are also grateful to the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Guehenno, for the
information on the enhanced efforts by the Secretariat
to achieve a prompt deployment of an effective
peacekeeping operation of the United Nations and the
African Union in Darfur.

We View the work of Special Representatives
Eliasson and Salim Salim as successful. Their efforts
are yielding significant results. The important thing is
that they have managed to launch a negotiating
mechanism between Khartoum and the opposition in
Darfur. We count on forward movement in the Sirte
dialogue.

We welcome here the approach of the
Government of the Sudan towards achieving peace
agreements with the rebels, in particular and as a first
step in the political process, Khartoum's announcement
of a unilateral cessation of armed actions in Darfur.
The situation in that region of the Sudan remains very
complex, but overall, the wave of violence has abated
somewhat.

We are seriously concerned with the position of a
number of rebel groups, who are continuing to refuse
to participate in the political process. We would hope
that, in the period of consultations before the renewal
of the talks, those groups would review their positions,
so that the political process could acquire a genuinely
comprehensive character. It is essential to continue to
put pressure on rebel leaders, proving to them the
advantages of peace over war.
Good intentions will remain merely intentions,
unless the parties conclude a bilateral agreement on a
ceasefire and the process of rebel disarmament and
demobilization commences. Without progress on the
intra-Darfur dialogue, improvement in the
humanitarian situation will not be possible, nor will
successful completion of the peacekeeping tasks of the
African Union and United Nations force in Darfur.

We are very concerned with the delay in the full
deployment of the Hybrid Operation. The list of
countries supplying forces and material to the African
Union/United Nations Hybrid operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), developed by the United Nations and the
African Union in consultation with the Government of
the Sudan, has, unfortunately, thus far not been fully
agreed to. We would expect that the remaining
unresolved problems having to do with sending to
Darfur what is an unprecedented and, in all respects,
important operation, will in the very near future be
settled, including the operationalizing of the national
inter-agency mechanisms in Khartoum created for
those purposes.

We would expect that the Sudanese leadership,
like all interested parties, will do everything possible to
cooperate with the United Nations and the African
Union in the peacekeeping work in Darfur.

Of course any threats against the peacekeepers
are unacceptable. The settlement in Darfur must
include the implementation of a comprehensive peace
agreement and improvement in the regional situation in
terms of security and relations between the Sudan,
Chad and the Central African Republic. That would be
promoted by unconditional compliance by States in the
region with the agreements reached in that area.

