Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of today's meeting and thank
Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Mr. John Ging for the
important information they have shared with us today.

We would like to stress the significance ofthe report
of the Secretary-General on cross-border assistance in
Syria (S/2018/6l7), which has allowed us to learn more
about the functioning of the assistance-distribution
system and the verification mechanism. We emphasize
the need to preserve a system on which the survival of
millions of people depends.

In view of the continuing increase in the number
of displaced persons and those in need of assistance,
Peru believes it is essential that the Security Council be
able to respond to the humanitarian crisis, in keeping
with international humanitarian law, regardless of the
differences and divisions that the conflict in Syria
is generating. We must express our concern about
the continuation of hostilities in south-west Syria,
particularly in Dar'a province, in the light of the
devastating humanitarian consequences it may have for
the more than 750,000 civilians who live there, as well
as its potential destabilizing impact on the region. We
consider it urgent to address the needs of the thousands
of newly displaced people in that area who are being
sheltered in makeshift camps near the Jordanian border
and remain highly vulnerable. We are also concerned
about the 2.5 million people in Idlib, whose situation
could lead to further tragedy.

In line with the calls by Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres, we consider it necessary for there to be an
immediate cessation of hostilities and for all parties
to live up to their responsibility to protect the civilian
population and allow for the provision of humanitarian
assistance in a sustained, safe and unhindered
manner throughout Syrian territory. We deeply regret
the continued attacks on medical personnel and
infrastructure in Syrian territory, particularly in Idlib
and more recently in the south-west of the country.

We welcome the valuable efforts in Astana of
the working group on detainees and missing persons.
We are confident that positive results will soon be
achieved there.
With respect to the political process, we commend
the efforts of Mr. De Mistura and lend our support
to the establishment of a framework of minimum
understanding, which has allowed for progress to be
made in setting up the constitutional committee, which
was considered at his recent meeting in Geneva with
representatives of the Astana guarantor countries
and other relevant actors. We believe it is important
that the Syrian opposition submit a consensual list of
candidates for membership of the committee as soon
as possible. We emphasize the need to ensure adequate
representativeness in the committee and the importance
of ensuring a 30 per cent level of participation by
women, pursuant to the letter that Peru, as a Chair
of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security, together with Sweden and the United
Kingdom, addressed to the Secretary-General and
others yesterday.

The setting up and launching of the committee are
undoubtedly complex tasks that require concessions
from all parties. We have great confidence in the
diplomatic skills and tireless efforts of the Special
Envoy, to whom Peru offers its full support.

