Judge Byron: This is the tenth time that the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) has had the honour of addressing the
distinguished members of the Security Council for the
presentation of the Tribunal's report on its completion
strategy. I am grateful for the opportunity to inform
you about our achievements during the last six months
and the challenges ahead of us.

I am happy to report that the majority of the
projections I made in June 2008 have been realized. By
the end of the year, four judgements will have been
delivered - three single-accused cases and one multi-
accused case. In addition, we have delivered four
decisions on requests for referrals to national
jurisdictions and one more will be rendered later in
December.

Trial Chamber I focused on drafting the
judgement in the huge and complex case involving four
military leaders, Bagasora et al. That judgement will
be delivered on 18 December. The Chamber also
rendered two decisions denying requests for referral
under rule 11 bis. In addition, judgements in the
Renzaho and Nsengimana cases will be delivered in the
first part of 2009. The completion of the evidence
phase in the Setako case is scheduled for May.

As projected, Trial Chamber II closed the
evidence in three multi-accused cases, Butare, Military
Il and Bizimungu, involving in total some 14 accused.
Unforeseen legal complications make it necessary that
in Butare and Military 11 some witnesses will be
recalled in early 2009. However, that will not affect the
scheduling for the signing of the closing briefs. The
same trial bench that completed the evidence in
Military II will deliver the judgement in Rukundo
during the first part of 2009.

Trial Chamber III delivered judgements in the
cases of Nchamihigo and Bikindi, and will rule in the
Zigiranyirazo case on 18 December. In addition, it will
have rendered two decisions on requests for referral by
the end of this year. The progress of the fifth multi-

accused case, Karemera et al., was adversely affected
by the deteriorating health of one co-accused, Mathieu
Ngirumpatse, requiring him to stay in hospital and
interrupting proceedings for several months. The
Chamber is managing the procedural issues resulting
from the medical problems and the trial is scheduled to
resume in early February. The same bench that is
hearing Karemera is also hearing the case of
Kalimanzira. Only two trial weeks are remaining in
that case and the evidence will be completed in the first
week of February.

The preparation of each judgement requires long
deliberations and other work done outside the court
rooms, often including the need to respond to
numerous interlocutory motions.

The Tribunal is facing a particularly challenging
year in 2009. The workload ahead of us is greater than
at any other point in the Tribunal's history. Proceedings
may start in up to ten new cases, including five that
could not be included in our planning when I addressed
the Security Council in June. Our calendar has
scheduled the evidence phase of all new trials to be
completed before the end of next year.

The new cases include the trials of three accused
arrested in 2007 and 2008, a retrial ordered by the
Appeals Chamber and a contempt of court case. The
main factor straining the capacity of the Tribunal is the
denial of the Prosecutor's requests to refer one case to
Norway and four cases to Rwanda for trial. These
referrals have formed an integral part of the completion
strategy. The Prosecutor of the ICTR continues to
investigate the extent to which new requests for
referrals can be pursued. In anticipation of his efforts,
three trials have been scheduled later in the judicial
calendar.

Instead of the decrease in workload that might
have been expected as we move towards the
completion of our mandate, we are now confronted
with these ten new cases. At the same time, we are
faced with the resignation of three judges, two
permanent and one ad litem, by the end of 2008. Four
additional judges - three permanent and one ad
litem - have announced their intention to resign after
the judgements in their current cases have been
delivered. They are not available to take on new cases.
It will therefore be critical to appoint at least four new
ad litem judges to replace those seven judges who will
not be available for new cases. Only three permanent

judges will remain to take on new cases. I have
submitted to the Secretary-General a proposal for
amendments of the Statute that will allow the Trial
Chambers to be composed entirely of ad litem judges. I
would respectfully ask the Security Council to consider
this matter as a matter of utmost urgency in order to
enable the Tribunal to begin hearing some of these new
cases early in 2009.

In this context, I would like to reiterate my
gratitude to the ad litem judges for their indispensable
support to the Tribunal. Some of them have served for
many years and on several cases concurrently. Their
willingness to take on new cases in 2009 in addition to
their current workload has been essential for the
completion strategy, taking into account the anticipated
unavailability of several permanent judges.

We want to achieve our goals, and the workload
ahead makes it clear that business as usual is not an

option. All three organs of the Tribunal - the
Chambers, the Registry and the Office of the
Prosecutor - are well aware of this and are closely

working together. In particular, they are taking active
steps to address staffing needs and to further develop
tools for expediting proceedings while fully respecting
the right of the accused to fair trials.

The Tribunal is grateful for the continued
cooperation and assistance of Member States, on which
it depends to fulfil its mandate. The long-standing issue
of transferring convicted prisoners for the enforcement
of their sentences is currently being addressed for a
first group of convicts, following confidential orders.
We are also grateful to have found a relocation State
for one acquitted person. One more acquitted person
remains in Arusha, and one convict will be released in
December after having served his sentence. Both are
awaiting a State willing to accept their relocation. The
cooperation of the Council would be very much
appreciated in this matter. In the reporting period, two
accused arrested last year were successfully transferred
to Arusha.

Unfortunately, no new arrests can be reported for
the 13 fugitives still at large. As we approach the end
of the Tribunal's mandate, I reiterate strongly my call
upon Member States to cooperate fully with the
Tribunal to ensure their arrest and transfer as soon as
possible.

The final issue I would like to address is the
Tribunal's legacy. Following the visit of the Security
Council Informal Working Group in September 2008,
we have been working closely with the Secretariat and
our colleagues in The Hague to plan a cost-efficient
and effective mechanism for discharging all necessary
residual tasks after the end of the Tribunal's mandate.

On behalf of all of the staff in Arusha and Kigali,
I would like to conclude by thanking the Security
Council, the Secretariat and Member States for their
support of our work. Our close cooperation shows that
none of us, on the national and international levels,
shall relent in our determination to deny impunity to
those responsible for the atrocities committed in
Rwanda in 1994. The end of the Tribunal's mandate
must not send a signal to the perpetrators that they are
safe from justice.

For our part, the Tribunal shall continue its
efforts to improve the process and to make it as
efficient as possible without compromising the
principles of procedural fairness. Our efforts and the
Council's cooperation and support demonstrate to the
entire world that persons responsible for genocide or
other grave violations of international humanitarian
law will find no safe haven on Earth, no impunity, no
evasion of fair trials and, when the evidence supports
conviction, no escape from the punishment their
horrendous crimes deserve.

