The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Jose' Singer Weisinger,
Special Envoy to the Security Council of the Dominican
Republic, for his service as President of the Council for
the month of January. I am sure I speak for all members
of the Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Singer Weisinger and his team for the
great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Threats to international peace and security

Mercenary activities as a source of insecurity
and destabilization in Africa

Letter dated 31 January 2019 from the
Permanent Representative of Equatorial
Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2019/97)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to warmly
welcome the Ministers and other representatives present
in the Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Chad, the Central African Republic,
the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Gabon, Rwanda and the
Sudan to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, to participate in this meeting.

Mr. Mahamat is joining the meeting via video-
teleconference from Addis Ababa.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/20l9/97, which contains the text of a letter
dated31 January 2019 fromthe PermanentRepresentative
of Equatorial Guinea to the United Nations addressed

to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, and give him
the floor.


