Mr. Christian (Ghana): Two years after the
signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
southern Sudan continues to face considerable
humanitarian recovery challenges, including the need
to support hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons, most of whom are returning to the
south. That situation has been further complicated by
the onset of a meningitis epidemic that has spread
across eight of the ten southern states.
We are extremely concerned about the worsening
situation in Darfur. Despite the notable successes by
humanitarian workers, we cannot deny that there is
heightened insecurity and targeting of aid workers.
Humanitarian operations will slow considerably unless
the situation improves and workers are granted greater
access to those in need. Given that untenable situation,
we once again appeal to the Government of the Sudan
to grant greater access to aid workers. Those persons
can reach a greater number of people in dire need of
assistance if there is adequate security and if
unpredictable violent attacks on them stop.

There is an urgent need for the international
community to tackle adequately the humanitarian
challenges in Chad, where there are more than 400,000
refugees and displaced persons. It is apparent that the
number of those unfortunate victims will increase
because of the situation in Darfur and the Central
African Republic. Growing violence in eastern Chad
will seriously disrupt humanitarian operations, where
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations are doing a remarkable job.

We recall the warning issued last week by the
United Nations Emergency Relief Coordinator that the
international community was dragging its feet on
funding for humanitarian operations in Chad and was
underestimating the scale of the crisis there. Given the
dire humanitarian situation in Chad, we encourage
donors to contribute to the $174 million needed to
provide food, water and shelter in eastern Chad. The
$40 million received so far cannot meet the various
needs of those unfortunate victims.

The number of internally displaced persons in
several parts of the Central African Republic tripled in
2006. In the most affected areas the lack of
development and the widespread insecurity have
plunged vulnerable populations into a situation of acute
emergency. We wish to express serious concern about
reports of summary executions, the targeting and
persecution of specific ethnic groups and the recurring
partial or complete torching of villages. It is recalled
that, under international humanitarian law, civilians
have an absolute right to protection in time of conflict.
We thereby appeal to all parties to this conflict to take
measures to ensure the safety of civilians, as insecurity
remains the prime cause of displacement.

We know that the United Nations is appealing for
$49 million for the Central African Republic for the

year 2007. Thus far, less than 0.4 per cent of that
amount has been provided. Early funding is crucial to
enable humanitarian agencies to plan and start
programmes to reach those in need in time.

We wish to commend President Chissano for his
for efforts to find a lasting solution to the conflict
between the Lord's Resistance Army and the
Government of Uganda. We urge the parties to commit
themselves to restarting the peace talks as soon as
practicable.

The Emergency Relief Coordinator has drawn the
world's attention to the humanitarian catastrophes in
the areas I have mentioned. He added that without
security, all the humanitarian assistance in the world
will not change the situation. The urgent need for us to
find political solutions to the political problems in all
three instances cannot be overemphasized.

