Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Mr. Minister, we
thank you once again for presiding over the work of
the Council. We in South Africa hope that next month
we will be able to achieve as much as your presidency
has done.

Let me also welcome the Under-Secretary-
General for Disarmament Affairs; the Director General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons; the Representative of the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency; and the
Director General of Compliance and Facilitation of the
World Customs Organization. We thank them for their
briefings.

South Africa welcomes this opportunity to
discuss with other Member States issues related to
resolution 1540 (2004).

It is South Africa's firm conviction that weapons
of mass destruction do not guarantee security, but,
rather, detract from it. As long as such weapons exist,
the world will always live under the threat of a nuclear
catastrophe. Today, we are discussing the fear we all
share that such weapons could fall into the wrong
hands. However, since weapons of mass destruction are
illegitimate and their destructive impact is
indiscriminate, South Africa fails to find assurances in
a status quo that seems to hold that such weapons are
safe in some hands but not in others.

South Africa continues to believe that the
objectives of disarmament and non-proliferation are
mutually reinforcing processes that require continuous
and irreversible progress on both fronts. We remain
convinced that the only real guarantee against the use
or threat of use of weapons of mass destruction is their
complete elimination and the assurance that they will
never again be produced.

The overwhelming majority of States are as
concerned about the vertical proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction as they are about horizontal
proliferation. With regard to horizontal proliferation,
we note with grave concern a lack of even-handedness
that further undermines efforts to deal effectively and
credibly with proliferation issues. As it is, the existing
arsenals of weapons of mass destruction are not only
retained, but expanded and refined to make them more
deployable in a conflict situation, especially when
aimed at specific targets, with increased destructive
power.

When resolution 1540 (2004) was introduced, it
was described by its sponsors as an emergency and
temporary stopgap measure designed to close a missing
link in the relevant international regimes addressing
disarmament and non-proliferation. In other words, the
fear was that non-State actors could potentially obtain
weapons of mass destruction and their delivery
systems.

Since the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), no
credible efforts have been made to close the gap in the
international regimes. Instead, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1673 (2006), extending the mandate
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) until 27 April 2008.

South Africa is of the view that challenges facing
the international community in the area of weapons of
mass destruction and their delivery systems can only
be addressed in a balanced and comprehensive manner
in the context of existing multilateral instruments. It is
only through inclusive multilateralism and the
reinvigoration of the relevant multilateral instruments
and organizations that we can effectively deal with
both old and new challenges in the area of
disarmament and non-proliferation, including those
covered by resolution 1540 (2004).
These international regimes provide a clear
recognition of the inextricable link between
disarmament and non-proliferation and set out the
obligations of nuclear weapons States, while upholding
the right of all States to peaceful uses of relevant
technologies.

My delegation wishes to highlight the importance
of technical assistance and cooperation between
Member States and international, regional and sub-
regional organizations. This assistance should be
provided upon request of a State in a way that respects
the sovereignty and national priorities of the State
making the request.

We should not lose sight of the fact that the
objective of such cooperation is to assist States in
meeting their obligations under the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Ensuring compliance with
Security Council resolutions remains a national
responsibility that cannot be transferred to
international, regional or sub-regional organizations.
International organizations and regimes are also not
responsible for drawing up action plans and roadmaps
for the implementation of Security Council resolutions
by Member States.

South Africa reiterates its conviction that in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), structures
such as the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), which have already been
established in accordance with international
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control
agreements, should be utilized as the primary
institutions in the international community's
endeavours to combat the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, including to non-State actors.

South Africa would also be concerned if the
Security Council were to assume legislative and treaty-
making powers not envisaged by the Charter of the
United Nations. South Africa will not accept externally
imposed norms or standards, whatever their source, on
matters within the jurisdiction of the South African
parliament, including national legislation, regulations
or arrangements that are not consistent with South
Africa's constitutional provisions and procedures, are
contrary to South Africa's national interests or infringe
on its sovereignty.

Regarding compliance with resolution 1540
(2004), the list of non-reporting and late reporting
States consists primarily of developing nations. The
Committee's experts report that in addition to lack of
capacity and reporting fatigue, one of the reasons
offered by States finding themselves on the late or
non-reporting list is that they do not have any
proliferation-sensitive nuclear, biological or chemical
capabilities and that reporting is therefore not
considered a priority for them. Rather than assign
international organizations the task of policing the
implementation of the Security Council's resolutions or
taking over the reporting obligations of Member States,
we should acknowledge that the resolution 1540 (2004)
reporting requirements themselves are overly
complicated and unsuitable for many developing
States. The reporting obligations ought to be
differentiated according to the capabilities of the State
in question. Instead of chastising these States for their
late or non-reporting status, it is important to
acknowledge that none of these States are possessors of
weapons of mass destruction.

The 2005 World Summit called on the Security
Council to consolidate its anti-terrorism activities and
reporting requirements. The overlap between the
functions and reporting regimes of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, the Al-Qaeda and Taliban
Sanctions Committee and the 1540 Committee needs to
be addressed. To avoid duplication, the outreach
activities and programmes of those Committees,
including their expert support structures, should
include joint Visits to Member States that could benefit
their work.

Bearing this in mind, we welcome the objective
of today's discussion, which is to consider ways to
harness the synergies that may exist between the work
of the 1540 Committee and that of relevant
international organizations. We believe this could assist
non-reporting States in a manner that respects their
sovereignty and also respects the mandates of the
relevant international organizations.

In conclusion, the vast majority of States still
lend their primary support to cooperative approaches
based on treaty-making combined with practical action
within relevant international organizations. They see
themselves as stakeholders in jointly managed systems
of treaties and organizations for disarmament, arms
control, verification and the building of security. Their
principled renunciation of weapons of mass destruction
should be reciprocated by an equal commitment to the
disarmament of these weapons. Without honouring this
most fundamental bargain that underpins all of our
efforts, significant progress with respect to both
disarmament and non-proliferation will continue to
elude us.

