Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Onbehalfofthe African
members of the Security Council - Cote d'Ivoire,
Equatorial Guinea and South Africa - I would like to
thank the Indonesian presidency for organizing today's
important open debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. I would also like to thank you, Madam
President, for presiding over it, knowing how keen you
are and how much you care about the subject.
The African members of the Security Council
align themselves with the statement to be made later by
Ambassador Fatima Mohammed, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations.

Africa is a major stakeholder in today's debate. I
would also like to thank Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres and the briefers for their comprehensive
presentations, which undoubtedly underscore that
civilians not only continue to account for the vast maj ority
of casualties during conflict but also bear the brunt of
the short- and long-term impact of conflict - from the
denial of, and attacks on, humanitarian assistance to all
forms of violence and forced displacement.

Today's debate is timely, as 2019 marks the
seventieth anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions
of 1949 - a cornerstone of international humanitarian
law - and the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1270 (1999). Those
landmark components of international law have framed
the approach of the United Nations to the protection
of civilians in the contemporary age. However,
the implementation of those 1ega1 frameworks is
still lacking.

While we have seen a significant improvement in
the compliance by State actors with such provisions,
the changing nature of modern conflict - shifting
from inter-State conflict to civil wars, transnational
conflicts and instability - has meant that the protection
of civilians has become more and more challenging.
Nevertheless, while recalling respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States and recognizing the
leadership role of States in protecting, nurturing and
advancing the protection of civilians agenda, we would
like to acknowledge the important role played by the
International Committee of the Red Cross as custodian
of international humanitarian law and in attempting
to regulate the conduct of armed conflict in order to
protect the most vulnerable caught in the middle of
such conflicts. We would also like to acknowledge the
significant role that the Center for Civilians in Conflict
plays by working with armed actors and civilians in
conflict to develop and implement solutions to mitigate
and respond to civilian harm.

The role of the Security Council in pursuit of
international humanitarian law should lead it to take
decisive action to facilitate the necessary environment,
including by establishing humanitarian corridors
and ceasefires and deploying peacekeepers with a
robust protection-of-civilians mandate. Such actions
are necessary to create the conditions for sustained
action on peace and security and ensure that the
humanitarian-development nexus thrives. Furthermore,
greater coordination and cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, such as the
African Union, are necessary to create an environment
that would enable the protection of civilians. The
comparative advantage of regional organizations can
enable closer collaboration and coordination with local
communities, including by creating an environment
conducive to the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons on a voluntary basis, in accordance
with the principle of non-refoulement.

The protection of civilians requires not only
physical protection, but also liaising and engagement
with communities to ensure that the necessary
environment is created to facilitate long-term protection
mechanisms. The African members of the Security
Council believe in that regard that the strength of the
multidimensional nature of peacekeeping missions
is paramount in creating proactive approaches to
protecting civilians through military engagements, and
also in consolidating the gains made in permanently
eliminating threats to innocent populations.

Nevertheless, we wish to underline that, while it
remains the primary responsibility of States to protect
civilians, including humanitarian personnel and health
workers, within their borders, all parties - including
armed opposition groups - must also bear the
responsibility of ensuring that civilians and health
workers are protected. All parties to a conflict should
fully comply with their obligations under international
law, as stated in resolution 2286 (2016).

It is also important to highlight the fact that the
protection of civilians is a multidisciplinary agenda. It
includes contributing activities of the United Nations,
regional organizations such as the African Union,
international organizations such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross, non-governmental
organizations, the military component, the civilian
component, and the host Government and its security
forces. Efforts to address the protection of civilians
agenda, therefore, need to involve close coordination
by all role-players.

It is also important to note that, among the civilian
population, vulnerable groups such as women and
children are affected the most. Therefore, we call for
the full implementation of the provisions of resolutions
1325 (2000) and 2427 (2018), as well as subsequent
resolutions, particularly with regard to the protection
of women and children in armed conflict. That also
requires the strengthening and mainstreaming of special
provisions and personnel within peacekeeping missions
to ensure that those groups are adequately protected.

In order to deter the threats to civilians and foster
greater compliance with international law, the African
members of the Council believe that the necessary
accountability mechanisms and the policy space and
technical support to develop them are essential. Those
include local, national and regional accountability
mechanisms. Broader international mechanisms should
continue to support accountability mechanisms, based
on complementarity and subsidiarity. However, the
most effective ways to protect civilians are to prevent
armed conflict through investments in sustainable
development, promote the peaceful resolution of armed
conflicts, and consolidate peace by focusing on the
post-conflict environment and peacebuilding, which is
a responsibility charged to all of us in the Council.

The Council often finds itself hamstrung from
acting based on competing geopolitical interests that
we are deeply concerned about. Nothing should prevent
the Council from acting decisively when it comes to
protecting those caught in the middle of armed conflicts.
The protection of civilians should remain a priority and
requires the commitment of all Council members.

