Mr. Sautter (Germany): First of all, I wish to extend condolences following the heinous attacks near Niamey. I would like also to thank the briefers. We appreciate the insights from Mr. Joao de Almeida Filho, on behalf of the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, as well as the briefing by Ghada Fathi Waly of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Both will play an even more prominent role in future. At this last regular Security Council meeting before the drawdown of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), we would like to thank the mission for all the work done over the past 21 years. Above all, I should like to extend warm thanks to Rosine Sori-Coulibaly and her team. We are happy that the Office will continue to provide its expertise in supporting the full implementation of the Conakry Agreement on the Implementation of the Economic Community of West African States Road Map for the Resolution of the Political Crisis in Guinea-Bissau as well as the six-point road map of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). The drawdown of the mission does not imply that we can be satisfied with the situation in Guinea-Bissau. The situation there continues to be of concern, for three reasons. First, we regret that the political crisis resulting from last year's peaceful presidential elections remains unsolved. With the coronavirus disease pandemic, a functioning Government and trustworthy institutions are more important than ever. Continued work is necessary. Secondly, we are deeply concerned by the reports of violence and threats against political actors. We have noted what Rosine has just reported on this issue. Respect for human rights and basic human freedoms are not negotiable; they have to be respected at all times and without preconditions. Thirdly, to achieve stability in the country, all stakeholders have to act responsibly and in accordance with the Constitution. This includes the security forces. The lack of neutrality displayed by the military in occupying State institutions is clearly not in line with that requirement. Any sustainable solution to the political crisis needs to involve all political actors; in particular, civil society needs to play a central role. This includes the full, equal and meaningful participation of women at all stages of the political and peacebuilding processes. In that context, we commend the efforts made by UNIOGBIS to engage with women representatives and to adopt a gender-sensitive approach to their work. Still, a lot remains to be done. Above all, we need to end impunity for gender-based crimes and human rights violations. With the drawdown of the mission on the horizon, we appreciate the transition process continuing, despite the additional challenges posed by the political tensions and the pandemic. An active and coordinated role on the part of other United Nations presences and regional organizations, especially ECOWAS, remains crucial to avoiding destabilization. The cooperation of the group of five, the Peacebuilding Commission country configuration and the support provided by the Peacebuilding Fund need to continue. Regional cooperation is also paramount to addressing transnational organized crime and drug trafficking, precisely because of their grave implications for the stability of the entire region. Indications that political and military personnel are involved in these illegal businesses are appalling and need to be followed up. We should also bear this in mind when we discuss the future of the sanctions here in the Security Council. We support the important work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and UNIOGBIS in supporting and empowering national law-enforcement authorities to effectively prosecute organized crime. Let me close by welcoming the efforts made by UNIOGBIS as well as ECOWAS to foster dialogue and to overcome political tensions. Yes, national ownership remains a central requirement for real progress, but we need to, and we will, uphold international attention to this crisis. Enacting the critical reforms envisioned in the Conakry Agreement and the ECOWAS road map is a crucial first step.
