Ms. Anderson (United States of America): The
United States fully supports the Secretary-General and
his Personal Envoy, Chris Ross, in their efforts to find
a peaceful, sustainable and mutually agreed solution to
the Western Sahara conflict, and welcomes the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Western
Sahara and head of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), Hany
Abdel-Aziz.

We welcome the fact that, during Ambassador
Ross's recent trip to the region, all of his interlocutors
confirmed their commitment to cooperating with the
United Nations to reach a solution to the Western
Sahara conflict as soon as possible. We encourage all
involved to come to the table without preconditions.
This conflict has languished for too long and has
hindered regional cooperation on urgent and emerging
issues facing North Africa. We believe that it is
essential that the parties demonstrate the political will
to identify a mutually acceptable solution, and we hope
that neighbouring States will assist the parties in doing
so.

We call on the parties to work collaboratively
with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to facilitate the
implementation of their agreement regarding family
visits, including the establishment of family visits by
land. We hope that family visits by air will be resumed
as soon as possible and that the parties will engage
constructively with each other and the Personal Envoy
of the Secretary-General to pursue other forms of
confidence-building measures.

We are deeply concerned about the allegations of
human rights abuses by the parties. We urge the parties
to work with the international community to ensure full
respect for human rights both in Western Sahara and in
the Tindouf camps. In this context, we underscore the
importance of making progress on the human rights
situation. Given the current situation on the ground and
Ambassador Ross's continuing efforts, we agree that
the presence of MINURSO remains indispensable. That
is why we have just supported renewing MINURSO's
mandate for another 12 months.
