Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and the Permanent Representative of
Burma for his statement, to which I listened with great
attention. It was essential for the Council to be
informed without delay of the results of the mission of
the Secretary-General at time when the development of
the situation in Burma continues to be a matter of
major concern for the international community.

I also wish to congratulate the Secretary-General
on his courageous, determined and tenacious
commitment on this issue. He went to Burma with our
support and clearly aware of the difficulties of his
mission, in order to convey the expectations of the
international community to the Burmese authorities.
Unfortunately, as he recalled, they refused to
cooperate. Among other things, they did not allow him
to meet with Aung San Suu Kyi and refused any
substantive dialogue. The authorities thus lost an
opportunity to show their desire to undertake genuine
national reconciliation and a process of
democratization. It is not after the visit of the
Secretary-General that one should come before the
Council to state that one is ready for dialogue and
reconciliation; it was before and during the Secretary-
General's visit that that should have been done.

The international community has shown its
readiness to work in a constructive manner with Burma
in supporting the political process, but also to support
the economic and social development of the country
with strict respect for its sovereignty and its territorial
integrity. That is the message of goodwill that the
Secretary-General carried. The hand he held out was
ignored.

The authorities' unwillingness to consider the
Secretary-General's proposals continues to raise
questions about the attitude of the Burmese authorities
in general, since the repression of the democratic
movement in autumn 2007. In its presidential statement
of ll October 2007 (S/PRST/2007/37), the Council set
forth clear and precise expectations unanimously.
Those demands were reaffirmed in May 2008 and May
2009.
Almost two years after they were first expressed,
where do we stand in terms of their achievement? The

first expectation was the timely release of all political
prisoners. What have we seen? First, the number of
those prisoners has continued to increase, in spite of a
handful of releases. New promises have been made,
including today, with respect to the release of some,
but not all prisoners. Here we recall that the demands
of the Council were for the release of all political
prisoners.

Next, although the appeal for the release of
political prisoners concerned, of course, Ms. Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi, who continues to be detained since
2003, instead of freeing her the authorities arrested her
in May and launched a political trial against her
without any justification, to the consternation of the
rest of the world, including the friends of Burma. The
fact that the announcement of the verdict is continually
being delayed clearly demonstrates the embarrassment
of a regime at the weakness of the so-called charges
against the head of the opposition and - as my
colleague from Great Britain recalled - the only
political leader in Burma to have won an election
democratically.

The second demand of the Council was for the
launch of a genuine dialogue among the Government,
Ms. Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and the other concerned
parties and ethnic groups, with a view to inclusive
national reconciliation. Instead of initiating that
dialogue, the authorities chose a policy of fait
accompli, by unilaterally implementing a so-called
road map. That strategy led to increased polarization
within the country.

The third demand of the Security Council bore on
cooperation with the United Nations. After several
visits by the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari - whose efforts and tenacity I
commend - the Secretary-General went to Burma to
offer assistance in the political, economic and
humanitarian areas. No response was given to his
suggestions, which were made in a constructive spirit.

The Security Council has shown great patience
with respect to those various demands. We are ready to
actively support change, howsoever gradual, in the
right direction. It must be noted that not only have the
Burmese authorities done nothing to respond to the
demands of the Council, but that, over the past few
months, they have taken decisions that run directly
counter to those demands.
We all know that the Burmese crisis goes beyond
the political dimension. The country is facing
enormous economic, social and governance challenges.
A response to the needs of the population in all of
those areas is urgently needed.

The European Union is a major actor in
humanitarian and development assistance. It has
continually shown its readiness to revise its common
position as the situation evolves. The onset of a
genuine political process leading to national
reconciliation continues, however, to be a necessary
precondition to positive momentum in all areas. Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi is an essential and irreplaceable
actor in that process. Her detention is intolerable,
illegal and an obstacle to dialogue. Without the prior
liberation of the Nobel Peace Prize laureate, any
electoral process would be nothing but a parody of
democracy aimed at legitimizing a fait accompli.

The current impasse is not a reason for the
Council to sit back and do nothing and we agree with
the Secretary-General on that point. France also
encourages the Special Adviser to continue his efforts;
however, those efforts can be successful only if the
international community, in particular regional actors,
works actively in favour of change. The Security
Council must continue to follow the situation and to
clearly remind the Burmese authorities of the need to
implement the demands made of them. The Council
must respond firmly if Daw Aung San Suu Kyi is
condemned.

We are committed to unity in the Council.
However, the price of unity must not be inaction. We
cannot risk further deterioration of the situation, which
could contribute to instability in the country and the
entire region.

