Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the United Kingdom for taking the initiative to
convene this crucial meeting, which is being held at
a time when the humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate under the circumstances that Mr. Lowcock
just eloquently described in detail.

I will address three points. First, I will refer to the
escalation of tensions in the governorate of Al-Hudaydah
since the beginning of September, specifically in recent
days, and the major humanitarian risks it poses. I
will then recall the need to do everything possible to
guarantee humanitarian access to Yemen and to ensure
respect for international humanitarian law. Finally, I
will come back to the imperative of a political solution,
which must be sought immediately. It alone will bring
about a lasting resolution of the crisis.

First, we have reiterated many times that every
effort must be made to ensure that the ongoing military
confrontation in the Al-Hudaydah region spares the
civilian population, which has already been sorely
tested and includes many displaced persons. The
civilian infrastructure must also be protected and food
and power supplies ensured. While the rising tensions
could lead to new population displacements, civilians
seeking to flee the fighting must be able to move freely
and safely.

Furthermore, as Mr. Lowcock recalled, it is
necessary to protect the umbilical cord that the port
of Al-Hudaydah represents for Yemen. More than
three quarters of the humanitarian aid and commercial
freight entering the country transits through the port
of Al-Hudaydah, which, like that of Saleef, should
remain open and fully operational. It is a matter not
only of supplying Al-Hudaydah and the region but
also of meeting the needs of a hinterland that covers
most of the country, including Sana'a, where the
vast majority of Yemenis live. The roads between
Al-Hudaydah and Sana'a must be kept open to allow for
the delivery of food aid and to prevent the large-scale
malnutrition already affecting Yemen from becoming
an unprecedented famine. Today, owing to the fighting,
some of the reserves stored in Al-Hudaydah are already
completely inaccessible. It must be clearly said: the
conduct of military operations must in no way hinder
humanitarian access.

Finally - and this is my third point - the
humanitarianpersonnelwhotodayrisktheirlivesworking
in extremely dangerous conditions must be protected. It
is crucial that the humanitarian actors, upon whom the
Yemeni population relies very heavily, can plan their
operations in advance and with the guarantee of being
protected from attacks.

Besides the situation in Al-Hudaydah, we must
respond collectively to the continuing deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in Yemen. Members have
without doubt seen the disturbing pictures of emaciated
children that have circulated on social networks and that
depict a troubling reality. Civilians are the first victims
of war and the consequent shortages. It is therefore
important to do everything possible to ensure their
protection. France reiterates its call to ensure full, safe
and unhindered humanitarian access to those in need.

In addition, the humanitarian response of the
United Nations must make it possible to contain the
widespread cholera epidemic raging in the country. The
vaccination campaigns successfully launched in recent
months must be allowed to continue. The humanitarian
response must also make it possible to provide Yemeni
children with a future, while malnutrition makes them
very vulnerable. It is unacceptable that they starve.
Moreover, we reiterate that, in all situations of war,
everything must be done to protect children from
conflict, as required by Security Council resolutions.

While the rial has fallen sharply, prices rise and
food staples are scarce, the Security Council, and
more broadly the entire international community,
must support the efforts of the international financial
institutions to find a solution to the economic crisis
facing the country. France stands ready to act in that
regard, building on the work of the humanitarian
meeting on Yemen held in Paris on 27 June.

The collapse of the economy and the State structures
has in fact caused more deaths than the hostilities
themselves. Rebuilding the State structure in a war
economy is a tragic impasse that must be overcome.
That requires renewed efforts by all, as Mr. Lowcock
told us. I state emphatically: the protection of civilians,
free and unhindered access to humanitarian aid and the
protection of humanitarian and medical personnel are
not options; they are obligations under international
law for all the parties to the conflict.

In that context, it is absolutely essential to safeguard
every opportunity to renew dialogue and to build a
genuine political process based on confidence-building
measures between the parties. The meeting in Geneva
on 6 September may have been a missed opportunity.
However, that does not in any way mean the end of
efforts to advance the political process and should not
lead to increased tensions between the parties.

Let us remember that the military approach cannot
bring about a solution in Yemen. The war has gone
on for too long. We therefore call on all the parties
to continue to engage with the Special Envoy so as to
resume the path of dialogue as soon as possible and to
advance the political process, which is the only viable
way to put an end to the conflict in Yemen. United
Nations mediation alone can relaunch negotiations with
a View to an agreement on the management of the port of
Al-Hudaydah, a resumption of talks, a lasting cessation
of hostilities and the definition of the parameters of
a political solution for a durable, comprehensive and
inclusive agreement that restores peace in Yemen
and security in the Arabian peninsula and the Bab
Al-Mandab Strait.

Given the terrible humanitarian situation, which
has continued to deteriorate, France will remain fully
mobilized, particularly within the Council, to work
for concrete solutions that facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian aid and the political resolution of the
conflict. That is the only way to end the suffering of
the Yemeni population.

