Mr. Carmon (Israel): Two days ago - and as a
matter of fact, a few minutes ago in his statement -
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon condemned Hamas's
rocket fire against Israel and called on Hamas and
other terrorist and militant groups to cease all acts of
violence and terrorism. He also called on Israel to
exercise maximum restraint.

Israel has exercised that restraint for many
months now - this in spite of the constant firing of
rockets and mortar shells on our towns and villages in
southern Israel every single hour and every single day
and in spite of Hamas's attempt to carry out terrorist
attacks wherever it can target and kill an Israeli.

While Israel has been showing restraint, Hamas
has shown no intention of ceasing its vicious attacks.
On the contrary, in the past week since Hamas failed to
organize a provocative demonstration in Gaza - a
failure that might be seen as weakness - it has
dramatically escalated its rocket attacks and upgraded
its capability in its attacks against our people: Grad
missiles, Katyusha rockets, mortar shells and Qassams.
Since Wednesday, more than 150 rockets have been
fired at Israel, dozens in the past 24 hours alone.

As I speak now, more than a quarter of a million
Israeli citizens are in the range of the deadly and
murderous weapons of Hamas - care of Hamas, its
backers in the region and their malicious vision. The
Government of Israel should thus not apologize for
protecting its citizens.

We have addressed this situation for a very long
time. The members of the Council can see the many
letters we have sent this week alone expressing our
alarm and concern about Hamas attacks and reiterating
our determination to protect our people. That is our
right. That is the right of all States, to act in self-
defence in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of
08-25715
the United Nations. That is our duty. That is our
obligation to our people. I ask the members of the
Security Council: Would it not be yours, too?

No responsible Member State would sit back in
silence and do nothing as its citizens and territory were
under constant attack. They would not be idle as the

alarms in Sderot - and now Ashkelon - blared
"colour red!, colour redl", giving Israeli civilians less
than 15 seconds - 15 seconds of terror. That is all it

takes before the rocket slams into their lives, their
homes, hospitals, kindergartens, schools, and
playgrounds - and their lives are destroyed forever.

There is only one way to describe the activity of
Hamas against Israel: it is plain and blunt terrorism.
Hamas is a terrorist group backed by Member States of
this world body. It is an organization that denies the
very basic principles set by the international
community itself: cessation of hostilities, cessation of
terrorist acts, recognition of Israel and abiding by
previous agreements between Israel and the
Palestinians.

Hamas not only seeks to kill Israelis; it has no
concern for its own civilians. It fires rockets from
populated civilian areas, using their civilians as human
shields. That is a war crime - there is no other way to
describe it - against both Israelis and Palestinians. We
heard the term war crimes here today in the Chamber.
May I suggest to the Palestinian Observer that he divert
that term - or accusation - to the Hamas terrorist
group, which brutally took over the Gaza Strip a few
months ago, in what the Palestinian Authority
leadership itself called a coup. If they answer your
phone, my distinguished colleague, you can tell them
something about war crimes, as well as much of what
you told the Council this evening. The address is there:
Hamas. The Palestinians in Gaza are victims of
Hamas's regime of terror. It is not only Israelis. We are
all being held hostage by Hamas, the real and only
occupier of Gaza, through its terror. This situation is
08-25715
unacceptable. We do not accept it. We will continue our
fight against terrorism.

There should be no doubt in our minds that
Hamas's true vision is the extermination of the State of
Israel, and not to live peacefully side by side with us. It
does not even seek to restore normalcy for the sake of
the people of Gaza. It is thus unfortunate that the
Palestinian Observer tonight, as has been the case in
the past, does not recognize that Hamas bears sole
responsibility for the violence. Once again, the word
Hamas was not mentioned even once in his address. I
think that says it all.

Hamas's vision for the failure of the moderates is
a vision shared by some States in our region -
including Iran and Syria - who are sitting behind the
scenes, orchestrating and supporting Hamas's terrorism
against Israel. They have done this in the past with
other terrorist groups elsewhere in the region and
around the world. One must wonder about the timing
of Hamas's escalation of violence and whether its
purpose was not to distract the international
community's attention today and this week.

I reiterate Israel's determination to protect its
civilians, territory, cities, towns and villages. It is what
they expect from us, and it is what we must do for
them. Sitting on the sidelines will only embolden the
extremists and convince them that they should not stop
the violence. Trying to derail the peace process is what
the extremists would like us to do. Israel expects the
international community and the members of the
Security Council to support us in our protection of our
people.

