Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation is grateful for the opportunity to
participate in this debate, which enables me to reaffirm
Spain's full commitment to the people and the
Government of Haiti, especially in the difficult current
circumstances following the tragic earthquake that
devastated the country on 12 January. We share the
pain of the whole nation and of the United Nations
family at the loss of so many human lives and the
suffering and privations of the entire population. We
are obliged to do everything possible to ensure that the
sacrifice and pain will not have been in vain.

Fortunately, we are responding. We took a great
step forward with, inter alia, the donors conference
held on 31 March in New York, at which the Haitian
Government presented its Action Plan for the
Reconstruction and the Development of Haiti. The
response of the international community was
extraordinarily generous. At that event, the Spanish
Government announced a significant contribution
which made us the third largest bilateral donor in Haiti.
The New York conference will be continued at the
Santo Domingo summit on 2 June.

Today's debate in the Security Council, the first
since the earthquake, is another step in the right
direction, and we think that it is highly appropriate that
it is taking place in the presence of the Prime Minister
of Haiti, Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, and with his
participation.

My delegation fully supports - it cannot be said
any other way - the statement made by the
representative of the delegation of the European Union.
Allow me add several elements from our point of view.

We have closely studied the new report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) (S/2010/200), issued
on 22 April, and we support its main recommendations.
I would like to take the opportunity to give particular
thanks to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his briefing today. I
would also like to acknowledge the extraordinary work
that he and his team are doing so diligently and in such
difficult conditions.

We support the adoption of a comprehensive
approach by the entire United Nations system in the
five priority areas mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report. We believe that such an approach
should have MINUSTAH at its core and - as is the
case now - should be implemented in close
coordination with the United Nations country team and
with all the international community actors present in
Haiti. We think also that adopting a comprehensive
approach could make modifying the current
MINUSTAH mandate unnecessary, as it seems wide
and flexible enough to face the new challenges with
any adaptations to its concept of operations that might
be appropriate. We think that MINUSTAH's activities
could be adjusted as suggested by the Secretary-
General, including an increase in its police component,
in order to enhance its activities in the short and
medium term at this very delicate time; Mr. Mulet
referred to this in his briefing.

As is well known, Spain contributed to
strengthening MINUSTAH immediately after the
12 January earthquake. We did that in two ways, first
through the Mission itself, by sending 23 Guardia Civil
officers to join the police contingent. This increases the
number of Spanish police personnel in that contingent
to 58. We have also dispatched the amphibious vessel
Castilla, with 450 military personnel on board, to
provide humanitarian assistance, in the areas of health
care and engineering, in constant coordination with the
Haitian Government and MINUSTAH.

I take this opportunity to express my gratitude for
the condolences offered with respect to the loss of four
Spanish soldiers on 16 April in a helicopter accident as
they worked to carry out their mission.

Spain will continue to support MINUSTAH in the
coming phase, on the basis of the comprehensive
approach proposed by the Secretary-General, which we
hope will be endorsed by the Security Council. We are
giving careful study to the possibility of strengthening
MINUSTAH in areas for priority action, in particular
those related to security, human rights and the rule of
law, within the broader purpose of helping Haiti to
fully and effectively build its institutional capacity.

Here, I reaffirm the importance that Spain
attaches to MINUSTAH's role in supporting the process
of reforming the Haitian National Police with a view to
ensuring effective and sustained security in the country.
Maintaining stability is at the heart of MINUSTAH's
mandate, and it is key to the reconstruction and
development efforts to which we committed ourselves
at the 31 March conference at United Nations
Headquarters. In the shorter term, stability is key also
in successfully implementing the demanding political
and electoral timetable, with major milestones for this
year, such as the conclusion of the constitutional reform
process and the holding of legislative and presidential
elections at the end of the year.

We are therefore pleased at the Secretary-
General's dispatch of a technical mission to work with
the Haitian authorities on the preparation of the
electoral process, with due international assistance led
by the United Nations.

