Mr. Thayeb (Indonesia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to extend its congratulations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of June. We have every
confidence that, under your wise and able guidance, the
issues before the Council will be brought to a
successful conclusion. Allow me also to extend
felicitations to your predecessor, Ambassador Wang
Yingfan, Permanent Representative of China, for his
skilful stewardship of the Council's activities last
month.

We would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, for his comprehensive briefing
regarding developments on the ground. Let me also, on
this occasion, express my Government's satisfaction
for having established a satisfactory practice of
cooperation with the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) in the
common interest of the development of East Timor.

As has been alluded to by previous speakers, my
delegation is dismayed at the recent incident at the
Noelbaki refugee camp which led to the decision of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) to suspend its activities at three
refugee camps. However, we must acknowledge the
fact that this incident was contained and that there were
no injuries to any United Nations personnel. For
Indonesia, such incidents are more disconcerting,
particularly considering the fact that an atmosphere of
calm had prevailed preceding the adverse events, which
seem to occur on the eve of every Council meeting
convened to consider the developments on the ground.

Time and again, my Government has expressed
its strong commitment to taking the necessary steps to
ensure security and to prevent such incidents from
reoccurring. We share with others the view that threats
of violence cannot be condoned under any
circumstances, but we must not forget that the refugee
problem is a complex, complicated and
multidimensional one. Let us also not ignore the fact
that a sense of frustration on the part of the refugees is
heightened by the fact that they are still awaiting their
return to East Timor. Despite the tireless efforts of the
Government of Indonesia, the provincial governmental
authorities in East Nusa Tenggara, UNHCR and other
relevant humanitarian relief organizations, the pace and
progress of the much-needed assistance have not met
the expectations of the refugees and have thus had a
demoralizing effect on them. Understandably, their
profound concerns - especially over job opportunities,
food shortages and the lack of other basic
necessities - offer a bleak picture of what the future
holds for them in East Timor. In addition, the heavy
rains and flooding in East Nusa Tenggara in May 2000
worsened the conditions of the refugees. As a result,
many lives were lost, with extensive damage to the
infrastructure of the province. Faced with this
emergency situation, the Indonesian Government took
swift action by declaring a state of emergency in the
area, while the local provincial government set up a
task force. It was the concerted efforts of the
Indonesian Government, along with the assistance
rendered by various agencies of the United Nations,
that succeeded in alleviating the hardships caused to
the refugees by the floods.

There is no easy resolution to this problem. The
Indonesian Government and the provincial government
of East Nusa Tenggara have consistently called for the
return of East Timorese refugees. As the most
underdeveloped province of Indonesia, East Nusa
Tenggara finds the additional economic burden a heavy
one to bear. It has stretched its meagre resources to the
limit. Compounding this situation is the fact that the
numbers of refugees are equal to or even greater than
the local Indonesian population, which does not
constitute an ideal environment for security and
harmony.

We acknowledge the role played by the local non-
governmental organizations, as well as other
international non-governmental organizations, that
have often undertaken difficult tasks in providing a
variety of services to the refugees, including basic
services, food supplementation, advocacy and
counselling and attending to the needs of women and
children. We are also mindful of the contribution of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in dealing with the refugee issue, and in this
context we would like to underline the importance of
the full resumption of its activities. At this critical
juncture, therefore, it is also hoped that the
international community will be forthcoming in
providing the necessary assistance to those refugees
who wish to remain in Indonesia, thereby contributing
to the resolution of this complex problem.

Indonesia remains steadfast in its commitment to
the East Timorese people as they embark on the path to
a society of peace, democracy and reconciliation, as
well as to prosperity and sustainable development.
Indonesia looks forward to a new era and to building
the foundations for bilateral relations between the two
countries.

In this respect, it is pertinent to note the close
cooperation between the Government of Indonesia and
UNTAET in dealing with various issues that stem from
the transfer of authority over East Timor from
Indonesia to the United Nations. These include the
questions of borders, assets, East Timorese students in
Indonesian institutions of higher learning, East
Timorese who were Indonesian civil servants, archives
and cultural artefacts. Our capacity to contribute to the
development of East Timor is limited by resource
constraints. We are, however, able to adopt policies and
undertake initiatives that are helpful to East Timor's
development. The Indonesian Government will do its
utmost to reach arrangements on issues arising from
the transfer of authority that are most beneficial to East
Timor, subject to existing Indonesian laws and
regulations.

Undeniably, the road ahead is strewn with
obstacles and challenges, some of which have been
voiced in this debate. Nonetheless, Indonesia is
determined to fulfil its long-standing commitment. We
are also determined to provide support for the well-
being of the people of East Timor, including by
addressing the urgent need to promote genuine
reconciliation among East Timorese of all political
persuasions. It is therefore imperative- indeed, a
prerequisite - that such an endeavour be initiated by
the United Nations as a matter of priority if East Timor
is to become a viable and democratic State.

