Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): Nigeria welcomes this
opportunity to participate in today's open debate on
water, peace and security. We commend the delegation
of Senegal for its initiative in convening this debate
and for the well-articulated concept note (S/2016/969, annex) to guide our discussion. Our appreciation also
goes to the briefers for their useful insights.

As we hold today's debate, there is a palpable fear
of the possibility of a global water crisis. The reason
for that is not far-fetched. As populations grow and
countries and societies modernize, the demand for water
needed to produce food, energy and goods increases.
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development estimates that by 2050 the world's demand
for water will increase by 55 per cent. Competition
between water users and nations demanding water
resources is also predicted to escalate drastically.

Studies have shown that 60 per cent of the world's
water reserves are domiciled in nine countries. The
Food and Agricultural Organization of the United
Nations has indicated that 33 countries across the
world depend on other countries for over 50 per cent of
their renewable water resources. Added to the scarcity
of that vital resource are the challenges of population
explosion, urbanization and climate change.

The growing scarcity of water is a potential
source of conflict not only within countries but across
international boundaries. This compels the exploration
of the best way to share this valuable commodity, which
should constitute a fundamental feature of the global
policy agenda. Averting potential conflicts stemming
from water insecurity should be the thrust of our
collaborative efforts in this regard.

We must recognize the imperative to sustain
cooperation among nations on water security even
in situations of political tension. Nigeria seizes the
opportunity of this debate to commend the efforts
made over the years to promote the peaceful resolution
of water-related crises, including the more than
200 bilateral treaties concluded in this regard. We
underscore the need for more efforts to bring about
many more cooperation frameworks in managing
water-sharing and access to water.

In the spirit of these efforts, Nigeria joined other
West African nations in establishing the Niger Basin
Authority. The Authority is one of the oldest African
intergovernmental organizations, created to promote
cooperation among member countries and especially to
foster the integrated development of resources in the
Niger River basin.

The Authority has worked to create an integrated
development plan for the basin, especially focusing
on cross-boundary projects. Drawing on water and
hydroelectric resources, the Authority has harmonized
the development of the energy, agriculture, forestry,
transport, communications and industrial resources of
member nations.

Nigeria has also, in conjunction with Cameroon,
Chad and the Niger, established the Lake Chad Basin
Commission. The mandate of the Commission is to
sustainably and equitably manage Lake Chad and
other shared water resources of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission so as to preserve the ecosystems of the
Lake Chad environmental basin, and to promote
regional integration and peace and security across the
basin. Efforts are currently being made to regenerate
the lake to sustain the inhabitants of the Lake Chad
basin and for the entrenchment of peace and security.

While encouraging States to enter into cooperation
agreements to share common water resources as
appropriate, I wish to underscore that according to
applicable human rights law, water is a component of
the right to an adequate standard of living. Therefore
there is a need for States to guarantee the provision of
this resource in all circumstances.

Consistent with the foregoing, and in accordance
with the Geneva Conventions, all objects indispensable
to the survival of the civilian population, including
water installations, must enjoy special protection.
We therefore call on all concerned to respect these
principles at all times and in all circumstances.

In closing, we are convinced that to avoid water-
related conflicts, there is a need for the strengthening
of cooperation between the United Nations and Member
States as well as regional organizations dealing with
water issues, particularly in the area of capacity-
building. Member States must all also deeply reflect
on how best to protect water resources during armed
conflict by reaffirming the need to respect international
humanitarian law.

