Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to contribute to this debate. I should like to
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the month of June.

My delegation wishes to thank the President and
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) for the presentation of their reports
on the completion strategy for the ICTR (see S/2010/259). Let me also acknowledge the open and
constructive efforts of the delegation of Austria in its
capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.

The Government of Rwanda remains steadfast in
its commitment to supporting the Rwanda Tribunal's
completion strategy, as called for in resolution 1503
(2003). As we have stated previously, we have
continued to facilitate unfettered access to witnesses
for both the defence and the prosecution. We have
assisted the movement of witnesses to and from Arusha
and have continued to ensure the security of witnesses
through the Rwanda Witness Protection Service, which
was established with the support of the Office of the
Prosecutor. My Government has continued to support
investigations initiated by both the prosecution and the
defence without prejudice to either, and a detention
facility that meets the standards set by the Tribunal is
in place and is currently hosting convicts from the
Special Court for Sierra Leone. My Government is
therefore of the considered view that no pretext should
remain to prevent the transfer of cases to Rwanda and
that if the ends of justice are to be served in the eyes of
Rwandans it is imperative that cases be transferred to
our jurisdiction.

My Government recognizes the efforts of the
Tribunal to comply with the completion strategy and in
this regard wishes to highlight the following points. We
welcome the Prosecutor's efforts to continue to enable
referrals to national jurisdictions for the trials of eight
of the remaining 11 fugitives and his insistence that
that effort focus on Rwanda, "the only country that has
jurisdiction and is currently willing to take up the eight
cases earmarked for referral" (S/2010/259, enclosure, para. 80). In view of the progress my Government has
made, which I have just outlined, it is our expectation
that the applications for referral will be granted.

We take note of the efforts of the Prosecutor in
tracking the 11 remaining fugitives and in that regard
call upon all countries to extend the cooperation
necessary to ensure that they are apprehended and
brought to justice.

We take note of the issuance by the President of
two Practice Directions which regulate the size of
closing briefs and the timing for filing them and
address the timing and conduct of site visits. We urge
adherence to them in order to expedite the conduct of
trials and ensure compliance with the agreed time
standards.

We welcome the Tribunal's efforts on outreach
and capacity building in Rwanda and encourage their
continuation. These efforts, however, need to be
complemented by decisions of the Tribunal,
particularly in respect to referrals, in order for them to
have efficacy in the view of Rwandans.

We take note of the progress that has been made
in archiving the activities of the Tribunal. We wish to
reiterate that it is our view that the archives of the
Tribunal should be transferred to Rwanda upon
completion of the Tribunal's mandate. This conviction
is based on the fact that these records constitute an
integral part of our history. They are vital to the
preservation of the memory of the genocide and will
play a critical role in educating future generations to
ensure the prevention of genocide. We recognize the
ongoing negotiations within the framework of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
and will continue to engage in the process, in order to
ensure an outcome that meets the desire of our
Government to host the residual archives and ensures
accessibility for the international community.

We share the view expressed in the report that
"The commitment to completing the Tribunal's
mandate requires that all efforts continue to ensure the
arrest of the remaining fugitives" (1bid., para. 88).

Allow me to address an issue of utmost concern
to my Government: the increasing tendency to
misrepresent, misinterpret and openly deny the 1994
Rwanda genocide against Tutsis, by a cohort of
members of the legal profession, academia and others
associated with the perpetration of this most heinous of
crimes. The revision and denial of the 1994 genocide
of the Tutsi, a genocide recognised by the Security
Council in its establishment of the ICTR, in our view,
is not only morally reprehensible but also threatens the
hard-earned peace and stability that Rwandans enjoy
today. We will continue to ensure, without prejudice,
that any individual who engages in revisionism or
denial of the 1994 genocide of the Tutsi is brought to
justice in accordance with our constitutional
obligations.

In respect of the case to which the Tribunal
President alluded in his remarks, allow me to state
categorically that the accused was not in Rwanda for
reasons linked to the Tribunal and that his arrest has no
link whatsoever to his activities with the Tribunal - as
was, by the way, recognized by the Tribunal's
spokesperson, Roland Amoussouga, on 2 June 2010.
My Government, however, has no intention of
interfering or hampering the ability of defence counsel
to represent their clients effectively and efficiently.

In conclusion let me reiterate my Government's
continued commitment to supporting the Tribunal in
successfully concluding its mandate.

