Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Because of the lateness
of the hour, I promise that my statement will be limited
to one short remark and two short questions.

First of all, I should like to join other delegations
in thanking the Presidents and Prosecutors of both ad
hoc Tribunals for their comprehensive and candid
presentations, which underline the fact that both
Tribunals are at an extremely critical stage of their
operation. We realize that the successful
implementation of the completion strategy depends on
factors that lie within and outside the scope of the
responsibilities of the Tribunals. Critical factors that lie
outside the scope of the Courts' responsibility but
within that of States on the Council are, notably, first,
the punctual payment of assessed contributions;
secondly, cooperation with the Tribunals; and thirdly,
and in particular, the arrest of fugitives, notably
Mr. Karadzic, Mr. Mladic and Mr. Gotovina.

We welcome the report of improved cooperation
on the part of Croatia, and we are concerned about
Serbia and Montenegro's poor record of cooperation,
as reported by both President Meron and Prosecutor
Carla Del Ponte. We urge all countries to cooperate
fully with the Tribunals and to pay their dues, and we
will push for appropriately strong Council reactions if
countries do not cooperate with the Tribunals, as
requested in particular by Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte.
We have taken note with great interest of
President Meron's proposals with regard to the election
of judges. The early holding of elections is welcome,
and the Council should be open-minded with regard to
the proposals concerning ad litem judges.

My first question goes to President Meron. He
and Carla Del Ponte have drawn the Council's attention
to Serbian non-cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
Following the presidential elections in Serbia and
Montenegro and the victory of Mr. Tadic, does he see a
chance for better cooperation with Serbia and
Montenegro, and what could the Council or third
parties do to promote such cooperation? Are there, in
his view, any lessons that he or the Council can or
should draw from the factors that led to the
improvement of relations between Croatia and the
ICTY?

My second question goes to Prosecutor Jallow.
First of all, I should like to commend him for his
dedicated efforts to improve relations with the
authorities of Rwanda. This is very much appreciated
and a very important basis for the referral of cases to
Rwandese justice. My question concerns cooperation
with authorities in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. He has reported that many of the 15 fugitives
accused of war crimes and genocide are hiding out in
the Congo, and he has also said that efforts to
apprehend and transfer them to the seat of the Tribunal
have borne little fruit so far. Can he please elaborate a
little, perhaps, on the cooperation he has with the
Congolese authorities to apprehend these criminals?

