Mr. Wittig (Germany): Germany fully aligns
itself with the statement of the European Union. Let
me at the outset thank Under-Secretary-General John
Holmes for his statement and for his work at the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
and wish him all the best for the future. Let me also
extend a very warm welcome to Ms. Pillay. The voice
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights is particularly relevant in this debate.

We are pleased that the past few months have
seen relevant progress on protection issues in the
United Nations. Like many other speakers, we consider
the adoption of resolution 1894 (2009) last November
to be a landmark decision, requesting the Secretary-
General to develop an operational concept for the
protection of civilians in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We are looking forward to the report of the
Secretary-General in November this year.

The independent study by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and OCHA published in
January has also provided a valuable analysis of the
successes, setbacks and remaining challenges
concerning the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations. It also makes a number of concrete
proposals to remedy existing shortcomings.

We also welcome the recommendations that the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations has
provided with this year's report (A/64/ 19). Clear and
achievable mandates for peacekeeping operations
remain key, providing the missions with the needed
resources and with the strategic framework to guide
senior mission leadership in elaborating a
comprehensive protection strategy.

We recognize the important work the Security
Council has done to enhance the protection agenda on
such issues as women, peace and security and children
and armed conflict. Only last month, the Security
Council adopted a presidential statement on children
and armed conflict (S/PRST/2010/10), which called for

an increased exchange of information between the
Security Council Working Group on children and
armed conflict and relevant sanction committees of the
Security Council. The Security Council also expressed
its willingness to adopt targeted measures against
persistent perpetrators. We believe that this is a step in
the right direction.

Despite the positive developments I mentioned,
challenges remain. In our intervention on the
protection of civilians last November (see S/PV.6216),
we highlighted a number of challenges related to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We argued
for enhanced mandating, better doctrine and
preparation, improved planning and preparedness, and
a comprehensive approach throughout peacekeeping
missions.

All these issues remain valid today. They should,
however, not obstruct our view of the specific
requirements of the protection of civilians at the
mission level. Special representatives and force
commanders are responsible for implementing the
protection agenda in the field. The international
community, humanitarian actors and, above all,
affected populations have legitimate expectations that
protection mandates will be implemented on the
ground. It is important that missions make use of all
their military, civilian and, above all, political
resources to fulfil this important task, in accordance
with respective Security Council mandates. In this,
they require and deserve the full support of the
Security Council and the international community as a
whole. The issue of the implementation of protection
of civilians measures at the mission level was
thoroughly discussed in the debate about the extension
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo/Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and should be addressed by the Security
Council when deciding about the renewal of the
mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur in a few weeks' time.

To conclude, let me briefly stress the corrosive
effect impunity has on respect for international law.
Ensuring compliance and accountability is key to
enhancing respect for applicable international law.
States must not fail in their responsibility to thoroughly
investigate and prosecute persons suspected of war
crimes, crimes against humanity or other serious
violations of international humanitarian law.

The protection of civilians is an important cross-

cutting issue which is of particular relevance to my

country, given the contributions Germany makes to

United Nations peacekeeping operations. We will
actively participate in future debates on this issue.

