Mr. Monteiro (Portugal) (spoke in French): I
promise to be brief.

(spoke in English)

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union-
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia- and the associated countries, Cyprus,
Malta and Turkey, as well as the European Free Trade
Association country member of the European
Economic Area, Iceland, align themselves with this
statement.

I would like to commend you, Mr. President, and
the members of this Council, for organizing this open
debate on Somalia. Indeed, I commend you for all the
open debates that you have organized, and for allowing
other Members of the Organization to participate in
them.

I would like very much to thank Under-Secretary-
General Prendergast for his informative briefing and
the Permanent Representative of Djibouti for his
detailed information on the Conference currently being
held in Djibouti. Information on the Somali peace
process is welcome and long overdue.

The European Union reiterates its support for the
Djibouti peace initiative, aimed at achieving peace and
stability in Somalia. We welcome the full involvement
of civil society. The European Union stresses the need
to take into account the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and unity of Somalia. In this regard, the European
Union hopes that the ongoing Somalia National Peace
Conference, which is taking place in Djibouti, will
provide a decisive contribution to the restoration of the
peace and stability that the Somali people deserve.

We call for the freedom of movement and safety
of all United Nations personnel and other humanitarian
workers to be guaranteed. In this context, the European
Union strongly condemns the attack on a United
Nations aircraft in Kismayo airport last month and
deplores the killing and intimidation of humanitarian
personnel. The insecure situation seriously hampers the
delivery of relief assistance to the population in need,
namely, internally displaced people.

The European Union is especially concerned with
the flow of arms into Somalia in violation of Security
Council resolution 733 (1992), which established an
arms embargo. It is essential that all States cooperate
and provide information on violations of the arms
embargo in order to fully implement the Security
Council resolution.

The European Union will continue to support the
Somali people, providing the necessary assistance.
Since 1992, the European Union, through the
Humanitarian Office of the European Commission, has
been constantly involved in Somalia. During the
intervention of the United Nations Operation in
Somalia, our assistance amounted to 12 million Euros
per year. Over the years, the European Union has
focused its attention on those areas where basic
preconditions for longer-term and more ambitious
development activities do not exist. We have also been
a major player in Somalia since 1994, through our
financing of large rehabilitation programmes and, until

recently. through our Chairmanship of the Somalia Aid
Coordination Body.

The Horn of Africa region is experiencing a
humanitarian crisis affecting millions of innocent
people. It is now time to call for a strong commitment
to the ongoing Somali peace process. The
responsibility for achieving genuine national
reconciliation and peace rests with the Somalis
themselves.

