The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Zaire, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lnkaba
Khabonji N 'Zaji (Zaire) took a place at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
paragraph 6 of Security Council resolution 997 (1995) of
9 June 1995, document S/ 1995/552, and the progress report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda, document S/1995/678.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/l995/703, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/ 1995/547,
letter dated 5 July 1995 from the Permanent Representative
of Rwanda to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council; and S/1995/683, note
verbale dated 10 August 1995 from the Permanent
Mission of Zaire to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

The first speaker is the representative of Zaire. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

Mr. Lukabu Khabouji N'Zaji (Zaire)
(interpretation from French): It is a pleasure for me and
my delegation, Sir, to see you presiding over the work of
the Security Council this month. We know your ability,
and we know that the Council is in good hands.

As the Council considers a draft resolution by which
it would lift the embargo on the supply of arms to
Rwanda, I wish to convey Zaire's gratitude to Council
members, who have worked tirelessly to improve the text
that was initially proposed. At the same time, we must
stress that the compromise text of the draft resolution on
lifting the embargo on the supply of arms and related
materiel to Rwanda, which the Council is soon to adopt,
although it has indeed taken into account some aspects of
Zaire's position, falls far short of our expectations, given
the deterioration of the situation and the exacerbation of
tension in the region.

By suspending the embargo on the supply of arms to
Rwanda for a trial period of one year, the Security
Council would authorize Rwanda to obtain military
equipment and other modern, sophisticated war materiel
at a time when it is barely concealing its warlike
intentions and when it is threatening to attack refugee
camps in Zaire. It is also a time when Rwanda is not
promoting a climate of understanding and national
reconciliation, but, rather, is encouraging new flows of
refugees to Zaire, which has the appearance of the
expulsion of Rwanda's own nationals for political, ethnic
and tribal reasons.

In other words, even though the Security Council has
included conditions in this text, adoption of the draft
resolution will not contribute to easing tension in the
region.

Facing this situation, Zaire is justified in derogating
from the principle that refugees should not be subjected
to measures such as refusal of entry at the border or, if
they have already entered a territory where they seek
asylum, expulsion or deportation to another State where

 

they may be persecuted. Indeed, in accordance with article
3 of the General Assembly's Declaration on Territorial
Asylum, of 14 December 1967, any State Member of the
United Nations can derogate from the principles enunciated
therein for overriding reasons of national security or in
order to safeguard its population, as in the case of a mass
influx of persons.

Clearly, in this case Zaire intends to give the persons
concerned the option of finding another host State.

So far, out of solidarity and a sense of humanity, the
Republic of Zaire has not wanted to resort to those
provisions, convinced, on the one hand, that the United
Nations and the international community would do
everything possible to alleviate Zaire's burden and to
facilitate the return of refugees to their countries of origin,
and on the other hand, that the sister Rwandese Republic
would assume in good faith its obligations under the
tripartite agreement between Zaire, Rwanda and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) on the repatriation of Rwandan refugees, which
was signed in Kinshasa on 21 October 1994. Unfortunately,
this has not happened, and the Republic of Zaire cannot
indefinitely sacrifice its own security for the sake of
unilateral solidarity and humanitarianism, which could be
suicidal.

That is why, as the Council is about to adopt the draft
resolution before it, Zaire would like to draw the Council's
and the international community's attention to the
worsening of the situation on the eastern borders of our
country. We would like the Security Council to address the
situation. The Republic of Zaire would like to inform the
Council here and now that if the situation should degenerate
we will hold the Kigali Government and the Bujumbura
Government responsible.

The Security Council should attach priority to the
disarmament of the militias, of course, but we should bear
in mind the recent massacre of a group of peaceful Italians.
The Republic of Zaire wishes to take this opportunity to
express its most heartfelt condolences to Italy over the loss
of those peaceful people who were working for an
organization with laudable goals and who were savagely
massacred.

I would like to ask the Security Council to bear in
mind what I have said the next time it considers the
situation in Rwanda and to take it to heart.


The President: I thank the representative of Zaire
for the kind words he addressed to me.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. If I
hear no objection I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.


