The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
photocopies of a letter dated 23 May 2007 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council, transmitting the report of the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission on the Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
That letter will be issued as a document of the Council
under the symbol S/2007/307.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the
transmission of the report of the Secretary-
General and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on the Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
which contains recommendations regarding a
mandate and a structure for the Hybrid Operation,
details on the various components of the
proposed operation and their specific tasks, and a
description of the ongoing efforts of the
international community to support the peace
process in Darfur and to strengthen the African
Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS).

"The Security Council notes that agreement
between the African Union and the United
Nations on this joint report is an important
development in the comprehensive approach to
the peace process in Darfur, which also includes
re-energizing the political process; strengthening
the ceasefire; and implementing the three-phase
approach to peacekeeping, culminating in an
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation.

"The Security Council calls for the full
implementation without delay of the United
Nations Light and Heavy Support Packages of
assistance to AMIS, as well as for the report of
the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission on the Hybrid
Operation to be considered and taken forward
immediately. The Security Council further
demands that all parties meet their international
obligations; support the political process; end
violence against civilians and attacks on
peacekeepers; and facilitate humanitarian relief."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2007/ 15.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.20 pm.
07-35950
