Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I simply
wish to say that I listened with close attention both to
the statements made by Ms. Bakoyannis and our
colleagues on the substance of the issue before us, and
to those made by our colleagues from the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and Uganda on our working procedures,
and I was deeply puzzled by them.

We all recognize and are well aware of the
importance attached to regional cooperation under
Chapter VIII of the Charter. It is a fundamental issue
and a guiding principle of the recent initiative of
France and the United Kingdom to review, with the
Council's support, the modalities of peacekeeping
operations. It is true that, once or twice a year, we hear
a briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) on the organization's programme and the
status of cooperation between it and the United
Nations. The invitation extended to the Chairperson is
generally the result of a unanimous decision taken in
the context of the Security Council's working group.
Thus, if there are double standards, they are collective.

I was especially puzzled to hear that we do not
afford the same opportunity to the African Union or the
League of Arab States. It seems to me that there is very
little debate touching on crises or items on the Security
Council's agenda that do not fall within the purview of
those organizations. In the year and a half that I have
represented my country in this Chamber, I cannot recall
a single instance in which the Council has rejected
such a request.

I reiterate that as the format is decided by
consensus, any rejection would be a collective one and
that those who today complain of alleged discrimination
would be accomplices to it. I recall that, in the month of
January alone, when France held the presidency and the
Council held a great many debates on the Middle East,
the peace process and the crisis in Gaza, the Council
held no meetings in this Chamber at which the Arab
League did not have an opportunity to take the floor. I
do not recall ever having rejected a request to speak.
With respect to the issue of conflicts in Africa, I believe
that our colleague the Ambassador of the African Union
has had numerous opportunities to intervene. In just a
few weeks, we will probably travel to Addis Ababa to
hold a joint meeting of the African Union Peace and
Security Council and the Security Council.

Thus, to be frank, I fail to understand why we are
being criticized, but as it has been done publicly in this
Chamber, I am compelled to point out that I would
happily study, alongside my colleagues from Libya and
Uganda, any information prepared by the Secretariat
regarding the participation in 2008 of the OSCE, the
African Union, the League of Arab States and any
other regional organization in the Security Council's
debates. I think it would be useful indeed to speak on
the basis of statistics.

I believe it important to note that the Council has
no desire to discriminate against any organization, and
certainly not the League of Arab States or the African
Union, which play essential roles. France has always
supported all initiatives, especially those of the Arab
League, with respect to the peace process. With regard
to conflicts in Africa, we are particularly attached to
our cooperation with the African Union. I believe that
we all recognize that fact.

