Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): We have listened
carefully to the debate so far. Having done so, we are
struck by three paradoxes, the first of which is that this
weekend, as several speakers have commented, is one
of the world's holiest weekends: Passover, Good
Friday, Easter. This holy weekend is being celebrated
at one of the world's holiest sites. At this moment, we
should be seeing celebrations or reflections of peace.
Instead, we see an extremely high level of violence.

This is not a normal situation. We suggest that
perhaps the time has come for both the Council and the
international community to reflect - and to reflect in a
very profound fashion - on how we have reached this
incredible point this weekend.

The second paradox is that in real terms we have
probably never been closer to achieving a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. As several
speakers have said today, resolution 1397 (2002) was
clearly a landmark decision. We have also recently
seen the endorsement of the Saudi peace plan by the
Arab Summit in Beirut. There are many conversations
about the Middle East peace process taking place
within the United Nations community - conversations
in this public room and those in the corridors. From the
conversations in the corridors it is very clear that when
we talk about what a comprehensive peace settlement
will look like, we all refer to these developments-
that is, resolution 1397 (2002) and the Saudi peace
plan. Yet, having come so far in terms of generating
this international consensus, we once again seem to be
moving further away from real peace.

There is a third paradox. Again, listening to
statements made so far, we are struck by how much
more unified the Council has become on the issue of
the Middle East in recent months. This has been
demonstrated most clearly by the adoption of
resolution 1397 (2002). A more unified Council should
have brought us closer to, rather than further away
from, peace. But the mere fact that we are holding this
extraordinary meeting on this weekend demonstrates
how small an impact the Council has on the real
situation on the ground. We believe that the time has
come for the Council to assume its responsibilities.

Today, despite the grave tragedies and the great
dangers facing us, we have heard many voices of
reason here. Singapore is a small - not a big - voice
in the Council. But we would like to add our small
voice to the voices of reason in the hope that they will
have an accumulated effect on our deliberations.

In this spirit, we would like to suggest four points
for the Council when it reacts to the latest
developments. The first is that we must condemn all of
the violence and make the point loudly and clearly that
violence is not the solution. Our second point is that, in
order to ensure our sending a clear signal that violence
is not the solution, we must not allow the extreme
measures being taken by both sides - extreme
measures which clearly, as everyone has said here,
exacerbate the situation and damage and derail the
peace process - to dictate how we go from here.

The third point is that we should build on the
positive developments we have seen in recent weeks.
We should build on resolution 1397 (2002), and we
should build on the positive outcome of the recent
Beirut Summit. We should ensure that these positive
developments are not lost.

The fourth point is that the Security Council must
react and react- we would like to stress- in a
unified fashion to the latest developments. We realize
that sometimes it is difficult to get the Council to take
unified positions on the Middle East question. But one
way out that we have is to build on the careful
statements made by the Secretary-General in previous
weeks, this morning and in his latest statement.
Sometimes it appears that there is no viable middle
ground on the Middle East question. But the Secretary-
General's careful and well-balanced statements
demonstrate that we can develop such middle ground,
and we hope that the Security Council will build on the
Secretary-General's statements.

