The President (spoke in French): | shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of the Niger. I would like to thank Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock for their excellent presentations. We heard the heart-rending messages of Yemenis, who need compassion, humanity and solidarity in these difficult times. I think that Ms. King eloquently expressed our feelings. My country is following with great concern the evolving situation in Yemen, marked by persistent fighting, differences between the separatists in the south and the Government with regard to the implementation of the Riyadh agreement and the alarming deterioration in the living conditions of a population trapped in a conflict that has been ongoing for six years. The conflict now seems to be turning into a real quagmire, whose most worrisome trend is the widening scope of the violence beyond Yemen's borders. If that trend were to continue, the conflict in Yemen would clearly take on a new dimension that would risk serious threats to peace and security in the region. Despite the tireless efforts of the United Nations since the beginning of this crisis, as well as the Special Envoy's many hopeful initiatives, including the announcement of a nationwide ceasefire, our fervent hopes for the return of peace in Yemen have been slow to materialize. In addition to the military stalemate, there seems to be an impasse in the negotiations due to the increased intransigence over the terms and a growing climate of mistrust. My delegation is convinced that only a political solution can lead to lasting peace in the country. We also believe that no progress can be made in addressing this crisis without a cessation of hostilities and the commitment of the parties to making the necessary concessions to move the political process forward. We therefore call on all the parties to the conflict to demonstrate responsibility and compassion by ending the hostilities and resuming dialogue once and for all. In that regard, I must say that the interest expressed by the Yemeni Government and the Houthis in the Special Envoy's proposals is a glimmer of hope. We must do everything possible to maintain that momentum and use every opportunity to revive the peace talks. In that regard, we call on regional actors and Council members with influence over the parties to the conflict to spare no effort in holding them to their commitments under the Stockholm and Riyadh agreements. The successful conclusion of a joint declaration on a national ceasefire would also enable the brave people of Yemen to close this dark chapter in their history and again move towards the country's reconstruction and development. Long before the coronavirus disease pandemic, the humanitarian situation in Yemen was of the greatest concern. Today it is even more worrisome, exacerbated by a combination of factors, including the rapid spread of the pandemic, the fragile health system, floods, foodinsecurity, the fuel crisis and obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian aid. To prevent a further deterioration of the situation, we are appealing to the international community for more funding to ensure continuing assistance programmes, on which several million people now depend. I take this opportunity to express our sincere thanks to all those who are helping the people of Yemen and encourage others, including the neighbouring countries, to do the same. In conclusion, my delegation would like to express its concern over the situation concerning the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which has been moored off the coast of Yemen for several years. Our concern is all the greater owing to its advanced state of disrepair. The vessel could explode at any time, or dump its cargo in the Red Sea. After the explosion on 4 August in the port of Beirut and the oil spill in Mauritius, it is urgent to act to prevent an environmental disaster in the Red Sea. That is why we call on the Houthis to honour their commitments by issuing the necessary authorizations to the United Nations expert team as soon as possible and to facilitate its mandate on the ground. The Niger welcomes the commitment of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and his team and reaffirms its full support for the efforts to restore peace in Yemen. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
