Mr. Bryant (Liberia): Somebody asked a
question about our relations with our neighbours. I
think they are good - I think they are very good. I
have been to Conakry, Guinea, four times, I think, at
the last count. I have been to Cote d'Ivoire three times.
I have been to Freetown twice. Since I have been here
in the United States I have received a personal phone
call from President Tejan Kabbah. This is thousands of
miles from where we were eight months ago. The
leaders of Guinea, Sierra Leone and Cote d'Ivoire were
simply not talking to us. The fact that I can go into
Conakry, Freetown or Abidjan and sleep at peace tells
you we have come miles in our relationship. The good
thing also is that we are all resolved that we want to
live at peace now. We are all resolved that we will
initiate common security measures to ensure that there
will be no more cross-border armed incursions and no
more trading in light weapons or heavy weapons across
our borders bringing hardship to our people.

I have lived in Liberia since birth. I have lived
there through all of our crises. I supported the Security
Council decision to impose sanctions on us because of
the profanity of what our Government was doing at the
time - mutilating little children, mutilating old people
and pregnant women. How could anybody in his or her
right mind condone such acts? It was shameful for us.
Some of us were so ashamed that we found solitude in

our bedrooms - we were too ashamed to even show
our faces outside as Liberians.

But I assure you that today it has changed.
Eighty-five per cent of the kids we are disarming say,
"We want to go to school". They are 22 years old
today, but they want to go to school. And that is why
we need resources: to build schools, to build clinics, to
build infrastructure, so that the partners who come in
and want to sincerely work with Liberians do not also
have to invest in access roads, power generators or
clean water to live and work. That is why we have
come to make this case. I thank Council members for
giving me an audience and for all their kind and warm
comments about us.

