Mr. Mogae: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to again address the Security Council.

Following my last briefing to the Council on
19 February (see S/PV.7628), I must unfortunately
report that the implementation of most aspects of
the August 2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan continues to
be delayed. The key milestone for the initial element
of the Agreement - the formation of the Transitional
Government of National Unity - has yet to be reached.
Violations of the permanent ceasefire also continue,
as most recently documented by the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism, in the states of Upper Nile, Western
Equatoria and Western Bahr el-Ghazal.

The Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
(JMEC) has publicly released these violation reports so
that the full details ofthe investigation are made known

to the South Sudanese and to the broader international
community. Notwithstanding the continuing trend, in
recent days there has been notable progress, and the
formation of the Transitional Government of National
Unity now seems within reach.

In response to the plan for transitional security
arrangements for Juba, the capital, which I issued
on 23 February in my capacity as Chair of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, the first
of the 1,370 troops of the Sudan People's Liberation
Army (SPLA) in Opposition have now returned, by a
combination of United Nations and charter aircraft.

The role of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan in the operation has been critical, not only in
terms of making aircraft available, but also in providing
crucial logistical support to this operation, both in
Malakal and in Juba. Flights are planned to continue
over the coming week, until the full complement of1,370
has been transported. Following the arrival of these
forces, the First Vice President-designate, representing
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) in
Opposition, has assured us that he will return to Juba,
thus permitting the formation of the new government.

SPLM. in Opposition representatives have
confirmed that there are no further conditions or
obstacles to the return of the First Vice President-
designate, and therefore I am cautiously optimistic
that the new Transitional Government will be in place
by the middle of next month. While this is months
behind schedule, it is a vital step forward in the
implementation of the Agreement, which I welcome.
That said, the parties can do more to prepare for the
return of the First Vice President-designate to Juba and
ensure that the formation of the new government is not
itself destabilizing.

Although developments in recent days are positive,
there is still much work to be done by the parties and
by the international community in support of a more
robust peace in South Sudan. As I observed in my
statement to the Council in February, the act of forming
the new Government will not automatically relieve the
humanitarian, development, political, military and
economic crises that the country continues to face.
While both the present Government and the SPLA in
Opposition have vowed to strengthen their cooperation
with the humanitarian response, and the Government
has formally announced that all military units have
been ordered to cooperate with the humanitarian
response, the overall situation remains dire, with
millions remaining at risk. In economic terms, South
Sudan's economy is in desperate trouble and urgent
measures are needed by both this Government and the
next to address the situation and implement agreed
reforms and procedures.

As I said to the representatives of JMEC at
our most recent meeting in Juba, without action on
economic reform and restructuring, the Agreement will
be imperilled. I urge the parties to consider what steps
can be to taken immediately to mitigate the situation, as
well as what steps can be taken immediately following
formation of the new transitional government.

The parties must also turn their attention to
the resolution of the State's internal administrative
boundaries. The Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) communique of 31 January, later
endorsed by JMEC, outlines the formation of a new,
ad-hoc national boundary commission to review the
number of States and their boundaries. It is critical that
this commission be quickly established to address the
issue and prevent any further destabilization.

I wish to reiterate my firm belief that the South
Sudanese parties should continually be encouraged
by IGAD, by the African Union and by the Council
to respect the commitments in the Agreement. Such
commitment is even more vital as we reach the cusp
of the formation of the new Government. There is little
time to be lost if the next two and a half years - the
transition period provided for in the Agreement - are
to be meaningful and see genuine implementation of
the Agreement's provisions.

I thank the Security Council for its continued
attention to the situation in South Sudan and urge that,
at this critical time, the Council continue to focus on
the situation in South Sudan.

