Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia-
Herzegovina, for his briefing.

I associate myself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union.

The security situation on the ground has remained
calm and stable - something for which Bosnia and
Herzegovina's institutions have been fully responible.
That has been the state of affairs for several years, and
we should welcome it.

However, the succession of political crises - for
months at a time at the central level, and now at the
Federation level - and the continuing tension between
the political representatives of communities paralyse
the country and are of concern to us. Those incessant
clashes divert Bosnian authorities from the goal of
Euro-Atlantic integration. We particularly regret that
in the light of the fact that other States of the region are
about to reach historical milestones in that process or
have demonstrated their ability to commit to dialogue
and compromise in order to give themselves the
opportunity to make progress towards the European
perspective.

We therefore call once again on the Bosnian
Government to undertake the reforms expected of it, first
and foremost with regard to bringing the Constitution
in line with the ruling of the European Court of Human
Rights in the Sejdie-Finci case. That is a crucial element
for progress towards European integration and resolving
the issue of the apportionment of defence and State
property. However, it is also essential to improve the
functioning and effectiveness of institutions, starting
with the establishment of a coordination mechanism on
European issues. We remain attached to the prospect
of seeing Bosnia and Herzegovina join the European
Union as a united and sovereign country enjoying
full territorial integrity. However, a country under
trusteeship and deeply divided cannot as such belong to
the European Union. It rests with the Bosnians and their
leaders to find an historic compromise that would allow
Bosnia and Herzegovina to develop institutions that
function effectively, which clearly would not allow the
prevailing exploitation of the institutional framework
inherited from the Dayton Agreement.

We welcome the ongoing reconfiguration of the
international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which is a harbinger of opportunity and an illustration
of the leading role that the European Union can and
should play in the country, in accordance with the
European vision offered to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The European Union is stepping up its political, humane
and financial commitment to the country. The Office of
the Special Representative of the European Union has
been considerably strengthened in its regional presence
and the rule of law. Mr. Peter Sarensen, Special
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, enjoys our full support.

The reconfiguration of the European Union-led
force Operation Althea (EUF OR Althea), resulting from
a calm and stable environment, has made it possible
to reduce the forces stationed there to 600 persons
and to focus them on capacity-building and training.
The Security Council must acknowledge that change,
the nature of EUFOR Althea in the autumn, when it
scrutinizes the role of the mission. EUFOR Althea still
has a residual executive mandate to support the abilities
of the country's authorities to maintain security as the
situation may require.

The Bosnian authorities have always been able to
ensure security, and therefore do not need the European
military presence for that purpose, as is regularly
recalled in the reports of the Operation Commander.
The activities of EUFOR Althea in its drawdown phase
must continue to complement those of other actors on
the ground, particularly the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which has deployed
its second largest mission covering a broad range of
activities, such as governance, the rule of law, respect
for human rights and the management of arms stocks
and munitions surpluses. In that area, the OSCE should
retain the leading role; a proliferation of actors would
be counterproductive.

The reconfiguration of the Office of the High
Representative is being considered, including by the
European Union, which I would remind the Council
contributes more than 53 per cent to the budget of the
Office. These considerations do not reflect a positive
assessment of the political situation; quite the opposite,
continuing political difficulties require us to rethink
and adjust our strategy. Maintaining at any price an
approach dating from the 1990s does not serve Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We would like to reduce the Office
to a scale consonant with its residual responsibilities
by strengthening its transparency and complementary
nature with the Office of the EU. The current
Government crisis reminds us that it is high time to
change our approach to ensure that Bosnian politicians
shoulder their responsibilities. When they do, the role
of the High Representative must be strictly limited to
the essential core of his mission within the framework
of the civil tranche of the Dayton Peace Agreement.

