Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
Brazil for convening this important debate, which of
course goes to the heart of the United Nations role and
responsibilities to help foster conditions for peace,
stability, prosperity and economic opportunity for all
Member States and their peoples.

All speakers today have reaffirmed that peace,
security and development are inextricably linked and
require a comprehensive approach. The Security
Council has an organic and decisive role to play in that.
We see constantly how the lack of development
opportunities is one of the fundamental underlying
causes of conflict. We have all heard the statistics and
are familiar with them - no low-income, fragile or
conflict-affected country has yet achieved a single
Millennium Development Goal. This fact should be
compelling. Lack of development is itself an important
contributor to conflict.

When the Council seeks to fulfil its
responsibilities under the Charter it must be fully
appraised of the root causes of the conflicts before it.
The Council must continually seek fresh approaches to
interact and work within the United Nations system,
including with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
and institutional financial bodies, in order to fulfil its
own responsibilities. This is needed not only during the
post-conflict peacebuilding phase, but also as part of
the Council's preventive diplomacy tool kit and in its
mandate formulation.

Inclusive economic development can help to
prevent conflict and its recurrence, as has been stated.
Australia has learned from its own work on peace and
security issues, particularly in our own region, the
importance of taking this comprehensive, whole-of-
Government approach that combines development
assistance with defence, law enforcement and
diplomatic resources.

The Council is obviously not the place to take on
the core business of development, and no one is
arguing that it should. Various actors must play to their
mandates, strengths and comparative advantages. The
General Assembly, United Nations committees, United
Nations agencies, Member States and others must all
do a better job in meeting development goals.

The Council should continue to mandate
peacekeeping operations, support peacebuilding
activities from the earliest stages of planning and
implementation, and give this due attention in the
renewal of mission mandates. It should continue to
mandate integrated missions to ensure coherent
approaches. It should encourage coordination and
coherence within mission structures and between
missions and other actors. We also need better
definition of roles and responsibilities within the
United Nations system in key peacebuilding sectors. To
properly consider development issues, the Council
needs access, as we know, to contextual socio-
economic information, and we welcome the Council's
request that the Secretary-General include this
information in reporting to it.

As mentioned by the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Permanent Representative of
Rwanda, the Commission is a unique organ within the
United Nations that brings together security and
development actors. It has a key role to play in
coordination and in sharing lessons and best practice.
We welcome the Council's intention to make greater
use of the advisory role of the PBC. We hope that can
be strengthened, and we certainly welcome steps to
include the participation of PBC country-specific
configuration chairs in Council briefings and informal
interactive dialogues. This is a relationship that we all
need to work at. Australia also encourages greater
coordination between the Council and the World Bank,
as we have seen today. And we support the comments
made by the representative of South Africa on the
important role of regional institutions.

Whether we are helping with the immediate task
of restoring the rule of law, facilitating basic service
delivery or helping build stable institutions for
governance and economic growth, obviously we must
do so with a view to promoting local leadership and
ownership and inclusiveness, particularly of women
and youth. We will not have security unless we give
balance to promoting development in urban and rural
settings alike. As others have said, it is important to
identify from the beginning those activities that are
most relevant to securing long-term stability and
security, and we agree strongly with comments made
by others about the importance of security sector
reform and the rule of law.

Briefly, I will mention youth unemployment and
the management of natural resources. As we all know
and see today, youth unemployment can potentially be
one of the most destabilizing elements in any society.
We must handle this not only through supply-side
activities - training and skills development - but
through generating demand. That is easy to say. United
Nations agencies and the banks need to give continuing
priority to finding creative and effective ways to draw
young people into productive society.

We will also not have security unless we ensure
sound management of natural resources. As has been
pointed out, in so many countries resource wealth has
not translated into stability, and resources have had a
particular role in fuelling a large number of conflicts.
The so-called paradox of plenty is something with
which we are all familiar, but little has been done in a
coordinated way to see what it means and what can be
done about it. This is something that the United
Nations has yet to grapple with effectively.

The Intergovernmental Forum on Mining,
Minerals, Metals and Sustainable Development,
chaired by Malawi, has done good work, including on
guidelines, and we welcome the fact that sustainable
mining is one of the themes to be addressed at this
year's session of the Commission on Sustainable
Development.

In the meantime, much can also be achieved at
the national level, and the onus does not rest solely
with the host country. In many cases, it cannot easily
do so. It is a growing priority in Australia's own
development assistance to work with countries on
natural resource management, including now in Africa.
I will stop here without going into detail, but my
written statement will say more about that.

In concluding, I would like to reiterate the
Secretary-General's own call for stronger coherence by
the United Nations across the security/development
spectrum and stronger coordination with other actors.
It is imperative, as we know, that we turn this enhanced
coherence and coordination into a reality in the
interests of the huge vulnerable communities of the
world - most compellingly, the 1.5 billion people who
live in countries affected by recurrent cycles of
violence and are living with that violence today.

