Mr. Malmierca Diaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
First and foremost, I would like to welcome the
participation in this debate of the President-elect of the
brotherly Republic of Haiti, Mr. Rene Pre'val. On
behalf of the Cuban people and Government, I reiterate
to Mr. Preval our message of congratulations and
friendship for the important and historic victory he
achieved in the recent elections.

The Cuban delegation also wishes to express its
satisfaction at seeing you, Minister Taiana, presiding
over the meeting. Your attitude of respect towards
Latin America and your tireless efforts to promote
Argentina's legitimate interests are held in very high
regard by our country. I take this opportunity also to
commend the Argentine delegation for the outstanding
manner in which it has presided over the Security
Council's work during the month of March.

Haiti, cradle of the liberation struggles against
colonialism in the Americas and the first independent
black republic in Latin America and the Caribbean, is
today a country ignored by the international
community. That Caribbean country is suffering greatly
from poverty and structural underdevelopment. It is
one of the most telling examples of the terrible
consequences of colonialism and neocolonialism, the
current unjust and exclusive international order, and
the continued interventionism that has characterized its
turbulent republican history.

When the situation of Haiti is addressed in the
United Nations, the focus is almost exclusively on
security issues, and, despite the urgent attention that is
required to address the serious structural, economic
and social problems that plague the country, the later
are, for all practical purposes, ignored or minimized.
Peace and security in that nation require, first of all,
the eradication of poverty and underdevelopment.
There cannot be peace without development nor
development without peace.
With renewed hope, the international community
must take advantage of the success of the elections
held on 7 February last in Haiti. Foreign interests from
well-known countries conspired to make the process
collapse. But the Haitian people took to the streets and
thwarted the plot - clear evidence that they are ready
to demand, by any means, that their legitimate right to
self-determination be respected.

Cuba, which supports and will always support the
right of peoples to self-determination, wishes to
highlight the determination of the noble people of Haiti
to defuse current tensions and to undertake a process of
national dialogue and reconciliation. Likewise, my
delegation wishes to underscore the support and efforts
of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the
Association of Caribbean States to achieve sustainable
peace and development in Haiti.

However, much remains to be done before
stability and progress can be achieved in the sisterly
Republic of Haiti. That will be possible only if its
economic and social development are promoted, its
human resources trained and its infrastructure built.
The international community and the international
institutions are in duty bound to contribute massively,
increase their assistance and fulfil their financial and
human commitments to that Caribbean country so as to
achieve economic and social rehabilitation and national
reconciliation in Haiti.

My country takes this opportunity to welcome the
recently announced initiative by the President of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Mr. Hugo Chavez
Frias, to incorporate Haiti in the Petrocaribe
Programme, through which that Caribbean nation will
be able to purchase crude oil and refined products
under preferential financial terms. That decision is a
clear example of solidarity that should be imitated by
others.

The need to show true solidarity becomes even
more evident if we analyse some of the statistics of that
brotherly Caribbean country. More than 80 per cent of
the more than 8 million Haitians live in poverty, two-
thirds are unemployed, life expectancy is under 52
years, and 48 out of every 100 inhabitants are illiterate.
In Haiti there are only 2.5 doctors for every 100,000
inhabitants. The number of HIV/AIDS cases is the
largest of all Caribbean States. Death during childbirth
is the second leading cause of death among women,
and almost half of the population suffers from
malnutrition.

Cuba, a small country which has been subjected
for over 45 years to the most brutal and merciless
economic, financial and commercial blockade ever
imposed on any nation, has maintained and enhanced
its cooperation with that fraternal Caribbean country,
providing the Haitian people with doctors, teachers,
technicians and development assistance.

My country cooperates with Haiti in different
sectors, primarily in the area of health care. During
more than six years of cooperation in the medical field,
2,246 Cuban health-care specialists have worked in
Haiti. Their work has made it possible to hold more
than 8 million consultations. They have given 865,202
doses of vaccine, and they have assisted in more than
70,000 births and performed 109,000 surgical
operations. All told, these actions have saved more
than 180,000 lives.

In spite of the critical situation that this country
has experienced, Cubans providing assistance strictly
observe the criteria of non-interference in Haitian
internal domestic affairs and have remained in their
posts. Our medical brigade in particular, made up of
399 health practitioners, spread out among the 10
departments of that country, has been an example of
selfless cooperation, saving lives under the harshest of
conditions. Recently, 514 Haitians have undergone
surgery in Cuba within the framework of Operacion
Milagro, enabling them to regain their eyesight.

Cuban cooperation with Haiti goes beyond direct
medical care for the population. It includes the
continued training of human resources, allowing for
short- and medium-term capacity-building. Currently,
there are 900 Haitian students in Cuba, 613 of whom
are attending the Latin-American School of Medicine.
This year, 121 medical students are expected to
graduate.

We are not trying to give lessons or to boast
about what we have done. What Cuba is doing today
for Haiti is but a modest example of how much more
could be achieved in that country through cooperation
and international assistance, mainly by those States
that have more economic and financial resources than
our small country does.

We are convinced that much more could be done
for Haiti within the United Nations as well. We hope
that the presence at this meeting of representatives of
several specialized agencies will contribute to the
devising of coordinated, long-term strategies that are
commensurate with the real needs of the Haitian
people.

I would like to conclude by reiterating that Haiti
can always count on our unwavering determination to
continue strengthening the spirit of solidarity of, and
increasing the assistance provided by, the Cuban
people and Government. In so doing, we are simply
fulfilling a duty and honouring our debt of gratitude to
the Caribbean peoples, and particularly to the Haitian
people, who have always made clear their steadfast
friendship and solidarity with my country.
