Mr. Ybaflez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by endorsing the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

I would like to thank the Venezuelan presidency for
having convened this open debate. The chosen subject
is fully topical and relevant.

In February 2015, at the initiative of the Chinese
presidency, we met to reflect on the importance of the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace
and security (see S/PV.7389). I had an opportunity
then to refer to a number of points, to which I now
only enumerate: the full validity of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations 70 years
after they were drafted; the importance of the Preamble
of the Charter, whose values complement the triptych
that guides the actions of the Organization; and the
firm commitment of my country with all ofthem, which
is reflected in the initiative promoted by Spain on a
statement delivered to mark the seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations, adopted by consensus by the
General Assembly, by which all Members renewed their
commitment to the Charter as a whole, and in particular
to its essential core made up of the values, purposes and
principles contained therein.

We note that local and regional conflicts are
increasing and that the action of the Organization in
maintaining international peace and security is not
what we would wish. There is therefore an urgent
need to continue to work to develop instruments that
will fully guarantee and uphold the values, purposes
and principles established in the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as to adapt those instruments to the
most fluid and complex international environment
since the post-Second World War period.

The observer of the African Union said a year ago,

"The question today is how to ensure that we
will fulfil the gap between the principles set forth
and the results we achieve each time that action is
taken." (S/PV. 7389, p. 67)

I agree. We must focus the debate in the realm of the
practical, so that it is productive. We have not we heard
discordant voices, then or two day, questioning the
validity of the purposes and principles of the Charter.
We appreciate the nuances with which each Member
State proclaims its attachment to them depending on its
history or international profile, but, again, we note no
rebuttal as to validity. However, there are differences
when it comes time to translating our words into
action - some concern nuance, but others are more
substantive. Debates like this should serve to identify
those discrepancies and to try to expand and strengthen
the consensus on the practical application of the values,
purposes and principles of the Charter. To that end, I
would like today to share with members a few thoughts.

The San Francisco Charter is the basic norm
governing coexistence in the international community.
Among its purposes and principles, as recalled by
the concept note (S/2016,103, annex), respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States is a crucial
safeguard for peace and stability. Violation thereof
inevitably results in chaos, violence and a return to
a state of nature of the past. The 1975 Helsinki Final
Act reaffirmed respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity as a fundamental principle for cooperation
and security in Europe. I would like to reiterate the full
validity of that concept here today.

International peace and security are inextricably
linked to respect for human rights, as the Secretary-
General said earlier. They are two sides of the same
coin, which is perhaps the reason that the drafters of the
Charter focused on it: safeguarding future generations
from the scourge of war and reaffirming faith in the
fundamental rights of man and in the dignity and
worth of the human being. Increasingly, we see the
close relationship between those two pillars of the
Organization, as well as the relationship of each one of
them with the third, namely, development. We need to
maximize the synergies that exist among those various
concepts. Initiatives such as the Human Rights Up Front
initiative, which highlights the relationship between
human rights violations and the risk of conflict, deserve
our full support.

In addition, human rights issues need to be given
due weight on the agenda of the Security Council,
which must devote increasing attention to such issues.
During our presidency in October 2015, we tried to
give the utmost relevance to the high-level review
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. We believe that the high level of participation
and commitment on the part of those involved in that
exercise explains, in large measure, the successful
result - in the form of an agenda that is essential for
the maintenance of international peace and security.

It is crucial that we work to develop international
law so that all States, organizations and international
entities operate under the rule of law and the principles
of legality, while also respecting fundamental human
rights. We must also concentrate on improving
the international legal architecture. That requires
making the legal order - articulated around the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations - applicable to all States, organizations and
individuals. Those purposes and principles need to be
implemented in a determined international context,
which in 2016 is not the same as in 1945. The nature of
conflict is different today. A few decades ago threats
to national sovereignty came primarily from without.
Today, they primarily come from within, and they are
rooted in ethnic and identity issues, which undermine
collective rights, respect for democracy and individual
liberties and rights.

The barbarism of terrorist groups, non-State armed
actors and other groups also represents a serious threat.
In order to preserve State sovereignty, efforts need to
be made to respect those principles of law. The United
Nations needs to pay greater attention to emerging
crises and to the factors underlying those conflicts and
their root causes. The panels that were created last year
in order to evaluate and review peace operations, the
peacekeeping architecture and the issue of women and
peace and security are instrumental in that regard.

The Secretary-General's plan of action to prevent
violent extremism is also an example to follow, in
as much as its multidimensional approach places
prevention at the heart of that proposal, by reinforcing
good governance, representative institutions, political
participation, quality education, decent work,
particularly for youth, and respect for the rights that
account for such an important component in that
strategy for preventing violent extremism. Spain also
attaches great importance to initiatives involving
preventive diplomacy on the national level. Currently,
we are working on the organization of a conference on
preventative diplomacy in the Middle East and North
Africa, which will take up, from a regional perspective,
the roles that democratic governance, civil society and
the participation of women play in the prevention of
conflicts in the Mediterranean.

Occasionally, the lack of capacity or willingness
on the part of some Governments to ensure the rule of
law and respect for human rights creates a culture that
readily promotes humanitarian conflict and crises, such
as that which is now affecting millions of individuals in
Syria, Yemen, Darfur, the Sudan, South Sudan, Burundi
and so many other areas of the world. The consequences
are felt in neighbouring countries. We must be very
clear with regard to that problem. Sovereignty entails

responsibilities, such as protecting civilians from the
risk of becoming the victims of mass atrocities. When
States do not shoulder those responsibilities, that
puts peace at risk. In this debate, the responsibility to
protect is particularly relevant in that regard. It should
be promoted, while also respecting the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, particularly when States
are not up to the task of exercising their responsibilities.

In accordance with the Outcome Document of the
2005 World Summit (General Assembly resolution 60/1), Spain is convinced that it is important to
continue building consensus around the importance
of implementing the responsibility to protect. In that
connection, in June of last year in Madrid, Chile and
Spain organized the fifth meeting of the Global Network
of the Responsibility to Protect Focal Points. We
discussed the challenges and threats facing vulnerable
communities. In December, we organized with Chile
an Arria-formula debate on the responsibility to protect
and non-State actors, the first of that kind on that
subject for the Security Council.

In other situations that implys a threat to
international peace and security, the Charter offers an
entire series ofmeasures, peaceful measures for settling
differences, and measures through the International
Criminal Court. Measures can range from mediation
to coercive efforts even. All of those measures are
consistent with the objective of carrying out the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and promoting their respect. What appears to
us as incoherent is inaction, especially on the part of
the Council, which is primarily charged with ensuring
the maintenance of international peace and security.

Too often, the Council has not been up to the
task of fulfilling its responsibility, because one of the
permanent members used the right of veto or threatened
to use it. Occasionally, the simple threat of using the
right of veto discourages the search for solutions and
contributes to the stagnation of conflicts. That paralysis
only prolongs the suffering of civilians and diminishes
the credibility of multilateralism as a means to face
the challenges of international security. The most
glaring example, in that regard, is the tragic situation
in Syria. Spain beseeches all the permanent members
of the Security Council to commit individually and
collectively to refrain from the right of veto when there
is evidence of atrocity crimes. Spain has supported and
signed the code of conduct proposed by Liechtenstein
and the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, which calls on all members of the Council to
refrain from using the right of veto in cases involving
mass atrocities or crimes against humanity.

To conclude, I call for a collective effort to continue
building on that which unites us, which is the validity
of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Those are essential to the future of all
States and States' security, both within and outside of
their borders. My country will continue to work with
all Members ofthe Organization to uphold those rights.

