Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I
will be brief. I want to thank you, Mr. President, and the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom for
their briefings on the Security Council visit to Colombia.
We also welcome the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations, Ambassador Maria
Emma Mejia Velez.

The Security Council's visit to Colombia is historic
for the Council. We meet in the Council almost daily
to meet the fundamental responsibility entrusted to us
by the States Members of the United Nations - the
maintenance of international peace and security. On
some occasions, that sacred duty leads us down difficult
paths, but on others like this one it unites us in a
fraternal bond.

Today, Colombia symbolizes the importance of
the Council for the world by maintaining unity while
respecting the sovereign decisions of States and firmly
supporting the peacebuilding process. The frank
dialogue with President Juan Manuel Santos Calderon,
his Ministers and Government representatives at all
levels allowed us to fully understand both the great
achievements that have been made in the process
as the challenges to the implementation of the Final
Peace Agreement.

You, Mr. President, have identified many such
challenges, and we agreement with your assessment.
Some of those challenges include meteorological
conditions, the remoteness of certain locations and the
building of sites for depositing weapons. Additionally,
listening to the leaders and members of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia - Ejercito
Popular (FARC-EP) has allowed us to understand
their concerns and fears for the future, as well as their
decision to abandon armed resistance, lay down their
weapons and take up their struggle in the political
arena instead. Throughout, the Government and the
FARC-EP have put their doubts behind them, and the
commitment, determination and courage of both sides
is evident. We note with great satisfaction the amicable
interactions and environment between the parties.

I recall that during our meeting with members of
Congress, we all pointed out the importance of political
leadership during peace processes. Imust commend both
the political leadership of President Santos Calderon
and the leadership and political resolve of the FARC-
EP to embark upon this difficult path. During the same
meeting, one of the congresswomen noted that there is
a third party to the peace process - the victims, the
third vertex of the virtuous triangle. The forgiveness of
victims that have opted for the peace process, despite
its difficulties, is fundamental. That virtuous triangle
is the secret to the success of Colombia's peace process.

The Final Peace Agreement is a comprehensive
and complex agreement that establishes a framework
of responsibilities and measures to ensure effective
reintegration and reconciliation. It also creates
opportunities for resolving the structural issues that led
to the armed conflict, such as integrated rural reform.
One of the most concerning consequences, as was
mentioned, is the assassination of community leaders.
We applaud the decision of President Santos Calderen
of creating a commission to ensure the safety of the
population, but also of presiding over it himself and
personally overseeing its success.

Finally, I want to emphasize the support of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
for the peace process and to highlight the efforts of the
United Nations team led by Mr. Jean Arnault. I also
want to pay a special tribute to Colombia's Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Maria Angela Holguin Cuellar, and
to Colombia's Permanent Representative to the United
Nations, Ambassador Mejia Velez, two women who
have worked diligently to guide this difficult process.

We congratulate you, Mr. President, on the manner
in which you have led the Council on this mission. I
think I speak for everyone in saying that we stand behind
all that you have said. You have admirably discharged
the lofty duties of President of the Security Council,
and I would like to very sincerely thank you. I also wish
to thank the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom for having co-led the process. His support has
been invaluable to the success of our mission. We know
that the road ahead is difficult, but the Council is firmly
committed to supporting Colombia, upon their request.

