Mr. Bin Momen: (Bangladesh) We thank the
Uruguayan presidency for organizing today's open
debate to coincide with the first anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 2286 (2016). We also thank
the Secretary-General for his informative report
(S/2017/4l4) and for his succinct recommendations
under his three priority areas relating to the protection
of civilians.

We agree with his views regarding the inevitability
ofcivilian casualties in wars and armed conflicts. As one
of the leading troop-contributing countries, Bangladesh
takes a pragmatic approach to the protection-of-
civilians mandate in both practice and preparedness,
while adhering to the principles of peacekeeping
operations. Being part of most of the highly challenging
United Nations peacekeeping missions, we have seen
the relevance of the protection-of-civilians mandate at
first hand on the ground, and we have usually tackled
it with professionalism and some degree of creativity,
even when the mandate was not laid out in clear, specific
terms. Our endorsement of the Kigali Principles on
the Protection of Civilians was largely guided by such
considerations. As announced by our Prime Minister,
Sheikh Hasina, at the peacekeeping summit in New
York, we remain committed to further mainstreaming
the protection of civilians in peacekeeping training
programmes, designed for our troops and police.

In line with our previous statements in the
Security Council, we take this opportunity to further
elaborate on five points. First, there needs to be greater
emphasis on the strategic assessment of threats to
civilians, so that the Security Council can clearly set
out its expectations regarding the implementation of
peacekeeping mandates to protect civilians. To that
effect, it is imperative to have meaningful coordination
and consultation among the Security Council, troop-
and police-contributing countries, the Secretariat, and
United Nations country teams, with a view to improving
guidance to the missions and promoting a mission-wide
coherent approach to protecting civilians.

Secondly, in order to be effective, the protection-of-
civilians mandates require the continued political
support of the Security Council, the main parties to the
conflict and the commitment of the host Governments
in particular. Protection-of-civilians mandates need to
be backed by viable strategies and adequate resources,
so that they do not fall through when faced with
belligerence from the parties to the conflict or the
lack of will or capacity of the host Governments to
cooperate. There is need for appropriate investment in
building missions' capacities for, inter alia, situational
awareness, strategic planning, threat assessment and
mitigation. There may be scope for peacekeeping
missions to contribute to the capacity-building of
national authorities and other local actors in protecting
civilians. Such scenarios need to be carefully mapped
out and walked through in the course of mandate design
and implementation.

Thirdly, measures to ensure the safe passage of
the relevant humanitarian personnel and supplies to
civilians in need and the addressing of acts of violence,
attacks and threats against medical care in armed
conflict are critical for the protection of civilians. We
subscribe to the notion that respect for medical care in
armed conflict needs to be promoted during times of
both peace and conflict. There is a need for sustained
engagement with the parties to armed conflict so
as to ensure that preventive measures can minimize
harm to civilians and that medical care is included in
the planning and conduct of hostilities. In the case of
specific incidents reported and backed by evidence,
investigation and accountability must be pursued as the
most effective deterrence measure.
Fourthly, the ongoing efforts to end violence
against women and children in armed conflict must
enlist the support of all State and non-State actors.
The underlying causes of forced displacements during
armed conflict need to be addressed through inclusive
multidimensional and comprehensive approaches.
Medical facilities, educational institutions, specialist
schools and places of worship should be kept out of
harm's way in the planning and conduct of hostilities.
The use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects
needs to be avoided in populated areas, considering their
humanitarian impact. In certain contexts, peacekeepers
and humanitarian workers can operate in tandem to
gather information, raise awareness and respond to the
needs of those affected.

Lastly, ensuring accountability for serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law is a crucial element for enhancing compliance
with that law, spreading the message of zero-tolerance
and generally strengthening the protection of civilians
and medical care in armed conflict. The Security
Council should continue to use the tools at its disposal
to that effect, including by providing consistent support
to the International Criminal Court so as to enable it to
deliver on its mandate.

The security and protection of civilians in today's
asymmetric conflict environment are increasingly seen
as linked to the legitimacy and credibility of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and humanitarian
assistance. The protection of civilians through military
means alone will always fall short unless vigorously
supported by meaningful political processes to prevent
conflicts and sustain peace.

