Mr. Mbalati (South Africa): Let me join previous
speakers in thanking the delegation of the Republic of
Korea for convening this important debate. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General; the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay; and
the Director for International Law and Cooperation
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
Mr. Spoerri, for their statements. We are grateful to His
Excellency Mr. Kim Sung-hwan, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Korea, and the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan, Rwanda and Brazil for
their presence and their presentations.

At the outset, my delegation wishes to acknowledge
that the United Nations in general and the Security
Council in particular have made significant strides in
an effort to ensure that civilians are protected in times
of armed conflict. While significant progress has been
registered, particularly since the adoption of resolution
1265 (1999), challenges persist.

South Africa agrees that it is extremely important
for the Council to periodically evaluate our response
to the protection of civilians for the purposes of
improving, adjusting or eliminating adverse practices.
Protecting civilians from the scourge of conflict is
at the core of the mandate of the Security Council,
namely, the maintenance of international peace and
security. Surely, if the Council, the United Nations
and its partners do not play their roles in protecting all
civilians, we will have failed communities.

The Council has made notable contributions through
the inclusion of protection-of-civilian mandates in its
decisions. Peacekeeping operations such as the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan and
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
both include that component. In addition, several other
United Nations peacekeeping operations, including the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, the African Union Mission in Somalia and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, have developed
comprehensive protection-of-civilian strategies. That
has put into operation the commitment made by the
Council in resolution 1894 (2009).

While making such important advances in
protecting civilians, we must at the same time ensure
that those efforts are not lost in furthering the objectives
of the scope of that noble and moral endeavour. On the
contrary, we must ensure that the protection of civilians
is not selectively pursued, as that would erode the
credibility of the Security Council.

A further challenge relates to the abuse of
protection-of-civilian mandates, which erodes not only
the credibility of the Council when it acts but also its
ability to act. Abusing the authorization granted by the
Council to advance a political or regime-change agenda
is unfortunate. That often creates mistrust within the
Security Council and has led to paralysis and inaction
on its part, particularly when faced with similar
challenges. Moreover, the experience has prevented
the Council not only from acting resolutely but also
from advancing the protection of civilian agenda.
The responsibility for such a failure must therefore
be borne by those that abuse the trust of the Council
with seemingly creative interpretations of protection
mandates.

Another challenge relates to the use of unmanned
aerial vehicles against human targets, which inevitably
leads to the killing of innocent civilians if not properly
managed. That concern is highlighted in the report of
the Secretary-General (see S/2012/376) and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi
Pillay is on the record stating that drone attacks raise
serious questions about compliance with international
law.

Those entrusted with the protection of civilians have
a stake in ensuring that our actions do not undermine
the very objectives that we seek to advance. There must
therefore be scrupulous compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law in carrying out
such mandates.

United Nations peacekeeping operations are
increasingly tasked with mandates to protect civilians
under imminent threat. Peacekeeping operations
mandated with protecting civilians must be implemented
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as the guiding
principles of such operations. Peacekeeping missions
with such mandates must carry out their task without
prejudice to the sovereignty of the host Government
and its primary responsibility in that regard. The
implementation of such mandates should be supported
by a comprehensive peace process that involves all
stakeholders and is underpinned by national ownership.

As my delegation consistently urges, United
Nations peacekeepers should always remain impartial in
carrying out their mandated tasks. Mandates to protect
civilians under imminent threat could be compromised
if the United Nations were perceived as biased and
found to be unable to perform its protection mandate
due to the lack of requisite resources and capabilities,
in particular air assets.

Ensuring the long-term protection of civilians
requires a mission-wide response and strategy. While
peacekeepers must assist States in providing immediate
protection for Civilians in the short term, the African
Union and its subregional organizations have identified
security sector reform and the building of national
institutions in the areas of the rule of law and justice
as critical to ensuring the long-term protection of
civilians.

In conclusion, we wish to underline that it remains
the primary responsibility of States to protect the
civilians within their borders. Armed opposition groups
also bear responsibility for ensuring that unarmed
civilians are protected. The failure by both State and
non-State actors to uphold that responsibility should
not go unpunished.

Accountability must first and foremost be sought
at the national level. Failing that, the international
community has the collective responsibility to act using
the mechanisms at its disposal, including independent
fact-finding missions and commissions of inquiry, as
well as the International Criminal Court.

We would also like to pay tribute to those
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers who lost their
lives while protecting civilians, as well as those who
continue to assist civilians affected by conflict.

