Mr. Rassoul (Afghanistan): First of all, let me
extend my congratulations to you, Minister Okada, and
your country for assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month, and thank you for convening
this meeting and inviting me to participate. I would
also like to thank His Excellency the Secretary-General
for his presence here today.

The rebuilding of societies emerging from
conflict is one of the biggest challenges to the
maintenance of international peace and security and
thus among the most important functions of this
Council and this Organization. It is also of central
5
importance to Afghanistan, which struggles on a daily
basis to establish peace and security.

In Afghanistan, reconstruction and stabilization
efforts began immediately after the fall of the Taliban
at the end of 2001. When we first gathered in
December 2001 in Bonn, Germany, we began a process
that, in five years, would put Afghanistan back on the
path towards an enduring stability. Though we were
astonishingly successful in achieving the benchmarks
set by the Bonn process, we soon acknowledged that
further efforts would be necessary to address the
magnitude of the challenges we faced. In Tokyo in
2002, London in 2006 and Paris in 2008, we adapted
our plans to emerging realities and extended our efforts
towards establishing a secure, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan.

After three decades of war, Afghanistan's
economy was decimated, the State had disintegrated,
and the society was bereft of infrastructure or even the
most basic necessities of life. Millions had died.
Millions more were forced to flee from their country -
among them, a large number of technocrats and
educated Afghans.

Continuous conflict during this period crippled
the social fabric of the country. Further, the ongoing
political and social instability bred networks of
terrorists, extremists, criminals, drug dealers and
opportunistic regional elements that depend on
insecurity in Afghanistan and the region. A nexus of
drugs, extremism and crime fed on the chaos and
anarchy that now seriously threatens our efforts to
build peace.

Despite the challenges, we have achieved
remarkable success in nine years, establishing a
convincing basis for optimism for the future of the
country. Afghans have forcefully renounced the
totalitarian rule of the Taliban and established a
Government through three successful elections,
including the most recent presidential election, run
entirely by Afghans. The Afghan Government is
becoming more efficient and effective every day, and is
increasing its capacity to provide governance and
services to the people. More than three quarters of
Afghans now have access to basic health care. Millions
of children now have the opportunity to attend school,
many for the first time.

We have addressed the legacy of violence through
a comprehensive disarmament and reintegration

programme that has successfully reintegrated
thousands of former fighters into society. In particular,
I would like to recognize and offer thanks for the
efforts of Japan in that area, including through the
financing of programmes for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and the disbandment
of illegal and armed groups, as well as for hosting a
comprehensive conference on peace and reconciliation
in Tokyo last November. In addition, we have built and
continue to improve the Afghan National Army and
Police through recruiting, training and equipping. They
are beginning to take primary responsibility for
providing security for the people and the country.

In rebuilding Afghanistan's shattered
infrastructure, we have built thousands of miles of
roads with the help of the Council, as well as hundreds
of schools and clinics, local wells, and improved
irrigation systems. We have seen immense economic
growth. This year, for the first time, the Afghan
Government has taken in more than $1 billion in
revenues. The average Afghan income has jumped six-
fold in the past four years.

Change has also come in ways that are not
visible. The Afghan people are more vocal, more
engaged and more involved in the future of their
country than ever before. We have a Vibrant media, an
active civil society and well-informed citizens. Social
structures are beginning to re-knit and a feeling of
national unity is emerging.

We are proud of our accomplishments to date, but
we still face daunting challenges. Security remains
Afghanistan's number one challenge. Terrorists are still
intent on jeopardizing our progress and are trying to
take Afghanistan back to the days of tyranny and
oppression. In stabilizing Afghanistan, we know that
military means are essential. Nonetheless, they are not
the only answer. That is why we have embarked upon a
comprehensive strategy that includes military, political
and economic efforts.

As an important element of our security strategy,
the role of international forces and the manner in which
they operate are crucial. More needs to be done to
ensure the protection of civilian populations. We
emphasize the need for the utmost care and precision
during combat operations to avoid civilian casualties. It
is also essential that international forces conduct their
duties with strict adherence to cultural sensitivities and
in close coordination with Afghan security forces. By
the same token, we appreciate the new approach of
NATO Commander General Stanley McChrystal, which
places added emphasis on the protection of the civilian
population.

To achieve success in defeating terrorism and
improving security, more focus is required to address
the main sources of insecurity. The problem of
insecurity will not be solved so long as terrorist
sanctuaries and safe havens in the region continue to
provide terrorists with ideological, financial and
logistical support.

Regional cooperation is another essential element
in achieving stability in Afghanistan. We continue our
collaboration with regional countries - bilaterally,
trilaterally and through other forums - to overcome
the challenges in Afghanistan and in the region.

Going forward, we must work to ensure the
sustainability of our progress economically, politically
and socially. Much remains to be done. We must build
the capacity of the Afghan Government and the
strength of its institutions so that it can stand on its
own feet. We still must focus more on improving good
governance and fighting corruption. We must guarantee
the long-term security of the Afghan people and more
fully win their confidence. And we must foster the
social well-being that is necessary for stability and
peace.

A few months ago, at the beginning of his new
term, President Karzai proposed a strategy that was
subsequently endorsed by the international community
in London at the end of January. That strategy is
focused on building lasting, sustainable peace and
stability in the coming three to five years through the
Afghanization of national ownership and leadership, by
empowering and engaging Afghans themselves, by
promoting long-term socio-economic development, and
by undertaking new regional cooperation.

First, if peace is to be sustainable, Afghans
should be involved in their own security. The Afghan
national security forces will play a central role. In the
coming three to five years, intensified training and
recruitment will enable those forces to begin to take
the primary responsibility for the security and defence
of the country and its citizens, thereby allowing the
international community's role to evolve from a
primary to a supporting one.
10-31721

Secondly, the Government of Afghanistan will
engage more fully with all Afghan people and address
their concerns in order to strengthen national unity and
social stability. Improved capacity will allow the
Government of Afghanistan to address corruption,
strengthen good governance, end the culture of
impunity and better serve the Afghan people.

Thirdly, we will offer former combatants and
those willing to join the peace process a chance for a
peaceful life and a decent future through a
reconciliation and reintegration process. That is a good
alternative for ending the continuing insecurity in parts
of the conflict and an important way of isolating
extremists and terrorists and ensuring that Afghans will
continue to choose peace over violence.

Fourthly, although those elements will promote
peace and stabilization, the only way to guarantee the
sustainability of progress is to anchor society on a
foundation of long-term socio-economic development.
The Government of Afghanistan must be able to fund
its programmes, support its people and decrease its
dependence on international aid. Job creation and
agricultural development in particular are central
elements that will cement short-term gains, improve
social cohesiveness and promote political
normalization. In addition, there must be a focus on
education to help build capacity, promote social
stability and confront extremism.

A crucial piece of the London strategy is the
central role of the Government of Afghanistan in
coordinating and leading those efforts as Afghans take
greater responsibility for their country. With regard to
development assistance, a much better job is required
to improve its efficiency. To date, only 20 per cent of
such aid has gone through Afghanistan's national
budget; 80 per cent of assistance has been channelled
on a bilateral basis. In short, we must Afghanize
development priorities.

Through improved coordination, we should work
to address parallel or competing governance structures,
which do more harm than good.

President Karzai's new Afghanization strategy is
built upon a workable and reliable partnership between
the Government of Afghanistan and the international
community. My Government and the Afghan people
are very grateful for the continuing commitment and
generosity of our international partners and friends. We

recognize that a partnership based on respect and
realism is Vital to our success.

Understandably, we have different expectations,
different timelines and different priorities. We can
avoid fragmentation and confusion only through
mutual understanding, open communication and an
awareness of our shared goals. Our efforts will take
time to bear fruit. This process cannot be hurried. In
addition to short-term measures, long-term
development supported by a committed partnership
with the international community is the key to a
healthy and sustainable Afghan society that is safe
from the risk of recurring conflict.

