Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's meeting.
We also thank Mr. Raisedon Zenenga, Ms. Ursula
Mueller and Mr. Francisco Caetano Madeira for their
important briefings.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/393) highlights the important steps taken
by the Federal Government of Somalia to build a
functioning federal State. We hope that the reform
programme presented by the Government will make it
possible to move towards an inclusive policy, achieve
security and justice and bring about economic recovery
and sustainable development. We commend the
Government's financial management, which in recent
years has resulted in increased revenue. However, it is
worrisome that a large part of the population remains
vulnerable to poverty and food insecurity and that
90 per cent of households lack access to basic services,
such as education, water and sanitation.

Those challenges are compounded, inter alia, by
the persistence of violent extremism, terrorism and
armed conflict. We note with concern that Al- Shabaab's
improvised explosive device attacks increased in recent
months. We firmly condemn such terrorist attacks and
pay tribute to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Somali security forces for their
courage and sacrifice. We must remember that only
through cooperation and reconciliation will the people
of Somalia be able to confront those challenges. In
that regard, the recent steps taken by the Federal
Government and the federal member states to promote
dialogue and reconciliation, such as the meeting
in Garowe, Puntland, in January, are encouraging.
We hope that those steps will mark the beginning
of sustained political dialogue that will allow for
further progress in the implementation of political
priorities, such as the holding of elections according to
schedule, the constitutional review process, federalism
and reconciliation.

We reiterate the importance of promoting the active
participation ofwomen in the political life ofthe country,
as well as in the social and economic spheres. We hope
that the reforms to be undertaken by the Government
will include provisions with a gender perspective.

We are concerned about the grave humanitarian
situation of millions of Somalis, in particular internally
displaced persons and marginalized communities,
which could be exacerbated by the expected drought.
We believe that the international community must
increase its financial support and that it should be
complemented by predictable aid for building resilience
and for recovery efforts.

With regard to the AMISOM. joint review to assess
progress in the transition to security in Somalia, our
country supports the recommendations of the joint
review team. We believe that, at this stage, it will be
important to maintain AMISOM's troop strength, while
taking into account the current security conditions and
delays in the implementation of the transition plan. The
reconfiguration of AMISOM. and the transfer of sites to
Somali security institutions must be conducted while
taking into account the humanitarian consequences and
ensuring the protection of the civilian population.
I would like to conclude by highlighting the work
of AMISOM, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia and the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia in support ofthe efforts ofthe Somali authorities
and people to achieve peace and stability. I would also
like to highlight the efforts of the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
United Nations.

