The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, the Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belgium, Burundi,
Cameroon, Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Egypt, Finland, Germany, Ghana, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mozambique, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, South Africa,
Spain, Uganda, Ukraine, the United Republic of Tanzania
and Zimbabwe, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mesdoua
(Algeria), Mr. Moore (Bahamas), Mr. Chowdhury
(Bangladesh), Mr. Adam (Belgium), Mr. Nteturuye
(Burundi), Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon),
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia), Mr. Mwamba Kapanga
(Democratic Republic of the Congo), Mr. Aboul Gheit
(Egypt), Ms. Rasi (Finland), Mr. Kastrup (Germany),
Mr. Osei (Ghana), Mr. Sharma (India), Mr. Wibisono
(Indonesia), Mr. Ryan (Ireland), Mr. F ulci (Italy), Mr.
Takasu (Japan), Mr. Kuindwa (Kenya), Mr. Babaa
(Libyan Arab Jamahirya), Mr. Santos (Mozambique),
Mr. Powles (New Zealand), Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria),
Mr. Kolby (Norway), Mr. Montiero (Portugal),
Mr. Lee See-young (Republic of Korea),
Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda), Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone),
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Arias (Spain),
Mr. Semakula Kiwanuka (Uganda), Mr. Yel'chenko
(Ukraine), Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania) and Mr. Muchetwa (Zimbabwe) took the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in
its prior consultations.
Allow me, in my capacity as Council President, to
make a few introductory remarks.

The Council and the wider United Nations
membership have accepted the need to respond better to
the challenges that Africa presents. The Secretary-
General's report last year analysed the problems and, in
response, there have been a number of Council debates
and texts, but these have not always produced concrete
action or concrete results. So we want today to focus on
practical and operational ways to make a difference to
Africa's problems and to help Africa's renaissance.

I want today's discussion to be a genuine exchange
of ideas and views. Hence the innovative step of holding
an active discussion in this Chamber, avoiding some of
the usual time-consuming formalities. This is Why we are
also urging all speakers to confine their initial
contributions to a maximum of five minutes, and I will
try to obey that rule myself. If we all stick to this limit,
there will be a chance to come back later and respond to
what has been said by others so that we can create a more
free-flowing and constructive discussion around, I
suggest, three key questions.

First, how can we improve coordination and
cooperation between the Security Council, the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the key
subregional organizations, including coordination of joint
activity on specific issues? Secondly, how can we meet
the needs for African peacekeeping more effectively and
more quickly? Thirdly, what additional instruments can
we, as the Council, bring to bear to help solve and, where
possible, prevent conflicts in Africa?

Once all the speakers have been heard, I propose to
call on as many as there is time for who wish to speak
again. At the end of the day, I intend to sum up briefly
and draw some conclusions. To open the discussion, I am
delighted to call on the Secretary-General.


