Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish at the outset to thank the Council presidency for
having convened what we consider to be an extremely
important debate. Spain fully endorses the statement
made earlier by the representative of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the European Union.

Today's discussion joins other fairly regular
Council debates on an item of great importance, given
the scale of the problems associated with the protection
of civilians in armed conflict - whose dimensions
have in recent years become a matter of particular
concern. Much of this is due to the predominantly
internal nature of conflicts and to the fact that the
majority of conflicts continue at a low level of
intensity which inflicts the bloodiest suffering on
civilian populations, both urban and rural.

Let us recall that the main responsibility for the
protection of civilian populations, including internally
displaced persons, lies with national authorities. But
where the State in question is unable to protect civilian
populations on its territory it is incumbent on the
international community to shoulder the responsibility,
making use of appropriate diplomatic, humanitarian
and other peaceful means, in accordance with Chapters
VI and VIII of the Charter, or when appropriate making
use of enforcement measures pursuant to Chapter VII,
to help to protect populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
The outcome document of September's General
Assembly summit (General Assembly resolution 60/ 1)
set this concept out as a major advance in the action of
the international community, and we cannot fail to
welcome this.

Of particular concern is the need to ensure access
to affected populations by humanitarian personnel and
humanitarian assistance in situations in which the State
or party to the conflict responsible for providing such
access is unable or unwilling to do so. As the
Secretary-General notes in his report (S/2005/740), and
as the United Nations Emergency Relief Coordinator
has indicated, in 2004 United Nations agencies were
denied access to an estimated 10 million people in need
of assistance. Grave security conditions not only
hamper access for such assistance; often, they also
make it necessary to remove humanitarian personnel
temporarily, leaving affected populations without
support or assistance of any kind. The case of Darfur
provides a clear example of this.

At the same time, it is vital that those responsible
for committing atrocities against civilian populations
not go unpunished. Once again, it is the State in whose
jurisdiction the crimes are committed that bears
primary responsibility for ensuring that. Should such a
State be unable or unwilling to do so, the international
community must use all means at its disposal to
combat impunity for especially serious violations. Such
means include transitional justice, truth commissions,
special or joint tribunals and, in a broader framework,
the International Criminal Court, which should play -
and in certain cases already is playing - a key role in
investigating and bringing to trial the perpetrators of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.

Let me turn now to the leading role that can be
played by the International Fact-Finding Commission
created under article 90 of Additional Protocol I to the
Geneva Conventions, relating to the protection of
victims of armed conflicts - in this context, civilian
populations in particular. The Commission, whose
jurisdiction has already been accepted by 68 States, can
help ensure compliance with the rules of international
humanitarian law, in particular those relating to the
protection of the victims of armed conflict, not only
through investigation and fact-finding with respect to
alleged violations of the relevant rules, but also by
using its good offices to facilitate a return to respect
for the Geneva Conventions and the Additional
Protocol. This fully justifies the reference to the
Commission's functions in resolution 1265 (1999), the
first of the Council's resolutions on this matter.

In that regard, we welcome the visit to New York
by a delegation from the International Fact-Finding
Commission, led by its President, Sir Kenneth Keith.
We are confident that this visit will enable us all to
become familiar with the activities the Commission
can undertake, with a view to increasing the number of
States accepting the Commission's jurisdiction and
encouraging the parties concerned that they should
have recourse to it. The Commission is a unique
instrument for ensuring the proper implementation of
international humanitarian law and for helping prevent
recurrent violations of the rules governing armed
conflict.

For that reason, we believe that consideration
should be given to the establishment of formal
channels by which cooperation between the United
Nations and the International Fact-Finding
Commission can be strengthened, with a view to
realizing the potential of the Commission's activities in
terms of the work of the Organization, particularly in
the sphere of the protection of civilian populations in
armed conflict.

