Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate Kuwait and you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. You can count
on my delegation's support. We also thank Indonesia,
Ambassador Djani and all his team for the excellent
work during the previous month. We appreciate the
convening of this meeting and thank Mr. Francois
Lounceny Fall for his briefing.

We would first like to highlight the extensive use
of good offices and the work of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) in
bringing together and reaching agreement among the
various stakeholders in support of the various peace
processes under way, as well as its assistance in dealing
with situations in a complex and fragile post-electoral
context in several countries of the region. As part of
those efforts, we commend the commitment of the
Office to ensuring good coordination with regional
organizations such as the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
the Gulf of Guinea Commission and the Economic
Community of Central African States. We believe that
the presence and involvement of those organizations in
all such processes is essential in the current context.

We commend the progress made in the subregion,
such as the implementation of the ceasefire agreement
in the Congo, the consolidation of the democratic
process in Sao Tome and Principe, the announcement by
President Tshisekedi of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo concerning the release of all political prisoners
and the political agreement between the Government
of the Central African Republic and the armed groups.
However, that does not preclude the need to continue
to pursue initiatives in all countries of the region
aimed at promoting full respect for human rights as a
prerequisite for building peace on the basis of adopting
confidence-building measures and strengthening
democratic institutions.

We are particularly concerned about the simmering
conflict in the North-West and South-West Regions of
Cameroon, where the escalation ofviolence also affects
health and education services, contributes to political
tension in the country and hampers the delivery of
humanitarian aid. In that context, unrestricted access
for humanitarian agencies is essential, as is the
promotion of cooperation and the presence of regional
organizations and international human rights bodies in
order to ensure the protection of such rights and the
fight against impunity.

Such a presence is also seen as the best way to
resolve the political, social and security crisis in
Burundi, which can be achieved only through an
inclusive intra-Burundian dialogue.

In addition, we acknowledge the work of UNOCA
in contributing to a determined fight against scourges
that lead to instability, insecurity and violence in the
subregion, such as the illicit trafficking in natural
resources and wildlife and the activities of illegal armed
groups, especially in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Central African Republic and Cameroon.

Similarly, strengthening cooperation between
UNOCA and the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel in various complementary areas, such as
the fight against Boko Haram, addressing the situation
of transhumance corridors as lawless areas used for
criminal activity and combating maritime piracy, to
name but a few, is particularly noteworthy.

In that regard, we strongly condemn the attacks
carried out by that terrorist group in the Lake Chad
region and in several countries of the subregion, as well
as those perpetrated by the so-called Lord's Resistance
Army, whose source of financing is linked to trafficking
in natural resources such as gold and diamonds.
That reminds us of the link between terrorism and
transnational crime as an area ofnecessary international
coordination and cooperation.

I conclude by stressing that the international
community must increase its support in the Central
African subregion in order to address the root causes
of conflicts and humanitarian crises, with free and safe
access for humanitarian and human rights agencies as a
minimum prerequisite.

