Mr. Manalo (Philippines): First of all we wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on your fine work during your
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
we thank the Council for the opportunity to participate
in today's meeting on East Timor. I also wish to thank,
through you, the Secretary-General for his latest report
on East Timor, and Mr. Vieira de Mello, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Mr. Ramos-Horta for their comprehensive briefings
this morning.

Two years ago we began a journey, the first ever
by the United Nations, of creating from the ground a
veritable political and economic functioning structure
for East Timor. Today, the United Nations finds itself
in the crucible of that journey, as we draw nearer to the
much anticipated independence of East Timor.

While substantial progress towards independence
has been made during the past six months, the election
next month remains an important litmus test of how the
United Nations, under the leadership of the Security
Council, has fared in its first true effort at nation-
building. As an active participant in the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
our interest and hopes are second to none in seeing the
United Nations and the growing local leadership in
East Timor truly succeed in realizing the dreams of the
Timorese people for viable independence and self-
government. This aim should underlie our exit strategy.

There are certain issues which the Philippines
continues to believe are important.

As we mentioned earlier, the forthcoming election
should become a solid springboard for East Timor's
move towards independence early next year. While
fully convinced of the strong commitment of our
United Nations officials and personnel who will
oversee this activity, we believe that the election must
not only be, but must also be perceived as, fair, clean
and credible and have the widest possible participation
of the Timorese people. On the issue of participation,
we are gratified at the report that the registration
process has been very good. Indeed, this is a strong
basis to proceed with a truly participatory election.

There is a body of research that suggests that
countries in transition are in the greatest need of
assistance and support. Disengaging assistance at the
onset of a post-conflict situation or immediately after
independence may therefore not be a wise course of
action insofar as East Timor is concerned. An
appropriate international presence and level of
assistance should thus continue after independence.
The details for a post-independence international
presence in East Timor should be formulated on the
basis of the needs of the East Timorese people and the
conditions on the ground, and in coordination with the
concerned actors. This pertains especially to issues
such as the size of the civilian component and the
police and military component of a successor mission.

On this last point, it has also been gratifying to
learn of the international support and commitment
being shown for the establishment of the East Timor
Defence Force, particularly with respect to voluntary
contributions for training, infrastructure and
equipment, all of which are necessary for developing a
professional and modern defence force. The
Philippines will be ready to assist, as appropriate, in
the formation of the East Timor Defence Force.

Meanwhile, a thoughtful management of the
security situation through the United Nations
peacekeeping force should be continued by UNTAET.
However, to ensure continued peace and stability in the
area, democratic institutions must also be established.
We therefore support the Secretary-General's view that
a successor mission should include a small team of
professionals in various fields to continue Timorization
and skills transfer, especially, in our view, in public
administration and civil service for the purpose of
developing capacity-building, which is necessary for
self-government.

Moreover, a sound economic infrastructure is
needed for sustainable development and growth in East
Timor. The country must be able to attract foreign
investment and sustain investor confidence. There have
been positive reports of growth in gross domestic
product, although most of this appears to have been
concentrated in Dili. This has attracted migration from
the rural areas, causing unemployment in the capital.
We therefore urge the World Bank and the Asian
Development Bank to encourage investments in rural
areas to ease the unemployment problem and
simultaneously increase rural productivity and growth.
At the same time, private-sector participation must be
enhanced.

We are also awaiting with anticipation the
promised benefits of the recently signed agreement
between Australia and the Transitional Administration
on the Timor Sea Arrangement. Based on the reported
90:10 sharing ratio in favour of the new country, the
projected income from oil and gas, if properly
managed, should be a significant addition of financial
resources to East Timor and lead to new jobs and
investment opportunities.

Finally, while we may consider our efforts in East
Timor as a success, the ultimate verdict will be drawn
by history. We must avoid measuring progress in terms
of how closely United Nations guidance is adhered to,
for in the final analysis, the future of East Timor lies in
the hands of the Timorese people.

