Ms. Tachco (United States ofAmerica): I offer many
congratulations to Kazakhstan on its able leadership of
the Council for the month of January. It has been a busy
and productive month for the Security Council. Thanks
to Kazakhstan's sustained efforts, the Security Council
travelled on its first mission to Afghanistan in seven
years, where it met with leaders of the Government
of National Unity, officials of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, opposition parties
and civil society representatives. Council members
thanked the Afghan people for their continued resolve
in the fight against terrorism, and noted international
consensus on the need to strengthen security. They
urged President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah to
hold free, fair and transparent elections, as scheduled,
and stressed the importance of maintaining unity for
the sake of an inclusive and stable Afghanistan.

We welcome Kazakhstan's emphasis on promoting
peace in Afghanistan, and we welcome the emphasis
on the potential benefits of security and development
partnerships between Afghanistan and Central Asia. We
thank Kazakhstan for convening a ministerial debate
on the partnership between Afghanistan and Central
Asia. Afghanistan, as those present all know, is a top
United States priority as well. That is why our National
Security Advisor, H. R. McMaster, came to New York
especially to brief the Council on Afghanistan and our
South Asia strategy, which goes hand in hand with
the United Nations efforts to end the conflict and help
Afghans build a better future.

We were also very pleased to receive our biannual
briefing on the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventative Diplomacy for Central Asia - the first
by the mission's new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Natalia Gherman. Of particular
note is the fact that the Council adopted a press
statement (SC/13179) supporting her work, which is
the first time we have come to a consensus on such a
document in several years. We hope that it will open the
door for future documents in support of the mission's
important work.

However, obviously South and Central Asia were
not the only focus to the Council's work. This month,
Ambassador Haley urged Council members to support
the South Sudan arms embargo and said that we as
a Council must act on the position we took in our
14 December presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/25)
to impose costs and consequences on those who
undermine the peace process in South Sudan.

We also held important discussions on the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus Mission
and its support for a comprehensive settlement to
reunify Cyprus as a bizonal, bicommunal federation.
We renewed the Mission's mandate this month and
now we urge Cypriot leaders to take steps to rebuild
trust, improve the public atmosphere and resume
talks immediately.

Council members remain unified in support of the
peace process in Colombia and the work of the United
Nations Verification Mission, noting that the challenges
posed by the reintegration of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia and the implementation
of the historic Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace are
significant, and success is not certain. The Council
is also committed to the resumption of talks with the
Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional and emphasizes the
importance ofa new ceasefire.

The Council also reaffirmed that the Libyan Political
Agreement must remain the framework for the political
process throughout the country's transition period and
that there is no room for spoilers. It is long past time for
all parties to put the interests of the Libyan people first
and engage fully with the United Nations sponsored
political process. In the meantime, we must also deepen
our work with the Libyan authorities to ensure that
all those responsible for human rights abuses against
migrants, including the shocking practice of slavery,
are held accountable.

As you, Mr. President, mentioned earlier this week,
Ambassador Haley hosted the members of the Security
Council in Washington, D.C., to view evidence of
Iran's violations of its international obligations and its
interference in conflicts around the region. She also
hosted Security Council members at the United States
Holocaust Museum for a discussion about atrocities in
Syria. The trip underscored the need for the Council to
take action on both fronts and pursue accountability.

I thank you again, Mr. President, for your able
management of the Council this month. We are very
much looking forward to the Kuwaiti presidency of the
Council in February. We are confident that Kuwait will
lead us effectively in our continuing efforts.

