Mr. Cevik (Turkey): At the outset, I would like to
extend our deepest condolences to France, Lebanon and
the Russian Federation on the recent terrorist attacks.
As a country that has been a target of terrorism,
most recently in Ankara in October, Turkey stands in
solidarity with the international community in the fight
against this universal scourge. I also wish to express
our appreciation to the United Kingdom presidency for
organizing this debate.

People are at the centre of sustainable development,
and the fundamental conditions for achieving
development are peace and security. Preventing
conflict, ensuring peaceful societies and promoting
good governance and the rule of law are crucial
enablers of sustainable development. Our 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), including its Goals and targets, not
only recognizes but also gives concrete expression to
the link between peace and sustainable development,
especially through Goal 16. Achieving sustainable
development paves the way for peace, while stability in
turn sets the stage for economic growth and sustainable
development.

In our view, both the quality and the quantity of
growth are important. We need to strive to ensure
that economic growth is inclusive and its benefits are
shared by all. Inequality, not just of incomes but also
of opportunities, is a source of social and political
instability. That fact is the starting point of the overall
emphasis that Turkey has placed on the concept of
inclusivity, notably throughout most of its presidency
of the Group of 20.

Protracted armed conflicts and transnational threats
against today's security environment are inherently
political issues and require political solutions, while
poverty, social inequalities, the lack of inclusivity,
the inefficient use of natural resources and ecological
degradation are often among the causes that lead to
crises. Addressing those causes will have a positive
impact on the peaceful resolution of conflicts.

Conflict prevention, peacebuilding, the promotion
of durable peace and development are among the core
United Nations activities that should be carried out
using a comprehensive approach. Effective mediation,
based on political inclusivity and technical expertise, is
a cost-effective tool in conflict prevention and conflict-
solving processes, especially with regard to addressing
the root causes of problems.

Another pillar of our strategic focus on United
Nations efforts to sustain peace under the Charter of the
United Nations is a stronger emphasis on peacebuilding
alongside peace operations, with a view to addressing
the full conflict cycle. The broad prospect of
peacebuilding, encompassing a wide range of activities
from development partnership to institution-building
and from disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
to security-sector reform processes and the promotion
of human rights and the rule of law, makes it all the
more relevant in a comprehensive approach.

We believe that a focus on the interdependence of
migration and development also merits attention in this
debate. Turkey has a long history as a crossroads of
migration. It is our firm belief that migration can be
a significant driver of development. There exist many
examples of the positive contributions that migrants
have made to the economic growth and sustainable
development of both source and destination countries.

On the other hand, we cannot achieve our
Sustainable Development Goals without addressing
complex humanitarian emergencies. Effective
measures must be taken by all to meet the needs of
people living in areas affected by humanitarian crises.
International cooperation should also strengthen
the resilience of communities hosting refugees and
strengthen burden- and responsibility-sharing, without
at the same time cutting back on much needed official
development assistance. That is why Turkey has long
been defending the necessity of a stronger emphasis on
the humanitarian-development nexus.

Taking only palliative measures and ignoring the
need to tackle the root causes of refugee and irregular
migrant flows would yield only temporary and limited
success. We need to focus on eliminating or at least
reducing push factors, like wars, conflicts, human
rights violations and economic deprivation in the
countries of origin. Inclusiveness is important not only
within countries, but also among countries. After all,
we now have a new universal sustainable development
Agenda, whose fundamental commitment is to leave no
one behind.

We certainly have a moral obligation to address
inequality, but we also need to address inequality
because we know that it hinders economic growth.
We need to create a more inclusive and equitable
system of global partnerships with the engagement
of all advanced, emerging and developing countries
based on mutual respect and benefit. Additionally,
the enhancement of the representation and voice of
developing countries in the global decision-making
architecture are necessary in order to strengthen the
resilience of global governance, as well as the trust
of people in our system. Unfortunately, in too many
cases, inaction by the Security Council on international
peace and security issues has had a direct affect on the
well-being of peoples. A more democratic, transparent,
effective, accountable and representative Council
will be key in addressing the challenges related to
development and peace and security.

