Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Lithuania welcomes
this annual opportunity to hear direactly from United
Nations Force Commanders about the most pressing
challenges in today's peacekeeping. I thank the Force
Commanders for their briefings. Let me also express
our appreciation for their service, under increasingly
demanding and challenging circumstances. On their
sound judgement hinges the successful implementation
of mandates, as well as the lives of peacekeepers and
those they are tasked to protect. Let me touch upon the
three topics selected for today's discussion.

Fifteen years after the Security Council pledged
to systematically address the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, civilians continue to account for
the majority of casualties in armed conflicts. A gap
persists between ambitious normative frameworks and
tragic realities on the ground. The most vulnerable
groups are often those least protected. In that context,
we recognize and support all initiatives aimed at
enhancing the protection of civilians by United Nations
peacekeepers.

The increased presence of troops from the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in the
eastern part of that country has had a deterrent effect
on armed groups that target civilians. Yet presence
alone may be insufficient. Peacekeepers must be ready
to demonstrate their willingness to act robustly, quickly
and effectively to protect civilian lives. In that regard,
we welcome the emphasis by Lieutenant General Dos
Santos Cruz on a robust proactive approach.

MONUSCO's efforts to improve its early-warning
and response mechanisms should be noted. The
establishmentofhotlinestoalertaboutimpendingdanger,
as well as the Mission's support for the implementation
of local protection plans through community protection
committees, all contribute to reducing threats and
insecurity for the civilian population and should be
considered in other peacekeeping operations. Last
but not least, we strongly support one mandate-one
mission-one force approach, as saving human lives is
the primary task of all units ofa mission.

Turning to expectations from the military
components, it is important to recognize that the
current peacekeeping environment - and many have
spoken about it - is marked by constantly changing
circumstances and challenges. Peacekeepers face
indirect fire, improvised explosive devices, ambushes,
abductions and even direct attacks, including by
radical extremists, as they carry out their missions
in hostile environments. They also find themselves
in situations where there is no peace to keep, while
peace enforcement may not be in their mandate. In
spite of the mantra-like repetition by the Council of its
resolve to give operations clear, credible and achievable
mandates, matched by appropriate resources, situations
continue to occur where the ambition of the mandate
and the capacity to carry out it are at odds with each
other.

A lack of adequate training, proper equipment or
enablers, as well as insufficient backing by air assets
and modern technologies to counter both conventional
and asymmetric threats, are recurrent problems. Such
mismatches end up being a lose-lose situation for
all. The United Nations loses its credibility, civilian
populations suffer casualties and conflict gets more
entrenched, and far too many peacekeepers lose their
lives in the line of duty.
For example, delays in the deployment of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and a continued lack
of air mobility, as well as the changing nature of the
threats, have limited the Mission's ability to effectively
implement the mandate. On the other hand, the current
steady increase in the Mission's military and police
capacities, as well as the enhancement of its situational
awareness through the establishment of the All Sources
Information Fusion Unit, are significant steps forward
that have a noticeable positive impact on the protection
of civilians.

At the same time, we must acknowledge that
MINUSMA no longer operates in the peacekeeping
context and that some troop-contributing countries
bear a disproportionate share of the impact, as we were
once again tragically reminded by the recent loss of
peacekeepers' lives. A serious discussion about the
mandate is in order, and the international community
should continue contributing to the development of
national capacities. In that context, I would like to note
the work of the European Union Training Mission,
whose personnel, including four Lithuanian trainers,
are engaged in rebuilding the Malian armed forces. The
civilian capacity-building mission complements those
efforts by supporting internal security forces through
training and strategic advice.

Finally, on the accomplishment of traditional
mandates under the changing political-military setting,
it is crucial to note that the safety and security of
peacekeepers must be among the Council's top priorities
when designing or adjusting peacekeeping mandates. It
should engage in constant dialogue with the Secretariat
and troop contributors to make sure that peacekeepers
are not left to fend for themselves in a dramatically
changed environment.

During the recent months in the Golan, troops of
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF), mandatedto observe the 1974 Disengagement
Agreement between Israel and Syrian forces, were
besieged, attacked, forced out of their positions and
detained by the designated terrorist groups and armed
non-State actors. There can be no justification for such
actions, and the perpetrators must be brought to justice.
A temporary adjustment in UNDOF's posture and
operations, as well as its immediate relocation, was fully
warranted. We commend the mission for continuously
reviewing and updating its contingency plans. We also
look forward to an update from the Secretary-General
on the steps needed to maintain UNDOF's ability to
implement its mandate.
Before concluding, let me put forward a few
questions to the participating Force Commanders.

First, to what extent is proactive reconnaissance and
intelligence helping to create better awareness, and thus
pre-empting and preventing threats? Could they refer to
good practices in current peacekeeping operations in
that respect? What more needs to be done?

Secondly, how do robust mandates translate into
operational plans? Would commanders prefer the
mandates' tasks to be detailed and precise, or should
they leave room for their decisions to act for the
achievement of end-states?

Thirdly, what is the impact of modern
technologies, such as unmanned aerial systems, in
today's peacekeeping operations, in particular on
intelligence-gathering? Would the commanders suggest
deploying those systems to other missions, such as
UNDOF, for example?

