Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Sir, we
are delighted to see you presiding over the Security
Council this month. We are certain that, under your
competent leadership, our work will be productive. We
wish also to acknowledge the outstanding work done
by Ambassador de la Sabliere and his team in the
context of France's presidency during the past month,
which was very busy.

We wish also to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his briefing. We thank you, too, Sir, for your
briefing, which has made clear to us the main aspects
of the Berlin conference for Afghanistan. We believe
that the contents and the work plan of the Berlin
declaration are clear guidelines for the reconstruction
of an Afghanistan that is free, secure, stable,
democratic and - we hope - prosperous.

We want to underscore the commitment of donors
to provide $8.2 billion over the next three years, which
will undoubtedly be vital in the context of efforts
aimed at reconstruction and development in that
country.

We value also NATO's commitment to expand the
International Security Assistance Force through five
provincial reconstruction teams, which will be
deployed in various areas of Afghanistan in the coming
months.

We know how critical the question of security is
to the future of Afghanistan. We believe, therefore, that
the participation of the countries of the region in the
framework of the Kabul Declaration on Good-
Neighbourly Relations of 22 December 2002, and in
particular of the annexed Declaration on Counter-
Narcotics, and the Doha Conference on Regional
Police Cooperation represent a clear commitment to
continue to strengthen regional cooperation.

We welcome the announcement of the holding of
direct presidential and parliamentary elections in
September of this year. As we said in the context of the
most recent consultations of the Security Council, it is
clear that a great deal remains to be done and that it is
absolutely essential that there be a national electoral
registration campaign, currently scheduled for May. We
believe that the elections will represent a milestone in
the restoration of harmony and unity throughout the
country.

In that context, we support the Afghan
Government's work plan aimed at the success of the
electoral process, the demobilization of at least 20 per
cent of armed groups and the cantonment of weapons.
The plan aims to ensure that the process continues to
make progress beyond the forthcoming elections. We
also agree that it is necessary to have the support of
NATO and the Coalition in connection with security,
with particular support for the work of the Afghan
National Police and the Afghan National Army, on the
basis of ethnic balance and respect for the rule of law.

We wish in particular to emphasize the
determination expressed by the Afghan Government to
continue to make progress in the implementation of its
political programmes, in particular in the field of good
governance and public administration, with a clear
emphasis on anti-corruption policies; reform of the
fiscal system; the promotion of private-sector
participation; economic and social development, with
special emphasis on overcoming poverty; the
strengthening of the rule of law; and the promotion and
protection of human rights.

We agree that an environment of security is
essential to achieve progress in the areas of economic
growth, political normalization, reconstruction and
development. We believe also that drug production and
trafficking poses a serious threat to the development
and stability of Afghanistan. We agree that the Council
must continue to support actions plans in this regard.
We therefore support the contents of the Berlin
Declaration on Counter-Narcotics.

Lastly, we support the presidential statement
agreed upon by consensus by Council members, which,
we hope, will be adopted at the conclusion of this
meeting, as a sign of support for the political process in
Afghanistan.

