Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen: The Secretary-General is
alarmed by the escalation of tension in Jerusalem that
has continued since the Security Council emergency
meeting on9 October (see S/PV.7291). Clashes between
Palestinian youths and Israeli security forces in many
parts of East Jerusalem and the West Bank have been
taking place on an almost daily basis. Of particular
concern are attacks against religious sites, including
given how such violence can resonate regionally and
beyond.

Escalating tensions surrounding access to the holy
sites have contributed significantly to the spike in
violence. The shooting of a prominent campaigner for
Jewish prayer rights on Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple
Mount on 29 October was followed by the brutal attack
on 5 November at a light rail station in East Jerusalem,
in which two Israelis were killed and another 12 Israelis
were injured when a Palestinian man rammed his car
into passengers dismounting the train. Both Palestinian
perpetrators of the two attacks were shot and killed
by the Israeli security forces. On the Palestinian side,
clashes at Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount between
Palestinian youth and Israeli security forces resulted in
multiple injuries, at number of them serious.

We are also deeply concerned that violence has
spread elsewhere in Israel and the West Bank. Serious
incidents include Israeli police shooting and killing
an Israeli Arab man in the village of Kafr Kanna, in
northern Israel, on 8 November, who alleged that he
had threatened them with a knife. On the same day,
thousands of people reportedly protested the killing,
leading to clashes with the police in the village. On
10 November, an Israeli soldier in Tel Aviv and an
Israeli woman in the West Bank were stabbed to death.
On 11 November, a Palestinian man was reportedly
shot to death by Israeli security forces during clashes
at a refugee camp near Hebron. On 12 November,
suspected Jewish settlers allegedly torched a mosque
near Ramallah in the West Bank. On the same day,
a Molotov cocktail was reportedly thrown at the
ancient synagogue of Shfaram. Over the weekend, a
Jewish man was stabbed in Jerusalem - which serves
as another indication that the violence continues
unabated - and the circumstances of that incident are
still under investigation. During the reporting period,
a total of 494 Palestinians, including 60 children and
8 women, were injured by the Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) in the West Bank. Eight IDF soldiers were also
injured.

The Secretary-General has expressed his deep
concern about the upsurge in violence, and calls on
all sides to do everything possible to avoid further
exacerbating an already tense environment. Preventing
a further escalation oftension makes it essential that all
sides demonstrate responsible leadership, avoid taking
provocative unilateral actions and refrain from inciting
their supporters through inflammatory rhetoric.

The Secretary-General welcomes the renewed
assurances by Prime Minister Netanyahu that there
will be no changes made to the status quo regarding
the holy sites. He expects Israel to continue to ensure
the protection of the holy sites and the safety of all
worshippers, as per its agreement with Jordan.

We note the recent separate meetings that President
Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu had with King
Abdullah of Jordan and United States Secretary of
State Kerry in Amman on 13 November. We hope that
the announced confidence-building measures and firm
commitments to maintain the status quo regarding the
holy sites will translate immediately into a de-escalation
of tension. In that regard, we are encouraged by the
lifting, on 14 November, of age restrictions for access to
the Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount, where Friday
prayers reportedly went without incident.

Another worrying development is the increase
in demolitions of Palestinian buildings, which is also
contributing to rising animosity in Jerusalem. Since
21 October, a total of 82 structures, of which 47
were residential, were demolished in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. The demolitions displaced
169 Palestinians, including 80 children.

We are also concerned about the risk of the forcible
transfer of the Um Al-Khayrbedouin refugee community
after the recent demolition of five dwellings next to
an Israeli settlement near Hebron. Demolitions and
forcible transfer contravene international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.

Meanwhile, Israel's ongoing settlement activity
continues to undermine efforts to calm the tensions in
Jerusalem. In defiance of the unanimous opposition
to increased settlement activity expressed in the
recent Security Council meeting on Jerusalem (see S/PV.7291), plans have since been advanced to build
some 500 residential units in the settlement of Ramat
Shlomo. In addition, 28 new building permits and 200
new residential units were approved in the settlement of
Ramot, in East Jerusalem.

Settlement activity constitutes a violation of
international law, fuels further polarization and
heightens the levels of mistrust between both sides. As
the Secretary-General has consistently repeated, such
unilateral actions will only further impede the chances
for long-term stability and a durable peace, and should
therefore be reversed.

Returning to negotiations has never been more
important. The absence of a credible political
framework is further hardening positions on both sides
and is providing greater political space to those seeking
to exploit the lack of trust between the two parties for
personal or political gain.

The Secretary-General urges the parties to return
to peace talks. He notes the recent meeting on the peace
process held in Washington, DC, and the call for the
resumption of peace talks by the European Union's
High Representative during her important visit to the
region this month. Without a genuine commitment from
the parties and an overall improvement in the lives of
Palestinians, we should anticipate further deterioration
of the security situation and an expansion of the current
violence.

Two months ago, Special Coordinator Serry warned
in this Chamber that averting a possible implosion of
Gaza or another tragic conflict with Israel required
urgent changes to the fundamental dynamics in Gaza.
While some signs of progress have gradually started
to emerge, the overall state of affairs in Gaza remains
volatile and fraught with potential pitfalls.

On the positive side, the temporary Gaza
reconstruction mechanism began its operations earlier
this month. Led by the Palestinian Government of
national consensus and working through the private
sector, the mechanism's priority is the provision of
reconstruction material for urgent shelter repairs. By
13 November, 1,086 Gazans had been able to purchase
much-needed construction materials, including some
10,146 bags ofcement- approximately 558 ofthe 1,298
metric tons of cement imported through the mechanism
for shelter repair - to start the rehabilitation of their
homes. A list of 1,926 Gazans cleared for import has
been published by the Ministry of Public Works and
Housing to date. Nine vendors have been cleared to
import to date, of which four are actively importing and
selling materials. A further 115 interested vendors are
being processed to enable their imports as well. That
is relative to the approximately 60,000 shelters in need
of repair as soon as possible that the mechanism aims
to reach. To date, an estimated 80,000 people remain
without shelter, including about 30,000 in facilities
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Meeting those
pressing needs is a monumental challenge. There
are currently $62 million worth of United Nations
construction projects awaiting approval by the Israeli
authorities for an average of 24 months. The imely
approval of those projects would be an important step
towards accelerating the much-needed recovery and
reconstruction efforts in the Gaza Strip.

The United Nations is actively assisting in
facilitating the implementation of the mechanism. But,
in order for it to be successful, we need a conducive
environment and the cooperation of all the parties
concerned. Homes continue to be surveyed and
resources are being raised to provide assistance to
those in need. Special Coordinator Serry has been
leading efforts to accelerate that work. Now that the
mechanism has become operational, it is critically
important that donors honour their pledges made at
the Cairo conference on 12 October. Urgent funding is
particularly required to support critical infrastructure
projects and to address Gaza's acute electricity and
water needs.

It is encouraging that Israel reportedly plans to
increase the number of truckloads of construction
materials entering the Gaza Strip -up to 800 trucks daily
instead of the current 350 trucks. The United Nations
also views the temporary reconstruction mechanism
not only as an important confidence-building step but
also as a means to lift all closures on Gaza. We call on
the Palestinian factions to uphold their responsibilities
to ensure that the reconstruction material is not
diverted to support illegal activities. We also encourage
both Israel and Egypt to accelerate efforts to devise
sustainable solutions that will address their legitimate
security concerns while progressively easing border
restrictions.

Those efforts notwithstanding, the reconstruction
of Gaza is doomed to fail without a long-term ceasefire
between Israel and the Palestinians. In that regard,
after their postponement last month, we note Egypt's
intention to host vital talks during the second half of
November. The importance of urgently continuing
the negotiations cannot be overstated. We strongly
encourage the parties to use the opportunity of the
talks to reach agreement on concrete arrangements that
will sustain the ceasefire and reinforce reconstruction
efforts. That should involve serious discussion of
tangible steps leading to the lifting of the closures that
continue to perpetuate Gaza's socioeconomic despair
and to embolden the proponents of extremism and
violence.

In that regard, we are troubled by reports that a
number of rockets have been tested within Gaza. An
additional rocket reportedly landed in southern Israel
on 31 October, prompting the Israeli authorities to
close the Erez and Kerem Shalom crossings for the the
three days that followed. Hamas reportedly arrested the
group suspected of launching the rocket. We are also
concerned that six Palestinians were reportedly shot
and injured by the IDF in Gaza, three near the border
fence, including a Palestinian boy on 16 November, and
three fishermen at sea.

We strongly condemn the use of rockets by
militants in Gaza. If continued, those actions would
have seriously damaging consequences. Every rocket
launched from Gaza cripples reconstruction efforts and
risks renewing conflict with Israel.

There has been little or no progress on implementing
the agreement that established the Palestinian
Government of national consensus. The bombings that
recently targeted Gaza-based members and facilities
of Fatah underline the fragility of the reconciliation
agreement. We strongly encourage the Palestinian
factions to urgently undertake the necessary work to
implement the agreement and refrain from any action
that could undermine such efforts.

In particular, the Government of national consensus
must be empowered to assume its rightful security
and governance responsibilities in Gaza. That is also
necessary for reconstruction to be implemented at the
required pace. The Secretary-General has underscored
the support of the United Nations in that regard. All
the parties concerned need to cooperate and urgently
address important issues, such as the transfer of full
control over the crossings to the Government and
conducting urgent civil service reform, including,
importantly, in the security sector. The recent
humanitarian payment to some 24,000 civil servants
hired under the former de-facto authorities, facilitated
by the United Nations, must now be used as a stepping
stone towards civil service integration.

The Security Council was briefed in detail on
Lebanon and the Blue Line last week, but I would like
to say a few words about Syria and the Golan before
concluding.

Last month, the Secretary-General's Special Envoy
for Syria, Mr. De Mistura briefed the Council on his
proposed action plan, including the idea of incremental
freezes, beginning with the city ofAleppo. Such freezes
are first and foremost intended to lead to a de-escalation
of violence, starting from specific areas with national
importance. They could also serve as building blocks
to arrive at a national inclusive political process. Mr.De
Mistura pursued his regional consultations and has
just concluded his second visit to Damascus. He held
constructive discussions with President Al-Assad and
Government officials on the proposals he presented to
the Council, which addressed the implementation of
all the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014). As immediate
next steps, Mr. De Mistura and his team will begin work
on the modalities of the proposed freeze in Aleppo. We
count on the Council's continued support for the role
and efforts of the Special Envoy.

On the Golan, the situation remains volatile.
Following the offensive of 12 September and subsequent
advances by armed members of the opposition and other
groups in the area of separation, as a precautionary
measure, the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (UNDOF) temporarily relocated from additional
positions in the area of separation and Camp Faouar
to the Alpha side, diminishing the mission's activities
on the Bravo side. UNDOF continued to observe heavy
clashes between the Syrian armed forces and armed
members of the opposition, as well as airstrikes by
Syrian armed forces, inside the area of separation and
the area of limitation. Those incidents are of serious
concern, as they jeopardize the ceasefire between
Israel and Syria.

In conclusion, we would like to stress that Gaza's
reconstruction will not be possible without efforts to
build trust between Israelis and Palestinians. That
requires a strengthening of the ceasefire, including a
lifting of the closures, in the framework of resolution
1860 (2009), and the full and swift implementation of
the temporary reconstruction mechanism in good faith.
At the same time, the success of Gaza's reconstruction
also depends on Palestinian willingness to truly
unite and do what is necessary to facilitate the entry
into Gaza of the Government of national consensus.
Addressing those challenges will not be easy, but there
is no alternative.

Elsewhere in the occupied Palestinian territory and
Israel, the upsurge in violence may have been triggered
by the culmination of several recent developments.
However, the continued reality of the close to 50-year-
long occupation and the lack of progress towards
the two-State solution ensure that the next round of
violence is never too far below the surface. The time
has come for leaders on both sides to make the difficult
compromises that will promote stability and ensure
long-term security for both Israelis and Palestinians.

