Allow me to join other Council members in thanking the briefers, Special Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer and Mr. Yakani, for their insightful briefings. Indonesia commends the formation of the revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity and a lasting permanent cease fire in South Sudan. We note the commitment of all parties to maintaining dialogue towards a lasting peace. Yet Indonesia remains concerned over several developments on the ground, which if left unchecked, would endanger the overall peace process. In that context, we underline following issues. First, with regard to mitigating coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the work by national authorities, reinforced by adequate international assistance, in curbing the pandemic and its impacts is critical, We commend President Kiir's action to establish a national task force to curb the spread of COVID-19. While the strict travel restriction measures are necessary, my delegation is concerned about the impact of such restrictions on freedom of movement of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and its operation. We urge the Government of South Sudan to enhance its cooperation with UNMISS in navigating through this pandemic. This is especially vital for an effective provision of humanitarian and medical assistances. Certainly, this cooperation must also ensure the safety, security and health of all peacekeepers and UNMISS staff. Second is the need for an immediate response to intercommunal violence. The sharp increase in intercommunal violence, particularly in Jonglei, is very alarming. We are further concerned that more than 36,000 people have been internally displaced due to these clashes in 2020 alone. Indonesia once again underscores an effective and immediate response to this threat. Left unchecked, it could potentially rollback the progress that has been achieved in the peace process. We need to ensure that there will be no relapse into violence anywhere in South Sudan. In that regard, we commend UNMISS active role in responding to intercommunal clashes, including through community engagement and dialogue facilitation. We expect that all sides will duly respect UNMISS freedom of movement, especially in community engagement and dialogue facilitation. Thirdly, there is a need to accelerate the political process. Indonesia commends the agreement last week on the allocation of 10 states. We look forward to further progress in the peace process, in particular, in concluding the transitional security arrangements, as mandated under the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan. We encourage all parties to maintain dialogue and accelerate the political process. While Indonesia believes in inclusive dialogue that accommodates all parties, it also believes that the present situation in South Sudan requires an immediate and comprehensive response. The priority parties put on peaceful resolution needs to be seen consistently through their clear actions, with adequate and sustained support from the region as well as the international community. To conclude, this is indeed a critical time in South Sudan's journey to peace. We in the Council should also play our role effectively to ensure that the challenges on the ground do not derail the overall peace process. Indonesia remains committed to working together with South Sudan to enable lasting peace for all of its people.
