Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): In the modern world, the ability to effectively
combat the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
is particularly crucial to the maintenance of global and
regional stability and to reliably ensuring the security
of every State, without exception. Constructive
cooperation in this area is an important element of our
efforts to establish a positive international agenda.

I think we all agree that the Security Council
resolutions that set out concrete measures for dealing
with those who violate non-proliferation regimes
should be strictly observed. The cornerstone remains
the founding resolution 1540 (2004), which requires
Member States to commit to taking concrete measures
to prevent weapons of mass destruction and their
components from falling into the hands of non-State
actors. The Council's resolutions, providing for
sanctions for the transfer of any type of arms to
terrorists, are especially important. Such transfers do
happen and must be thoroughly investigated.

Just as it was 50 years ago, when the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) opened
for signature, my country remains committed to the
goal of ridding the world of the nuclear threat. At the
same time, there can be no question that we have to
consider every factor influencing strategic stability,
and that every country with military and nuclear
potential should take part in the negotiation process.
The desire of a number of countries to ban nuclear
weapons in isolation from the fundamental principles
of the NPT has no hope of success and serves only to
create ambiguity with regard to future approaches to
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

Speaking of the NPT, I should not omit to mention
resolution 2231 (2015), in which the Council endorsed
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
to settle the issue of the Iranian nuclear programme.
The unilateral withdrawal of the United States from
this agreement represents a serious threat to the
non-proliferation regime, particularly since, as many
speakers before me have emphasized, Tehran has
been meticulously abiding by its obligations under the
JCPOA, as the International Atomic Energy Agency
has regularly confirmed. Russia is a firm believer in
the importance of preserving the JCPOA, and we are
actively working on that at the moment with Iran,
China and the European Union. Without it, we could
be facing increasing tensions throughout the Middle
East, fraught with risks to regional stability and the
non-proliferation regime. The collapse of the JCPOA
would also be extremely counterproductive for the
ongoing efforts to denuclearize the Korean peninsula,
which we welcome and support.

There continue to be other serious obstacles to
nuclear non-proliferation - essentially, the decision of
the United States to put off for an unspecified period,
perhaps forever, its ratification of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, and the lack of progress in
implementing the decision of the States parties to the
NPT on the establishment of a zone in the Middle East
free of weapons of mass destruction.

The situation regarding chemical-weapon disarmament
is also worrying, primarily in connection with the actions
of a number of Western States, which have continued
again and again to accuse the Syrian authorities of the
use of banned chemical agents. We should warn them
against carrying out any new attacks on the territory
of the Syrian Arab Republic under any more staged
pretexts, which would constitute a gross violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and undermine the efforts
to promote a political settlement in that long-suffering
country. The Government of Syria has destroyed its
arsenal of chemical weapons in accordance with the
Russian-American agreement of 2013, enshrined in
Security Council resolution 2118 (2013) and in the
resolutions of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons. But there are terrorist groups that
do possess chemical warfare materials. They have
learned how to synthesize them and have built their own
laboratories for that. Intelligence services, including
those of the United States, have been issuing warnings
about this for a long time. Russia has repeatedly
proposed developing a comprehensive strategy for
combating chemical terrorism. In 2017 Russian and
China introduced a draft resolution on the subject to
the Security Council that was not considered, through
no fault of ours. From a broader perspective, as long
ago as March 2016, at the Conference on Disarmament
in Geneva, we submitted a draft convention at the
Conference on Disarmament in Geneva on combating
acts of chemical and biological terrorism. Sadly, work
on it has been artificially blocked, and no doubt we all
know by which countries. Nevertheless, our proposals
still stand.

Meanwhile, the situation is deteriorating in the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
where our Western colleagues are trying to impose so-
called attributive functions on its Technical Secretariat,
in a gross violation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention that infringes on the prerogatives of the
Security Council.

At the same time, entirely unsubstantiated rhetoric,
in the "highly likely" vein, is increasing in connection
with the Salisbury affair. However, Britain has been
stubbornly rejecting our repeated proposals for a joint
investigation, despite the fact that this is a requirement
according to its obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention, the 1963 Vienna Convention on Consular
Relations, the 1965 bilateral Consular Convention
and the 1959 European Convention on Mutual Legal
Assistance in Criminal Matters. This raises the
possibility that if they do not want to cooperate, they
have something to hide. We once again call on London
to launch a constructive dialogue in order to establish
the truth.

The way events have been developing gives reason
to believe that today no possibility can be excluded,
including that of provocations involving the use of
biological weapons. Given the attempts Ihave mentioned
to manipulate the status of the Chemical Weapons
Convention, I want to caution against the temptation to
do the same with the Biological Weapons Convention. I
would like to point out that the Convention stipulates that
the right to initiate and conduct investigations belongs
to the Security Council alone. There is no provision for
surrogates, nor can there be. Incidentally, I would like to
remind the Council that we more than once proposed to
agree on a mechanism for verifying the implementation
of the Biological Weapons Convention. However, that
was firmly blocked and ultimately completely buried
by the United States. Washington's desire to preserve a
free hand has also been apparent when the Convention's
regime has encountered additional issues with regard to
the spread of military medical and biological activity,
including in the post-Soviet space. We urge everyone
to reject the militarization of health care. Russia has
consistently advocated for strengthening the Biological
Weapons Convention, and we are implementing several

initiatives to that end, including the establishment
of mobile anti-epidemic teams for rapid responses to
biological emergencies.
A dialogue between Russia and the United States,
as the two largest nuclear Powers, is especially
important for strengthening the non-proliferation
regime for weapons of mass destruction. Our two
States were present at the creation of the common
frameworks for multilateral cooperation in preventing
such weapons from falling into the hands of non-State
actors and combating acts of nuclear terrorism. Russia
still considers such cooperation to be fundamentally
important, not just for Moscow and Washington but
for the entire international community. Let us not
sacrifice it for the sake of instant decisions and short-
term calculations. Based on the solid foundation of the
Charter of the United Nations, Russia is always open
to honest cooperation with the five major nuclear-
weapon States and all other countries in the interests
of strengthening global strategic stability. We hope
that today's meeting of the Security Council - the key
organ for the maintenance of international peace and
security - will enable us to take a step in that direction.
In that regard, we believe that President Trump's
initiative to convene this meeting is very timely.

