Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month. We also
welcome the presence of our worthy colleague, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto;
Mr. Fedotov of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime; and Ms. Ghizaal Haress, from our country's
civil society.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/1092), which provides a useful update on the
overall situation in Afghanistan.

Today's meeting is being held against the backdrop
of important developments. These include the renewed
international partnership as affirmed by the Geneva
Ministerial Conference and the adoption of the General
Assembly's resolution 73/88, on Afghanistan, two
weeks ago; new measures in the context of Afghan-led
peace efforts, supported by regional and global partners;
and sustained progress by our National Defence and
Security Forces in their fight against regional and
global terrorist groups, as well as enhanced economic
cooperation by virtue of regional connectivity projects.
Moreover, our parliamentary elections were, in spite
of the challenges, another opportunity where our
people, through ballots, took another step towards the
consolidation of democracy and the rule of law.

This series of events provide a clear picture of the
way in which our people have been turning the corner
in their difficult journey towards stability and self-
reliance. The United Nations played a crucial role in
co-chairing the Geneva Conference on Afghanistan
and supporting our parliamentary elections, for which
we are very thankful.

In the area of security, our national security forces
have, at great sacrifice, kept terrorist elements at bay
throughout Afghanistan. The Taliban and affiliate
groups failed to register real gains anywhere in the
country. Attacks aimed at capturing territory, including
provincial capitals, were foiled, with massive casualties
in enemy ranks. Consequently, these groups, including
foreign terrorist fighters, resorted to new levels of
brutality, with increased numbers of cowardly terrorist
attacks on population centres, leading to a dramatic
increase in civilian casualties.

In the face of these atrocities, our people stand
defiant in pursuit of peace and democracy. That
commitment was made evident by the more than
4 million Afghans, over 45 per cent of registered
voters, who came out on election day to cast their vote,
despite all of the threats and attacks in various parts
of the country. Every candidate and every voter was
a target of the Taliban. As we await the final results
of the parliamentary elections, our next focus is to
address existing shortcomings to ensure success in
the presidential elections currently scheduled for April
next year.

Our people have embraced and were inspired by
the international community's renewed partnership and
support for a number of imperatives that are crucial to
our ultimate success. Among the most important issues
discussed in Geneva were our peace efforts, presented
by President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah in the
context ofthe road map for peace, which was deliberated
on at great length. We have fostered an unprecedented
level of consensus on the imperative ofpeace nationally,
regionally and internationally. Internally, an extensive
consultative process culminated in the creation of
a negotiating team and an Advisory Board that will
provide strategic input on various aspects and stages
of the peace talks once they begin. Ijust learned this
morning that the Board held its first meeting today.

Regionally, a number of additional countries
have stood behind our efforts, recognizing that the
prospect of peace is now within reach. Internationally,
we welcome the efforts of the United States Special
Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation, which
has brought new momentum to the peace efforts.

We welcome all forms of support for peace and
underline that all such initiatives should be under the
purview of Afghanistan's leadership of the process.
Let me reaffirm to the Council that we seek a peace
that is durable, with increased political, social and
economic opportunities for our people: a peace that
protects human rights, especially women's rights, and
consolidates the gains of the past 17 years and a peace
that keeps Afghanistan friendly to the region and to the
world at large. Any misuse, abuse or instrumentalization
of the peace process, by anyone, will not be tolerated by
the people of Afghanistan, who have paid a heavy price
over the past 40 years of imposed conflicts.

That notwithstanding, the imperative of genuine
and tangible regional support for peace is of crucial
importance. We have always asserted that the
Government of Pakistan has a particularly important
role to play, given its leverage over key Taliban figures.
Support for peace is one of the key commitments
stipulated in the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for
Peace and Solidarity, which entered into force in April.
The Action Plan constitutes an important framework to
effectively counter terrorism, help advance peace and
avoid territorial violations. Nevertheless, progress on
various fronts has thus far been elusive.

Last Saturday, Afghanistan, Pakistan and China
gathered at the level ofForeign Ministers in Kabul for the
second round of the trilateral dialogue platform, where
discussions centred on tangible measures to build trust
by addressing outstanding issues, mainly focused on
countering terrorism to reduce violence in Afghanistan.
With regard to peace efforts, we reiterated our request
from Pakistan to do what is necessary to facilitate
direct talks. With regard to security, we asserted that
mutual trust and confidence are possible only when we
see a reduction in violence and more tangible measures
taken against terrorist elements. We hope to see visible
progress in the coming weeks and months based on new
commitments made, as well as the expectations of our
people and the international community.

Afghanistan's worst drought this century has
affected our people and lead to food insecurity,
internal displacement and other drastic humanitarian
implications. We appeal to the international community
to help provide the support needed in order to alleviate
this alarming situation, including through contributions
to the emergency appeal launched by the United
Nations. Amid the challenges facing Afghanistan,
adequately addressing the humanitarian crisis should
not be overlooked.

The Security Council visited Kabul under the
Kazakhstan presidency in January and made a strong
pledge to improve coordination and consensus on
security and development in Afghanistan. What
followed was a high-level ministerial meeting of
the Council on building regional partnerships in
Afghanistan and Central Asia as a model to link
security and development (see S/PV.8162). That was
seminal in setting a trend to approach Afghanistan's
security from a development perspective. It reinforced
a sharpening focus among a broad range of regional
partners to advance numerous mega-projects, primarily
under the Afghan-led Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan and Heart of Asia Process.

Last week, in a historic event, President Ghani
inaugurated the long-awaited Lapis Lazuli Corridor
project, signed by Foreign Minister Rabbani and his
Turkmen, Azeri, Georgian and Turkish counterparts
in Ashgabat in November 2017. That landmark project
reinstates the old trade route in its modern version,
transporting famous Afghan products to Turkey and to
European markets through Turkmenistan, Azerbaijan
and Georgia.
Moreover, since last year, we have operationalized
air cargo corridors with India, Kazakhstan, Turkey,
Europe, the Russian Federation, the United Arab
Emirates, Saudi Arabia and China, leading to a
substantial increase in the export of Afghan products
abroad. The Chabahar port remains an important
gateway for providing commercially viable access to
the sea, linking the Indian Ocean with Afghanistan,
Central Asia and beyond. In that regard, we appreciate
the collaboration and flexibility of our strategic partner,
the United States, in working with Afghanistan, Iran
and India towards exempting the port from its sanctions.
We also witnessed this year the implementation of the
Afghanistan section of the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-
Pakistan-India gas pipeline project, which will
revolutionize the energy sector in those four countries.

Experience has shown that progress on all
fronts - from development and security to economic
prosperity and social development - in Afghanistan
and elsewhere is best achieved in an atmosphere of
amity, unity of purpose, mutual trust and cooperation
for the common good. Afghanistan is a rare example
of a mission on which various countries, and from
different political blocs and security architectures, have
converged for a collective purpose, namely, to ensure
that Afghanistan is secure and stable and, through that,
to promote regional and global peace and security.

We are pleased that that imperative is reflected
in General Assembly resolution 73/88, on the
situation in Afghanistan, adopted two weeks ago. It
emphasizes that threats to stability and development
in Afghanistan and the region require closer and more
coordinated cooperation, as well as greater coherence
and complementarity of approach between countries
of the region and the international community, for the
long-term peace, security, prosperity and sustainable
development of the country. In that regard, it
underscores the standing of Afghanistan as a platform
for such international cooperation. That offers the
surest guarantee for completing the mission upon which
we all embarked 17 years ago. In that objective, there
must be no space whatsoever for seeing Afghanistan as
a site of danger and a battle ground for proxy warfare,
but rather as a platform of cooperation and cordiality by
virtue of location and strategic perspective.

As we approach the new year, two issues are crucially
important for our shared success. First, the political
transition must be transparent, inclusive, embraced
by the Afghan people and lead to the strengthening
of our national unity and political stability. We look
forward to the completion of the transition, which
will give birth to a new and re-energized Parliament
and Government. Secondly, in relation to the peace
process, its outcome should provide the basis for
durable peace, while preserving our many democratic
gains across various spectrums and, above all, ensure
that our country remains on the trajectory of progress,
democracy and development. We count on the support
of the Council and all of our international partners for
ourjoint success.

Let me end with a note of thanks and gratitude
to the outgoing members of the Council - Bolivia,
Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, the Netherlands and Sweden.
We are particularly grateful to the Permanent Mission
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to the United
Nations for all its efforts as penholder on Afghanistan
in the Security Council this year. We enjoyed a great
level of collaboration between our two Permanent
Missions on all relevant issues related to the Council's
work on Afghanistan. We also thank Kazakhstan for
facilitating the Council visit to Afghanistan in January
and for playing a positive role in the peace, security
and development of Afghanistan and the region within
the Council.

I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome
the new members of the Security Council - Belgium,
the Dominican Republic, Germany, Indonesia and
South Africa. We look forward to working closely with
them during their tenure on the Council.

