Mr. Zhang (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. We are
convinced that under your able leadership, the Council
will achieve fruitful results. I also take this opportunity
to welcome the five new members to the Council:
Algeria, Benin, Brazil, the Philippines and Romania.
China looks forward to working closely with the new
members to better promote the Council's efforts to
maintain international peace and security.

I thank you, Mr. President, for your presentation
as Chairman of the 1267 Committee. We note with
satisfaction that, under your able leadership, over the
past year the Committee has had fruitful results in
ensuring implementation of resolution 1455 (2003),
including the improvement of the operability of the
consolidated list and the modification and ramification
of the guidelines and working procedures. It deserves
to be mentioned that, as Chairman of the Committee,
you, Sir, have made two trips to the countries
concerned despite the fatigue of travelling, in order to
get first-hand information and to promote the
resolution's implementation. In addition, you have
made timely briefings to the Council. It is no
exaggeration that the Committee, through its hard
work, has already become an indispensable part of
international counter-terrorism efforts.

Despite the enormous progress in international
counter-terrorism efforts and despite the heavy blows
to Al Qaeda and the Taliban, they are still in existence,
and in some regions, there are still signs of the
activities being carried out by Al Qaeda. The terrorism
threats also have new characteristics. Therefore, the
1267 Committee still faces an arduous task. In order to
better respond to a changing reality, it is imperative to
strengthen the work of the Committee and to improve
the sanctions regime.

I wish to make three comments. First, combating
Al Qaeda, the Taliban and associated individuals and
entities is in the common interest of the international
community. The implementation of sanction measures
depends on the common efforts of all Member States.
We hope that all countries concerned will continue to
support the work of the Committee and submit their
country reports in a timely manner. The Committee and
the expert mechanism should enhance their cooperation
with the Governments in order to better understand
their difficulties in implementing the resolutions and to
provide the necessary help. Some countries wish to
receive financial and technical assistance in their
efforts to implement the sanctions. Those requests
deserve the Committee's thorough consideration.

Secondly, the consolidated list is a foundation of
the sanctions. Measure should be taken to improve
their operability. The Committee should encourage all
countries to submit lists of names and relevant
information in order to make the list more
comprehensive and to maximize coverage of Al Qaeda,
the Taliban and associated individuals and entities. At
the same time, the expert mechanism of the Committee,
when assessing implementation of the Council's
resolutions, should do its best to make sure that the
information used is accurate and complete.

Thirdly, we support further coordination and
cooperation between the 1267 Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, which should
complement one another. We are also in favour of
continuous contact and communication between the
1267 Committee and the relevant international and
regional organizations in order to explore opportunities
for cooperation on sanctions. We look forward to
consultations with the parties concerned on the new
draft resolution on improving the sanctions regime. We
hope that consensus will soon be reached in order to
send the international community a very strong signal
on counter-terrorism.

As always, China will fully support and
participate in the work of the Committee and will make
ongoing contributions to the campaign against Al
Qaeda. The Government and people of China have
been fighting against the terrorist organization in
eastern Turkistan, which constitutes an important part
of the international efforts in counter-terrorism and the
fight against Al Qaeda. We therefore believe that
counter-terrorism in China will continue to gain the
understanding and support of the international
community and all countries concerned.

Before concluding, I wish to say that I endorse
what you, Sir, have said in thanking the outgoing
members of the Council.

