Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): First of all, Mr. President, I would like to
congratulate you upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I wish
you all success in the discharge of your
responsibilities. I would also like to express our
appreciation for the efforts made by your predecessor,
Ambassador Baja, the Permanent Representative of the
Philippines, in conducting the business of the Council
last month. I would like to join you in welcoming the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, who is with us in
this meeting.

Allow me to express my gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to address
the Security Council before its important deliberations
on the report of the International Independent
Investigation Commission. At the outset, I would like
to assure those present here that what I will say
expresses the truth as seen by the leadership and the
people of Syria. I also reiterate our full faith in the role
of the United Nations and our total respect for its
resolutions.

05-5678?»

The heinous crime that took the life of Premier
Hariri targeted the unity and stability of Lebanon. It
also targeted the Syrian sacrifices for Lebanon and its
status in both Lebanon and the region. Based on this,
Syria, when informed of the crime, reaffirmed that
finding the culprits and those who backed them is a
Syrian imperative as much as it is a Lebanese
imperative.

I would also like to point out that this dastardly
act has led to an escalation of tension in the region,
particularly because in some quarters, either on the
basis of a suspect or premeditated scheme or out of bad
faith, this crime has been used in a despicable manner
in order to fan the flames of hostility against Syria and
to increase accusations against it.

It is indeed strange that every crime committed
has a number of suspects, except this particular crime
for which unfortunately only one possibility has been
advanced, involving an accusation against Syria,
levelled even before the body of Mr. Hariri was laid to
rest.

I will not lay out for the Security Council a
history of the relations between the peoples of Syria
and Lebanon and our countries. However, I will say
briefly that these two independent Arab States have
been linked throughout history by the ties of
neighbourliness, kinship, aspirations and mutual
concerns. In that regard, Syria was in a unique position
to come to Lebanon's aid when, in 1975, a destructive
civil war erupted and tore that country apart and
destroyed the role of its institutions, its army and its
national fabric. The end of the civil war and return to
normalcy could not have been achieved without huge
sacrifices, namely at least 13,000 Syrian military
personnel who made the ultimate sacrifice while
extinguishing the fires of the civil war in Lebanon.

The security, stability, independence and
sovereignty of Lebanon have always been in the
forefront of Syria's concerns. In order to achieve them,
Syria has cooperated with all onal sons of Lebanon,
including the late Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, who
always supported the role of Syria in Lebanon and
always gave expression to that, both when he was in
power and when he was not. He always expressed his
faith in the role of Syria and his appreciation for its
assistance, even doing so just a few minutes before he
was assassinated.
5

This heinous crime runs counter to all the

principles that Syria upholds and clearly is against
Syrian interests.

Allow me to make a few comments on the report
introduced by Mr. Mehlis a few moments ago
(S/2005/662). In view of the fact that every paragraph
of the report deserves a comment to refute its content, I
will put our remarks before you in brief in the hope
that Council members will take them into account
during its consideration of the report in subsequent
consultations.

First, I would like to point out that the report is
clearly influenced by the political climate prevailing in
Lebanon after the assassination of former Prime
Minister Hariri. That is clearly evident in the second
chapter of the report, entitled "Background". In
paragraphs 25 and 26 and what follows in that chapter,
the report examined the structure of Syrian-Lebanese
relations and their ramifications on the Lebanese arena.

Secondly, it is indeed regrettable for us to read in
the report the Commission's strange hypothesis that:

"Given the infiltration of Lebanese institutions
and society by the Syrian and Lebanese
intelligence services working in tandem, it would
be difficult to envisage a scenario whereby such a
complex assassination plot could have been
carried out without their knowledge."
(5/2005/662, para. 216)

On that basis, the report can be seen to accuse Syria.
But, then, what about the major terrorist crimes that
were, regrettably, carried out on 11 September 2001 in
New York, on 11 March 2005 in Madrid, and on 7 July
2005 in London - as well as the many other terrorist
acts that have been carried out - despite the fact that
all those countries have very strong and highly
effective intelligence and security authorities? Again,
there is a hypothesis in paragraph 124, that

"There is probable cause to believe that the
decision to assassinate former Prime Minister
Rafik Hariri could not have been taken without
the approval of top-ranked Syrian security
officials and could not have been further
organized without the collusion of their
counterparts in the Lebanese security services."
(Ibid., para. 124)
6
However, that is a charge that could be levelled against
the security service of any country in the world on
whose territory a terrorist crime or act has taken place.

In later paragraphs, among other things, the
report bases its conclusions on the wiretapping of
former Prime Minister Hariri by the Lebanese security
service. However, the report also mentions, and then
summarily dismisses, another hypothesis: the
possibility that an unknown, third party carried out a
wiretap.

Thirdly, the report's conclusions, which point the
finger at Syria, depend completely on the credibility of
the testimony of people with strongly declared political
antipathy to Syria. At the same time, the report casts
doubt on the credibility of the testimony of Syrian
officials.

Fourtth, the report contains the testimony of
three persons, only one of whom is identified. He is a
forger and a swindler, and he has been previously
convicted by both the Lebanese and Syrian judicial
authorities. In addition, the three sets of testimony
contradict each other, and thus they lack the necessary
credibility to be relied upon.

Fifthly, the report, in both form and content,
accuses my country before the investigation has been
completed. That can be seen by the results and
conclusions drawn under the chapter entitled
"Conclusions". The Commission admits, however, that
it must continue its investigations in a number of areas
in order to identify the perpetrators of this criminal act.
I am pleased that, in the preface to the report,
Mr. Mehlis refers to the need to continue
investigations. The Commission further states that the
investigation still needs a considerable amount of time.
In paragraph 20, the report states:

"the investigation of such a terrorist act with
multifaceted international dimensions and their
ramifications normally needs months (if not years) to be completed so as to be able to
establish firm ground for a potential trial of any
accused individuals". (Ibid., para. 20)

Here, I would like to step back and address those
who are in such a hurry to pass judgement, to adopt
resolutions, to impose measures and to mobilize
members of the Security Council in support of their
extremist position. I wonder what their real objectives
are? I am certain that they have nothing to do with
uncovering the truth, which is the common objective of
both Syria and the international community.

The report accuses Syria of not having
sufficiently cooperated with the Commission. That
accusation does a great injustice to Syria. Syria has
sent letters to the Commissioner of the Investigation
Commission, informing him of its readiness to
cooperate. Syria sent a representative to Geneva to
meet with the Commissioner at a time of his choosing,
with various dates suggested before the issuance of the
procedural report. On the basis of that meeting, the
Commissioner and one of his assistants visited Syria
on 12 September 2005. During that visit, procedures
were agreed on for those whom the Commission
wished to interview. However, paragraph 34 of the
report states that the Syrian Authorities refused to have
the Commission interview those individuals in a third
country. It goes on to report that each interview was
conducted in the presence of a representative of the
Syrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, one interpreter, two
note takers and additional persons whose affiliations
were not identified. In paragraph 35, the report
concludes that the lack of cooperation of the Syrian
Government with the Commission has impeded the
investigation and made it difficult to follow leads
established by the evidence collected from a variety of
sources. That is an extremely strange statement, as it
runs counter to the agreement made with the
Commissioner of the Investigative Commission.

Syria offered for the meetings to be held in any
place on Syrian territory to be chosen freely by the
Commission. The Commission expressed its wish to
have the interviews take place near the Syrian-
Lebanese border and that was precisely what happened.
The Commission could have rejected that arrangement.
Concerning the presence of a representative of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs at the interviews, the
representative in question was a lawyer and was
present in that capacity. Mr. Mehlis did not object to
the representative's presence. He could have objected
to that and his request would have been honoured. As
for the presence of a note taker, the note taker was
present at Mr. Mehlis's request, so that the witness
could read the record of their testimony and sign it in
Arabic. As for the presence of other persons referred to
in the report, the Commission must identify them,
because the place where the interviews took place was
under United Nations security control.

Following those meetings and interviews, one of
the investigators informed us on 22 September that the
group would like to come back and hear from other
witnesses whose names were mentioned during the
interviews. Syria agreed to that request, but the
Commission has not returned to Damascus. It should
be recalled that the Commission contacted the Legal
Adviser to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for more
information in order to complete its investigation after
leaving Damascus. Syria provided the Commission
with the answers requested at the time. All of which
proves that Syria has fully cooperated with the
Commission and therefore refutes the accusation that it
failed to do so.

In paragraph 16 of its report, the Commission
complained that the media had a tendency to
continuously publish rumours and speculation. Syria
has had reason to complain about the media campaign
against it because of the leaks from the Commission
and from certain quarters of the United Nations.
Moreover, we had thought that the Commission was
committed to the principle of confidentiality in
carrying out its investigation. However, that principle
was repeatedly violated before the writing of the
report, in addition to the fact that the report itself was
leaked to the media before it was given to us.

We must also recall that an agreement was
reached with Mr. Mehlis and that the Commission had
sufficient time to review the agreement and to request
that it be amended between the two parties in a manner
consistent with the Commission's approach. However,
nothing of the sort was put before us.

During the past period, Syria has cooperated
faithfully and sincerely with the International
Independent Investigation Commission. As we have
stated previously, that stems not only from Syria's
commitment to international legality, but also from its
serious desire to arrive at the truth. Here, I should like
to reaffirm before the Council that during the coming
period, Syria will continue to cooperate with the
Commission and will provide it with any information
that can assist it in concluding its investigation and in
arriving at the truth.

His Excellency Mr. Bashar Al-Assad, President of
the Syrian Arab Republic, has stated that Syria is
innocent of this crime and is ready and willing to
pursue and prosecute any Syrian conclusively
implicated in it. Syria is the main victim of this crime,

in particular because the relations between Syria and
the late Prime Minister Hariri had been characterized
by cooperation and respect since the mid-1980s. That
fact was personally reaffirmed by the Prime Minister in
an interview with the Lebanese newspaper As-Safir on
14 February 2005, minutes before he was assassinated.

Finally, in its report the International Independent
Investigation Commission acknowledged that it has an
extensive programme of work and that it considers all
persons - including those against whom it has
levelled accusations - to be innocent until proven
guilty. Therefore, the Commission should not have
accused or cast doubt on anyone; it should have limited
itself to submitting a procedural report pending the
completion of its investigation into the various areas
referred to in its report, and it should have provided
evidence for its accusations.

We look forward to the Security Council's
consideration of the report in the light of the points we
8

have just raised. Those points have also been raised by
hundreds of specialists, jurists and politicians in many
countries. Lebanon and the region from which we
come need tranquillity and stability, not further
destabilization and suffering.

In conclusion, I reiterate that Syria will spare no
effort to achieve the stability of Lebanon, because that
is at the heart of our strategy and of the aspirations of
the two brotherly Syrian and Lebanese peoples.

