Mr. Ould Hadrami (Mauritania) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me, at the outset, to express my deep
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting. I also take this opportunity to
welcome and congratulate you on assuming your
position as President of the Security Council for this
month. My delegation also thanks Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
valuable briefing.

The Security Council is meeting today to
consider the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. The meeting is taking place at a
time when tension continues to spread throughout the
area due to the disastrous effects of the destructive
Israeli war machine in the Gaza Strip including
immense destruction that did not spare even United
Nations facilities. Our Government therefore reiterates
the need for the international community, represented
by the Security Council as the organ charged with
maintaining international peace and security, to find a
just solution for the Palestinian people that guarantees
their right to self-determination and to establish an
independent State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, so
they may live side by side in peace and security with
the State of Israel. My Government also emphasizes
the need for the international community to work as
soon as possible to compel Israel to immediately halt
its ongoing illegal settlement activities in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, which seriously
threaten the demographic composition and geographic
integrity of the Holy City. The international community
must also urge Israel to end the blockade of the Gaza
Strip and implement the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including resolution 1860 (2009), which
calls, inter alia, for the unimpeded provision and
distribution of humanitarian assistance, including food,
fuel and medical treatment, to citizens throughout
Gaza, for the opening of humanitarian corridors and for
international efforts to alleviate the humanitarian and
economic situation in Gaza.

Our Government also notes with satisfaction the
results of the Sharm el-Sheikh donor conference and
calls upon the parties to expedite the delivery of
assistance to the Palestinian people, especially in Gaza,
and to begin reconstruction as soon as possible. We
also welcome the results of the inter-Palestinian
reconciliation talks and look forward to the
establishment, as soon as possible, of a national unity
Government that responds to the aspirations of the
Palestinian people.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to
emphasize that any solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict
cannot be achieved without the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, and without the return of all of the
territories occupied in 1967 including the Syrian
Golan, the Lebanese Sheba'a farms and the Lebanese
part of Ghajar village. That can only happen through
Israel's compliance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

