Mr. Miller (United States of America):
Mr. President, I appreciate your initiative in scheduling
this open discussion of the Peacebuilding Commission.

I will be brief, as I think it is more important that
we listen to our guests here today, including the
President of the Economic and Social Council,
Assistant Secretary-General McAskie, the Chairman of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the chairs of the country-specific
meetings of that Commission, the representatives of
the World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund
and particularly the Permanent Representatives of
Burundi and Sierra Leone.

I suggest that we look at this debate and the
discussion on the Peacebuilding Commission to take
place soon in the General Assembly as opportunities to
re-energize our common effort to better contribute to
concrete results on the ground. No one working in
post-conflict situations, no citizen of a country trying
to emerge from months or years of fighting cares at all
about United Nations lines of authority or the
institutional breakdown of seats around the conference
room table. They care and we should care - about
results. What we all agree on is the goal of
strengthening the Commission's ability to make a real
difference in strategies to support countries emerging
from conflict, to help these societies establish the
institutions and systems necessary to prevent a relapse
into violence.

From the United States perspective as a member
of the Security Council, the goal of the Commission
must be to facilitate better coordination between the
Council's security component and the broader post-
conflict stabilization efforts of the international
community. The Commission should provide a forum
for the various agencies, Governments and
organizations involved in a particular post-conflict
situation to come together and share their assessments
and work plans and to better coordinate and target their
respective efforts, and for the Council to benefit from
their common advice and best recommendations.

The strength of the Peacebuilding Commission
will be found through pragmatic, action-oriented and
country-specific recommendations to address the
problems of post-conflict peacebuilding. The problems
encountered by countries emerging from conflict are
not solely - and for some, not even mainly - a lack
of resources. In any event, this is something for which
the Commission will not be able to compensate.
Rather, the problems have rather to do with how to
ensure that the activities of the national Government
and outside partners are well coordinated, that the
significant funds available through existing donor
mechanisms are best utilized and that the international
community's attention to these countries' needs does
not fade.

We will take this same practical spirit into the
discussions that take place in the General Assembly, in
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission itself and, most importantly, in the
Commission's country-specific meetings. We hope
others do too.

We appreciate the opportunity today to hear the
views of others, both inside this Council and out, on
how we can help the Commission better serve our
common goal.

