The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Security Council, I wish to convey my heartfelt
condolences to the Government and the people of
the United States of America following the death of
Mr. George Herbert Walker Bush, forty-first President
of the United States. President Bush left us after a long
and illustrious career in the service of his country,
including as Permanent Representative of the United
States to the United Nations, where he presided over
the Security Council in May 1972.

On behalf of the Council, I invite all attendees to
stand and observe a minute of silence in memory of
President Bush.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute ofsilence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Post-conflict reconstruction and peace, security
and stability

Letter dated 28 November 2018 from the
Permanent Representative of Cfite d'Ivoire
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2018/1063)

The President (spoke in French): I wish to
warmly welcome the Secretary-General, Ministers and
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Burkina Faso, Japan, Rwanda and
Senegal to participate in this meeting.

On behalf ofthe Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Paul Robert Tiendrebeogo, Minister for African
Integration and Burkinabes Living Abroad of Burkina
Faso.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/1063, which contains a letter dated
28 November 2018 from the Permanent Representative
of Cote d'Ivoire to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, and give him the
floor.

The Secretary- General (spoke in French): I extend
a warm welcome to His Excellency President Alassane
Ouattara and at the same time thank Cote d'Ivoire for
using its presidency of the Security Council to propose
today's theme, which emphasizes the links between
sustainable economic development, peace and security.

The experience of C6te d'Ivoire itself, which is
moving forward on the path of peacebuilding and
development, shows us that peace and development are
indivisible. In addition, having hosted a United Nations
peacekeeping operation on its soil, Cote d'Ivoire can
make a valuable contribution and share its experience
with ongoing peace operations in other countries
around the world. These facts undoubtedly attest to the
results we can achieve if we work together. This is the
very spirit of my Action for Peacekeeping initiative.

In the long term and in the light of the acute and
protracted crises that shake the world today, it is clear
that the main method of responding to crises has too
high a human and financial cost. That is why I am
so keen to refocus our activities on prevention, to
rebalance our action in the fields of peace and security,
and to coordinate our activities across the three pillars
of peace, sustainable development and human rights.
Peace cannot be sustainable without development, and
sustainable peace is essential for the preservation of
development gains. Based on this observation, I would
like to share four key messages with the Security
Council today.

First, we must take a holistic approach. This
approach essentially implies that we combat such
potential factors of instability as inequalities, climate
change, competition for resources, corruption and
cross-border crime. It also requires a real awareness that
investing in basic services, sustainable development and
social cohesion is investing in peace. Finally, it requires
a better adaptation of the United Nations presence to the
changing needs of countries that, in the aftermath of a
violent conflict, seek to establish lasting peace. To this
end, we must give priority to meeting the needs of the
host country and mobilizing the entire United Nations
system - all peace operations, all humanitarian and
development actors - around these needs. This is
one of the fundamental elements of the reforms I have
undertaken. Unfortunately, all too often, countries
that have experienced crises can sometimes return to
violence if a development programme inclusive is not
well conducted.

Secondly, we need to adopt more inclusive
approaches. It is essential that peace and development
activities be owned, led and carried out by national and
local actors. For this to occur, we must mobilize citizens
first and foremost, as well as the private sector, and
ensure that the scope for civil society action remains
intact. We must also involve in our efforts the social
strata that are too often marginalized and excluded, such
as women and girls, the elderly, young people, people
with disabilities and members of minority groups.
The participation of women, in particular, is a sure
way to improve the effectiveness and sustainability of
peacebuilding. Their contribution is indeed crucial to
the economic recovery, political legitimacy and social
cohesion.

(spoke in English)

Thirdly, we need more partnerships. I am
committed to further strengthening ties with regional
and subregional organizations and with international
financial institutions to safeguard development gains,
strengthen resilience and build local capacities to
prevent and respond to conflicts. This is particularly
important in transition settings, once the mission
departs and international attention and resources
typically start to decline.

Our partnership with the African Union is key and
continues to deepen. We have signed joint frameworks
on peace and security and on implementation of
Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Further, we have conducted joint
missions focused on women, demonstrating the central
importance of gender equality. Earlier this year, I signed
a Strategic Partnership Framework with the World
Bank, and we are operationalizing the findings of our
joint study, Pathways for Peace." Inclusive Approaches
to Preventing Violent Conflict.

The Peacebuilding Commission has a useful
convening and bridging role to play as a platform
where diverse actors and stakeholders foster coherence
among political objectives and support sustainable
development in countries affected by conflict. Indeed,
the Commission's dialogues with local peace activists
and civil society have been essential in connecting
country-level peacebuilding efforts with global policy
discussions.

Fourthly, we need adequate and predictable
resources for peacebuilding and development actors
during the conflict cycle. We must support Member
States in strengthening domestic resource mobilization
and in attracting external investments.

The Peacebuilding Fund needs and deserves greater
support. As a catalytic, fast and flexible vehicle, the
Fund fosters local participation and, crucially, provides
support in remote areas, including cross-border
zones, that are often overlooked. The Fund has also
allocated more than 30 per cent of its annual resources
to supporting women's rights and gender equality for
sustaining peace. I reiterate my call to all Member
States and United Nations organizations to follow
this example. I also appeal once again for African-led
peace operations acting under the Security Council's
authority to receive predictable, sustainable and
flexible financing, including through United Nations-
assessed contributions where appropriate.

I am strongly committed to supporting the Security
Council as we strive together to strengthen our work
across the peace continuum.

Restructuring and repositioning the peace and
security and development pillars of the United Nations
will help foster a new generation of approaches
and architecture to more effectively respond to the
world's most pressing problems. The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and sustaining peace are
complementary and mutually reinforcing. I encourage
all actors to do more to embrace those frameworks as
our best guarantees against instability and insecurity.
I once again thank His Excellency President Ouattara
and Cote d'Ivoire for focusing our attention on this
crucial work.

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

I now give the floor to Mr. Faki Mahamat.


