Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for this new opportunity to inform the Security Council
on the situation in Darfur. As you have indicated, two
recent reports of the Secretary-General will be the
focus of our meeting today: the regular report on the
activities of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2015/14l) and the
special report ofMarch (S/2015/l63). In accordance with
paragraph 7 ofresolution 2173 (2014), the special report
is dedicated specifically to the implementation of the
new strategic priorities of UNAMID, highlighting the
progress made and the major difficulties encountered
during this exercise. It also provides a comprehensive
analysis of the current situation in Darfur, information
on the progress of the implementation of the UNAMID

mandate and an update on the process of transferring
certain activities of the Mission to agencies and United
Nations country teams, as well as the development of
an exit strategy for UNAMID.

Since the adoption of its three strategic priorities
under resolution 2148 (2014) of3 April 2014, UNAMID
has made significant progress in their implementation.
Members will recall that these three priorities are, first,
mediation between the Government of the Sudan and
non-signatory armed movements on the basis of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur; secondly, the
protection of civilians, the facilitation of the delivery
of humanitarian assistance and the safety and security
of humanitarian personnel; and thirdly, the provision
of support, in conjunction with the United Nations
country team, to the mediation of community conflict,
including through measures to address its root causes.

Regarding the first priority of mediation support,
the Joint Chief Mediator of the African Union and the
United Nations has continued to support the efforts of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel to
establish an inclusive peace process. Throughout 2014,
the Joint Chief Mediator has urged non-signatory rebel
groups to join the peace process on the basis of the
Doha Document without preconditions. The Sudanese
Government has been encouraged to establish the
conditions necessary a peaceful resolution of the
various conflicts in the country.

Following these efforts, direct negotiations among
the Government of the Sudan, the Sudan Liberation
Army/Minni Minawi and the Justice and Equality
Movement-Gibril Ibrahim took place in late November
2014 in Addis Ababa under the auspices of the High
Level Panel. However, they have been suspended
due to differences between the parties on the agenda
and modalities of the discussions. The Sudanese
Government in particular rejected proposals of rebel
groups, which had insisted that humanitarian matters,
reconciliation and other issues relating to development
and land be the subject of separate negotiations. During
the discussions, the Sudanese Government maintained
its position that the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
is the sole frame of reference, while the rebel groups
reiterated that the provisions of the agreement did not
necessarily commit them.

With respect to the protection of civilians,
UNAMID continued to protect the sites and camps
for displaced people and civilians in general through
patrols and strategic deployment. To meet the needs of
threatened civilians, the Mission established protective
areas in and around the camps in Saraf Omra, Kosma
and Um Baru in North Darfur, as well as in Khor
Abeche in South Darfur. This required the deployment
of additional military and police units to protect the
humanitarian operations and provide them with the
necessary logistical support. Through its contacts
with the leaders of the various communities and the
Sudanese authorities, UNAMID has helped prevent
and thwart attacks on civilians population in Kalma,
Labado and Kabkabiya in South Darfur, East Darfur
and North Darfur, respectively.

To promote intercommunity dialogue and contain
local conflicts, the Mission has been in constant contact
with traditional leaders, central and local authorities,
civil society and youth groups. This commitment,
aimed at supporting mediation efforts, led to the
signing of local cessation of hostilities agreements
that have reduced the violence caused by the four
major communal conflicts in the region, namely, those
between the Ma'alia and the Rizeigat and between the
Ma'alia and the Hammar in East Darfur; between
the Beni Hussein and the Northern Rizeigat in North
Darfur; and between the Salamat and the Misseriya
in Central Darfur. Clearly, it is a highly disjointed
scenario throughout Darfur.

(spoke in English)

Concurrently, the Mission has also worked
towards addressing the three main challenges to its
mandate implementation, as identified in last year's
strategic review. Cooperation with the Government
has improved, at least in terms of reduced duration of
approvals for contingent-owned equipment and visa
requests, although some are still outstyanding. But the
biggest problem is the Government's denial of access to
UNAMID to conflict-affected areas, which continues
to impede significantly the ability of the Mission
to implement its protection of civilians mandate.
Members will recall that this was the case in Thabit,
North Darfur, following the allegations of mass rape
in October, and has also been the case in eastern Jebel
Marra in the wake of the increase in fighting between
the Government and the armed groups since December.
Similar access restrictions have also been imposed
on humanitarian actors, which has delayed response
efforts in areas most affected by the recent operations.

Over the past 12 months, UNAMID has
implemented a series of measures to address the
challenge of the operational capabilities of its troops
and their effectiveness on the ground. The military
component has undergone structural and compositional
changes and - I am pleased to say - increased the
serviceability rate of its equipment to over 90 per cent;
it has also improved the maintenance of oversight and
the provision of guidance to its units. I have to add that,
in recent months, we have taken drastic measures in
four cases to send home some units that had proved
on the ground to be behaving in a way that was not
suitable. That includes the units and their commanders.

A military capability study will be conducted over
the next three months in order to ensure that the current
force deployment is fully aligned with the strategic
priorities and evolving security challenges on the
ground. On its part, the police component has completed
the streamlining of its strength and command-and-
control structures, and increased operational flexibility
through proactive deployment in response to security
threats. I have to add that many of these measures
were taken on the basis of recommendations that
were formulated by the first mission that the Director
for Peacekeeping Strategic Partnership - whom I
continue to call the Inspector General - sent last
year to Darfur. He made a number of assessments and
recommendations that have provided a very solid basis
for us to work on during this period.

In order to improve internal coordination,
UNAMID has also substantially revised its management
structures and coordination mechanisms between its
various components, yet some of the major challenges
remain, including the need to improve the Mission's
reporting and analysis of incidents, its internal
and external communications approach, and the
recruitment of personnel to key posts. Despite strategic
and operational-level improvements in coordination
with the United Nations country team, further progress
is also needed on establishing an effective Darfur-wide
early warning and response system.

Let me now provide an update and analysis of
the current situation in Darfur. The security situation
has deteriorated significantly over the past year.
Fighting between the Government of the Sudan
and the non-signatory armed groups has increased
significantly. In an effort to defeat the armed groups,
the Government has implemented its Decisive Summer
military offensive through the use of the Rapid Support
Forces (RSF), a counter-insurgency militia with aerial
and ground support from the Sudanese armed forces.
That did not result in a decisive military victory, but
the two-stage Government offensive significantly
weakened and isolated the armed groups geographically.
It also caused a significant loss of lives and large-scale
displacement.

The first phase of the operation, which was
conducted from January to May 2014, degraded the
military capacity of the Sudan Liberation Army/
Minni Minawi (SLA/MM) and dislodged it from its
strongholds in east and South Darfur. After a six-
month lull in the fighting, which coincided with the
rainy season, in December the Government launched
the second phase of the operation, which focused
primarily on removing the Sudan Liberation Army/
Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW) from its strongholds in north
and east Jebel Marra. In December 2014 and January
2015, Government forces attacked SLA/AW positions
in North, West and Central Darfur, while the SLA-MM
announced plans to retake some of the strongholds in
had lost in the first phase of the offensive in North,
South and East Darfur. In December, fighting between
the Government and the SLA-MM. erupted near Tawilla,
North Darfur. In January, Government forces captured
Orchi village, in the Um Baru locality in North Darfur,
from the SLA/MM. Fighting continues to be reported
in Jebel Marra, forcing the population to flee. Between
4 and 10 March, clashes were reported between the
RSF and the SLA/MM. in Central and South Darfur.
Against that background, on 10 March, a joint World
Food Programme-UNAMID convoy travelling in North
Darfur was ambushed by unidentified armed men. I am
pleased to inform the Council that the troops escorting
the convoy behaved most gallantly and effectively.

The humanitarian situation in Darfur also
deteriorated significantly in 2014. We estimate that no
less than 450,000 people were displaced as a result of
the violence - the highest number in any single year
since the peak ofthe conflict, in 2004. Ofthose persons,
at least 300,000 remain displaced, mostly in camps
for internally displaced persons. The total number of
displaced persons in Darfur has now reached above
2.5 million. That negative trend persists, most recently
with the continuation of fighting. We estimate that at
least 43,000 new displacements have occurred since the
beginning of the year.

The current upsurge in violence in Darfur is largely
attributable, at least for now, to the ongoing Government
of the Sudan and the RSF military offensive. It is not
directly linked to the forthcoming Sudanese general
elections. As the Council knows, those are scheduled to
start on 13 April. However, events on the ground may
change with the intensification of election campaigns.
Recent calls by Sheikh Musa Hilal for the boycott of
the elections and the disruption of the electoral process
across Darfur should his demands of the Government
not be met could affect the political and security
situation in North Darfur in the coming weeks. Should
that threat materialize, existing inter-tribal tensions
may be heightened with strict security measures and the
deployment of additional Government security forces.
With the breakdown in the talks on Darfur and on the
Two Areas and with the implementation of measures by
the Government that had the effect of curtailing political
freedom, the prospects for the holding of the national
dialogue between the Government and the opposition
before the elections remain doubtful. However, from
24 to 28 February, Sudanese opposition parties, armed
movements and civil society held a meeting in Berlin,
following which they adopted the Berlin declaration
calling for the convening of an inclusive preparatory
meeting at African Union headquarters in Addis Ababa
to revive the national dialogue. The declaration seems
to demonstrate a certain degree of consensus among
the opposition to re-engage in the national dialogue.
On 9 March, the National Congress Party welcomed the
Berlin Declaration as well as meetings and agreements
that could lead to the national dialogue without
preconditions. It is said that President Al-Bashir
subsequently pushed away the Berlin Declaration, so
that remains to be clarified.

With regard to the steps towards the handover
of certain tasks to the United Nations country team,
preliminary discussions on identifying relevant tasks
that could be transferred following the revision of the
mission's strategic priorities have been completed. It
is envisaged that the transfer would be implemented
in phased manner, taking into account the security
situation in Darfur and the availability of funds and
capacity for the country team. Our proposal will
be presented to the Council in the next report of the
Secretary-General at the end of May.

Further to the Council's request on the development
of an exit strategy, the United Nations, the African Union
and the Government of the Sudan have commenced
discussions. From 15 to 18 February in Khartoum, an
agreement was reached on the terms of reference for
establishment of a joint working group, which started
meeting today in Khartoum. The group will review
the situation in Darfur and develop a road map for the
gradual exit of the mission. Upon the completion of
its work, it will submit its report on the exit strategy
to the Government of the Sudan, the African Union
Commission and the Secretariat. The report will then
be submitted to the Council and to the African Union
Peace and Security Council for consideration at the
end of May. Needless to say, we count on the total
cooperation of the Government of the Sudan in that
very important phase, so that we can make progress.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, the evolution of the situation in
Darfur over the past 12 months has, unfortunately,
shown no sign of improvement or tangible progress
towards a resolution of the conflict. In that context, the
three strategic priorities recommended by the review of
UNAMID and endorsed by the Security Council remain
entirely relevant. Their implementation is the primary
objective of the mission. It is therfore more necessary
than ever that the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council jointly intensify
pressure on the parties so that they enter into genuine,
direct negotiations for a cessation of hostilities, which
is the first step towards a comprehensive and final
peace in Darfur.

