Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I, too, would like to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson and Assistant

Secretary-General Simonovie for their briefings and
our colleague from Ukraine for his statement.

Last Sunday, a hastily crafted illegal referendum
took place in Ukraine's Crimea - a referendum held
in a region cut off from its mainland and the rest of
the world by another country's armed forces and
under a heavy barrage of aggressive anti-Ukrainian
propaganda.

Representatives of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Council of
Europe and key United Nations national and regional
organizations with outstanding experience in human
rights monitoring and the organization and observation
of elections were all prevented from entering Crimea.
The plebiscite was organized in a record short period
of time, probably a first in the practice of referendums,
without nationwide preparations or consultations. Not
a single credible international observer was present to
verify and ascertain that this hurried referendum was
free and fair. Those facts alone are sufficient to raise
alarms about the quality of the referendum and its
fraudulence.

At the same time, notably while representatives
of major international organizations, monitors and
observers were prevented from entering Crimea, more
than 100 so-called "independent referendum observers",
as our French colleague has stated, who were well-
established hard-line nationalists, Nazi sympathizers,
deniers of the Holocaust, anti-semites, deniers of the
massacre of Srebrenica and Islamophobes - hardly a
company to keep for those who claim to protect Europe,
Ukraine and Crimea from fascism - were able to
observe and to ascertain that allegedly the referendum
was fine and fair.

The indigenous Tatar population, for whom Crimea
is the only place on Earth they can call home and whose
massive deportation by Stalin in cattle cars is still
very much alive in their collective memory, called to
boycott the election as contrary to their desire to be an
integral part of Ukraine. How about their right to self-
determination?

The so-called referendum is nothing but an
undisguised land grab and a blatant violation by Russia
of the Charter of the United Nations, international
law, as well as bilateral and multilateral agreements
and commitments. A country which should have
been a guarantor of Ukraine's sovereignty, as per
the 1994 Budapest Memorandum, breached its
legal responsibility towards Ukraine to protect its
sovereignty and territorial integrity in exchange for its
renunciation of nuclear weapons. How does that bode
for the non-proliferation regime?

Sunday's referendum is nothing else but a fraudulent
sham whose sole purpose was to rubber-stamp the illegal
annexation of a part of Ukraine. As such, it cannot be
recognized by the international community. Lithuania
once again calls on all States to reject that act, not to
recognize the illegal joining of a part of the territory
of sovereign Ukraine to the Russian Federation and to
reaffirm their support for the principles of the United
Nations Charter and the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine.

How deeply ironic is the fact that, carried out under
the false pretext of protecting human and minority
rights, the aggression against Crimea is carried out
by pro-Russian militants with Moscow's support,
causing serious and repeated human rights violations
against the Crimean population through incitement
against Ukrainians, extreme censorship, shutting down
media outlets and press hubs, cases of arbitrary arrest,
detention and enforced disappearances, routine attacks
against journalists, vandalism, beatings and other ill-
treatment?
Furthermore, the outcome of the referendum and
the rushed admittance of Crimea into the Russian fold
will further infringe upon the rights of large numbers of
Crimea's inhabitants, who will be forced to make heart-
rending choices regarding their loyalty to the Ukrainian
State and their citizenship, with serious consequences
for their families, their property rights and their future.

One country appropriating at will a part of a
neighbouring country is a profoundly disturbing signal
to everyone that, once again, territories are up for
grabs and that the international norms guaranteeing the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and the inviolability of
States can be rewritten by force. Who will be next?

