Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of
all, Sir, I should like to congratulate on you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to pay a well-deserved tribute to the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation for his
outstanding presidency last month. I should also like to
warmly thank Mr. Alvaro de Soto, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General to the
Palestinian Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority. This important debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
enables us to keep constantly under careful review the
issue of stability in the Middle East, which is a crucial
item on the international peace and security agenda.

My delegation wishes to draw attention to recent
developments in the situation in occupied Palestinian
territory, which are cause for renewed concern
regarding the chances for a resumption of the Israeli-
Palestinian peace talks. It is a matter of regret that
every time we have some hope for the establishment of
conditions for peace in the region, various acts are

committed that once again undermine what has been
achieved as a result of long years of effort and
compromise, as well as the desire of the protagonists
on both sides to commit themselves resolutely to the
path of peaceful coexistence between the Palestinian
and Israeli peoples.

Indeed, the climate of relative calm which
recently reigned between Israelis and Palestinians has
just suffered yet another blow following a decision
taken by the Israeli authorities to begin on Tuesday,
6 February 2007, an archaeological dig at the foot of
the mosque compound in Jerusalem, in addition to the
construction work for a new bridge leading to the
Al-Maghariba gate. The implementation of this project
for a bridge by the Israeli occupation authorities is
paralleled by drastic measures restricting the freedoms
of Palestinians, especially the prohibition against entry
by anyone younger than 45 years of age into the area of
the Al-Aqsa mosque. This is a flagrant violation of the
right of this people to have access to its religious sites.

This Israeli initiative is likely to increase the
climate of tension and violence in the region and could
also revive the anger and bitterness of the Islamic
umma, which would have consequences for the overall
process for a settlement of the Israeli-Arab conflict.
This is especially true since the Al-Aqsa mosque
represents the third holiest place for Islam after Mecca
and Medina in Saudi Arabia. In this regard, Senegal
emphasizes the need to conserve the tri-faith nature of
the holy city of Jerusalem and calls upon Israel to
urgently halt its policy of the systematic destruction of
the symbols of Islam in that city.

In the same vein, my delegation is of the View
that none of the parties can gain from committing acts
which could have the effect of compromising peaceful
coexistence between the Arab and Jewish peoples and
the stability of the Middle East region as a whole.

My delegation welcomes the inter-Palestinian
agreements achieved in Mecca on 9 February 2007
between Fatah and Hamas on the formation of a
government of national unity in Palestine. These
agreements should bring about reconciliation among
Palestinian leaders with a view to resuming
negotiations with the Israeli authorities. With this in
View, we call upon the international community, and
more particularly the Quartet, to help in this process
with a view towards a rapid return to the negotiation
table and the implementation of the relevant peace
plans.

For its part, the United Nations, and more
specifically the Security Council, should continue to
urge all the parties to respect and strictly implement its
resolutions and international law. Senegal places a
great deal of hope in the activities of the new
Secretary-General, who, thanks to his qualities as a
seasoned diplomat, in which he resembles his
predecessor, could play a decisive role to that end.

