Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): It is an
honour at the outset to warmly congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your impressive performance in
presiding over the deliberations of the Security Council
during the month of September. I also wish to
congratulate your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Colombia, on his excellent
stewardship of the Council during the past month.

I wish to welcome the Secretary-General. We are
very pleased at his presence at this important meeting,
at which an issue that affects my country is being
debated.

I address the Council following its adoption of
the resolution to lift sanctions against the Sudan. This
resolution has come as the fruit of enormous efforts
undertaken by the Sudan in order to cooperate with the
international community, as represented by the Security
Council, on the basis of the firm tenets of the Sudan's
foreign policy, which is anchored in our commitment to
promote conditions of international peace and security,
the primary objective of this Council.

I wish to take this opportunity to thank all
members of the Security Council who have appreciated
my country's seriousness and good faith in putting an
end to the factors that led to the imposition of sanctions
against my country in 1996. Special thanks go to the
Non-Aligned Movement caucus in the Council, which
sponsored this resolution on behalf of the larger
membership of the Non-Aligned Movement. I also
wish to thank the permanent members of the Council,
who have appreciated my country's wisdom and
positive honouring of its commitment to comply with
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

More than one year has elapsed since the question
of lifting the sanctions against the Sudan was last
debated in the Security Council. In fact, that happened
during your previous presidency of the Council, Sir.
During this period many bilateral dialogues were
undertaken between the Sudan and some members of
the Security Council. Despite the fact that such
dialogues delayed the adoption of this resolution for
some time, we can safely say that they were
constructive and useful and were characterized by
constructive and professional diplomatic work. We
believe that this will lay a solid foundation for wider
areas of cooperation in the future.

In closing, I would like to take this historic
opportunity to assure the Council, on behalf of the
Government and the people of my country, that the
resolution just adopted represents a strong impetus for
my country to proceed forward and to cooperate in
efforts to eliminate terrorism, and to engage in the
mainstream work of the international community and
its organs, foremost of which is the Security Council,
in order to eliminate international terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, with a view to creating a
world where justice, peace, security and stability reign
supreme.

