Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to thank Mr. Fisher, Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for presenting
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/139). I
express our support to him for the success of his task. I
welcome the presence of Mr. Fernando Carrera Castro,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala, at this
debate.

As we have seen over the past months, the Republic
of Haiti remains vulnerable, in particular with regard to
climate. While the country continues to struggle against
the devastating effects of the 2010 earthquake, it has
suffered in the wake of Hurricane Sandy and tropical
storm Isaac, which affected more than 2 million people.
Moreover, three years after the 2010 earthquake, it is
clearly noticeable that the international community's
humanitarian support in Haiti is diminishing despite
the fact that the stabilization process has not yet been
finalized. This quarterly debate of the Council on the
developing situation in Haiti should enable us to draw
attention to the various plans and strategies under way
that are not always supported by adequately funding
from the international community. We must ensure that
the achievements of these past years are sustained.

On the political front, Morocco welcomes the many
positive developments towards finalizing the necessary
institutional reforms to strengthen the rule of law in
Haiti. At the same time, as the Secretary-General notes,
complications linked to establishing the temporary body
of the Permanent Electoral Council continue to push
back the date for the legislative, local and municipal
elections - a phase that remains crucial.

On the security front, the situation remains stable
despite an increase in demonstrations and some civil
disputes. In the light of the consolidation plan and the
gradual drawdown of United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) troops, we must
continue to underscore in parallel the strengthening of
the police force. In that connection, we commend the
increased effectiveness of the Haitian National Police,
which continues to build its capacities with the support
of MINUSTAH. Moreover, the rate of recruitment
could be significantly sped up in order to achieve the
objectives of the 2012-2016 plan, namely, incraeasing
the force to 15,000 police officers.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, despite
the fact that the number of people living in the camps
continues to fall, partly thanks to the programmes
launched by the Government with United Nations
support, the Secretary-General's report notes with
concern the worsening humanitarian situation in the
country. With the withdrawal of more than half of
the non-governmental organizations present in 2010
and many partners following the fall in available
funding, the provision of basic services in the camps
has considerably lessened. That is further exacerbated
by the risk of a food crisis, which cannot be ignored,
all the more since the recent Hurricane Sandy had a
significant impact on the country's agricultural land.
Combating the risk of food insecurity is, moreover, a
core aspect of the humanitarian plan for 2013, which
requires $144 million in funding.

Another key aspect of that plan is the fight against
cholera and better sanitary conditions. Despite a
decrease in the number of infected persons, there is a
real risk of a new outbreak since the departure of many
humanitarian groups and the lack of financial resources
prevent the existing infrastructure from functioning.

In order to optimize MINUSTAH's presence in
line with the country's needs, while keeping in mind
the transition phase of the Mission, a consolidation
plan for its withdrawal must be drawn up. We thank
the Secretariat for the report's annex, which clearly
present a concise and strategic version of that plan,
which holistically addresses the main difficulties still
to be overcome.

I should like to revert to one of the essential
elements that will affect of the withdrawal schedule
of MINUSTAH, which is the ability of the Haitian
National Police to guarantee security throughout
the country. We are encouraged by the fact that the
various operations under way to respond to the recent
resurgence of organized crime are being led by the
National Police, with the support of the Mission's police
and military components. We call on MINUSTAH to
maintain its support in order to ensure that the Haitian
National Police attains the objectives set down in the
consolidation plan. We also welcome MINUSTAH's
support in other key security sectors, such as capacity-
building in the judiciary and penal sectors.

Morocco has always stood by Haiti and its people.
Morocco is committed to continuing to help the country
to strengthen its capacities and build a prosperous future.
More than three years after the terrible earthquake that
shook the country, we welcome the efforts undertaken
by the Haitian authorities in various key areas for the
reconstruction and stabilization of the country. The
support and assistance of the international community
and the United Nations remain essential to allowing
Haiti to restore normalcy and meet the aspirations of
its people.

