Mr. Ivanou (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. Let
me express our belief that under your able guidance,
the Council will successfully deal with the difficult
tasks before it.

The delegation of the Republic of Belarus
reiterates its firm and unswerving commitment to the
process of the peaceful disarmament of Iraq based on
scrupulous compliance with the demands of the
Security Council under the United Nations Charter and
on unconditional compliance with all its relevant
decisions. The President and the Government of the
Republic of Belarus believe that the consistent efforts
of the inspectors of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in
Iraq have yielded concrete, practical results that
reaffirm the effectiveness and the correctness of the
policy chosen by the Security Council in resolution
1441 (2002), that of the disarmament of Iraq by
political and diplomatic means, in the interest of all
members of the international community. Those results,
as well as Iraq's gradually increasing cooperation with
UNMOVIC and the IAEA, cannot be disregarded or
groundlessly used to justify the choice of armed force.

We are resolutely against any kind of ultimatum
imposing a limiting time frame on the activities of the
inspectors or on the process for Iraq's compliance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions. The Republic
of Belarus advocates the further intensification of
inspection activities in Iraq and calls upon the
Government of Iraq to use all resources available to it
to ensure maximum, active cooperation with
UNMOVIC and the IAEA.

The continuing stirring of tensions around Iraq
and unabashedly warlike intentions cause the President
and Government of the Republic of Belarus deep
concern. In solidarity with the majority of the members
of the international community, Belarus sees no
alternative to a peaceful disarmament process in Iraq
and calls upon the members of the Security Council to
show firmness and wisdom in order to maintain peace
and to spare the Iraqi people and the entire region the
ills of war.

