Ms. Keita: It is my pleasure to address the Security
Council today and provide it with an update on the
operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-S Sahel), relevant international support,
including by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
and challenges encountered thus far, as well as possible
measures for further consideration in accordance with
the provisions of resolution 2391 (2017).

I do not need to remind the Council that the security
situation in the Sahel is dire. Just yesterday, we once
again received reports of a shooting in Ouagadougou.
Over the past weeks and months, local security forces
in the Liptako-Gourma triangle, as well as international
forces and MINUSMA, continued to face devastating
terrorist attacks, including on 18 April in Timbuktu.
However, let us not forget those who suffer the most:
local populations and civilians, who continue to be
intimidated and harassed, live in fear for their lives on
a daily basis, cannot send their children to school and/
or are unable to meet their most basic needs, including
access to food and nutrition. Terrorism and transnational
organized crime continue to be two of most pressing
security challenges facing the Sahel region, and I fear
that we will have to grapple with them for many years
to come.

Against that backdrop, I can only express
admiration for the member States of the G-5 Sahel,
which have taken their fate into their own hands, and
commend them for the efforts that they have undertaken
over the past year to operationalize the Joint Force. As
reported by the Secretary-General (S/2018/432), since
the authorization of its deployment by the African
Union Peace and Security Council this past April and
the subsequent renewal of its mandate only a month ago,
notable progress has been made. Member States of the
G-5 for the Sahel have begun deploying their troops and
equipping the command posts and sector headquarters
in all three sectors. Burkina Faso and the Niger have
each deployed one battalion on their respective borders
with Mali, while the deployment of the Malian battalion
in the Litpako-Gourma triangle is under way.

The Joint Force conducted its first two operations
in the Central Sector and undertook important
first steps towards establishing its human rights
compliance framework, including defining screening
and monitoring mechanisms to address human rights
violations. Nonetheless, much work remains ahead
of us. The operationalization of the Joint Force has
incurred delays and has yet to attain full operational
capability. I call on G-5 Sahel member States to
relentlessly follow up on the efforts made to date and
deploy remaining troops as quickly as possible so that
the Joint Force can resume its operations. I also call on
the G-5 Sahel to further clarify the Joint Force's concept
of operations and come together to jointly define its
end state and objectives. I also acknowledge that the
Joint Force continues to urgently require equipment
and training, including air and communication assets.
Those capability gaps are another important factor
delaying the full operationalization of the Joint Force,
and the support of the international community will be
required to overcome them.

While not underestimating the complexity of
military operations, we also believe it is important to
address the recent reports about allegations of human
rights Violations by security forces in the region as a
matter of priority, as those may constitute obstacles for
the provision of United Nations support. In particular,
I urge the member States of the G-5 Sahel to take
advantage of the efforts carried out by the Joint Force,
MINUSMA and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to establish a human
rights and international humanitarian law compliance
framework and cooperate for its rapid and effective
implementation, including by supporting effective
accountability mechanisms, ensuring the systematic
deployment and presence of provost officers at the
company level, and supporting the deployment of
United Nations teams in countries of the G-5 Sahel.

I also express my profound gratitude to the
international community for its sustained and continual
support to this important initiative. The outcomes of
the international high-level conference on the Sahel
held on 23 February in Brussels are a testament to that.
An additional €80 million was raised at the conference,
bringing the total amount of pledges in support of the
Joint Force for the first year to over €400 million, which
is almost the entirety of its projected budget for the first
year of operations. The member States ofthe G-5 for the
Sahel, the European Union and the United Nations also
signed the technical arrangement defining the scope
and modalities for providing MINUSMA support to the
Joint Force, as requested by resolution 2391 (2017), on
which we briefed the Council on 13 April.

I applaud the European Union for managing the
coordination hub, which is no small task. The hub is an
important tool for coordinating and mobilizing member
States' and partners' contributions. I also thank the
European Union for its own generous and important
contributions to MINUSMA's support to the Joint Force.
However, I am also concerned that, while the support
mobilized by the international community to date is
indeed commendable, the support mechanisms, such as
they have been set up by resolution 2391 (2017), will
require perpetual resource-generation efforts to fund
support to the Joint Force, including replenishing the
African Peace Facility. In the medium to long term, it
will be challenging to sustain the momentum achieved
so far. What is more, the United Nations will continue
to depend on others to be able to implement the support
measures it has been mandated to provide to the G-5 for
the Sahel Joint Force by resolution 2391 (2017).

(spoke in French)

To date, despite the significant number of pledges
received, the funds necessary to fully implement
MINUSMA'S support to the Joint Force has still not
been received. With the funds we have received so far,
the Mission can provide only essential consumable
goods and casualty evacuation. MINUSMA is still in
urgent need of funds to provide engineering support to
allow it to be able to assist in strengthening the G-5 for
the Sahel camps in Mali. The lack of secure operational
bases in Mali has proven to be a major obstacle to the full
operationalization of the Joint Force. The troops who
have already been deployed must live and conduct their
operations under the most difficult conditions. However,
MINUSMA's own experience in Mali demonstrates the
need for effective camp-protection measures. In that
regard, I call on all donors to make a contribution or
to earmark additional funds for MINUSMA's support
to the Joint Force. As the Council knows, MINUSMA's
support to the Joint Force is limited to Mali itself,
which is part of the Central Sector of the Joint Force's
operations. Therefore, I also call on donors to step up
their support to Sector East and Sector West, which so
far have not received support from the United Nations.
Finally, few of the pledges have been disbursed to date.
I call on donors to disburse them as soon as possible.

Over the long term a and here I echo the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in
his most recent report - our overall goal must be to
consider together which mechanisms will allow for
more predictable funding, including through mandatory
contributions, as well as support measures and more
predictable and sustainable financing, for the G-5
Sahel Joint Force. That would provide better support
for MINUSMA and ensure that it can effectively fulfil
its own mandate.

Ultimately, any attempt to overcome instability and
insecurity in the Sahel will succeed only ifit focuses on
the link between development, peace and security. The
interventions of the Joint Force will remain a security-
focused initiative, but must be embedded within
a broader and holistic framework, combined with
initiatives to improve governance, access to nutrition
and basic social services, and creating opportunities
for young people. They must also always maintain
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali as their primary objective, as
that is the cornerstone of all stabilization efforts in
the region.

I welcome the progress made in the establishment
of the Joint Force compliance framework, but I remain
concerned about reports of human rights violations
committed by local law-and-order forces. The Joint
Force will succeed only ifit enjoys the trust and support
of the local population.

I also welcome the efforts undertaken by the G-5
for the Sahel to strengthen its Permanent Secretariat
and its links with the Joint Force command in Sevare.
An important next step, which I urge the G-5 for the
Sahel to pursue, is the strengthening of its ownership
of efforts to operationalize the Joint Force, as well as
efforts to mobilize resources and to therefore establish
the support group. The establishment of such an
important structure would allow for more concerted
and systematic cooperation with the region, the African
Union and other international partners, and would
ensure that the Joint Force's operations were aligned
with a broader strategy for the region as a whole.

The commitment of the United Nations to that
important initiative remains unwavering. It is up to all
of us to ensure that the Joint Force succeeds.

