Mr. Chun (Republic of Korea): Mr. President,
the Republic of Korea welcomes your initiative to hold
today's open debate on Afghanistan. It is most timely
for the Security Council to draw the renewed attention
of the international community to the Afghan situation.
I join previous speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno and Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa for their extremely informative briefings this
morning.

Afghanistan has come a long way since the
launching of the Bonn Agreement a year and a half
ago. The political timelines set out in the Agreement
have so far been met. We note the encouraging
progress being made in the political processes of
transition towards a multi-ethnic, broad-based and fully
representative Afghan Government, including the work
of the Constitutional Commission in preparing a draft
constitution and preparatory work for next year's
general elections. We are also gratified to note that the
Afghan Transitional Administration has consolidated
government authority throughout the country.

We believe that these positive developments
would not have been possible without the sustained
commitment of the international community to the
Afghan peace process. In this respect, my Government
pays tribute to the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), under the leadership of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, the participating members of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and
other international agencies which are playing
indispensable roles in building a peaceful and
democratic Afghanistan.

Despite some encouraging developments, in
particular on the institution-building front, a host of
daunting challenges lie ahead on the path to building a
durable peace in Afghanistan. The fragile security
situation is the most serious one, as shown by the tragic
terrorist incident perpetrated against German ISAF
members earlier this month. My Government takes this
opportunity to express its deepest condolences to the
German Government and to the bereaved families.

The security situation will become more
precarious and the viability of the peace process may
be severely tested as we move closer to the national
elections scheduled for next year. For it is generally in
the run-up to elections that tensions and rivalries
between competing ethnic groups and factions become
more acute and come fully into play. The improvement
of the security situation is also essential to, among
other things, containing the centrifugal forces fuelled
by rampant factionalism and tribalism, which threaten
the sustainability of the peace process. In that regard,
the international community's sustained support for
security sector reform cannot be overemphasized.

Another related challenge that the Afghan peace
process faces today is the problem of drugs, which is
the focus of our debate. My Government shares the
profound concern over the nature and magnitude of the
drug problem in Afghanistan, which poses a serious
threat to the Afghan peace process and which has even
wider ramifications for the region.

The production and trafficking of drugs has long
been a prime factor in fuelling and sustaining intra-
Afghan conflicts. We believe that countering that
illegal sector of the economy should be an integral part,
and a top priority, of the international community's
efforts in support of the Afghan peace process. In that
respect, we appreciate the United Kingdom's lead in
supporting the Afghan Government's counter-narcotics
efforts, Germany's lead in police training, and the
efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime to strengthen the Afghan Government's
verification capacity. We share the view that the drug
eradication campaign will be more effective when
police enforcement is coupled with the availability of
alternative sources of livelihoods for farmers.

We believe that tangible progress in economic
reconstruction and rehabilitation is vital in making the
peace process irreversible. The Afghan people will
enjoy the real peace dividends to the fullest only when
they see progress in reconstruction and economic
development. The Republic of Korea is strongly
committed to reconstruction in Afghanistan. We are
proud of carrying out our assistance programmes for
Afghanistan, in line with our commitment to extend up
to $45 million through 2004 despite our difficult
financial situation. We are also contributing to Afghan
nation-building endeavours in the field of security by
dispatching army medical and engineering units to
Afghanistan and providing telecommunications
equipment to the Afghan national army. My
Government will continue to do everything in our
capacity to help the Afghan people realize a peaceful,
prosperous and democratic future.

The sustained support of the international
community is vital to the success of the Afghan peace
process and to reconstruction. But it cannot be a
substitute for the will and efforts of the Afghan people
and their leaders to help themselves in rebuilding their
country.

