Mr. Swan: I am pleased to address the Security
Council for the first time since assuming my duties
in June. I want to begin by affirming to the members
my full commitment to implementing the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM), approved by the Council in resolution 2461
(2019), and other relevant Council resolutions. I also
want to stress at the outset the central importance of
key cross-cutting priorities in all that we do, including
human rights, the women and peace and security
agenda, youth engagement and the inclusion of civil
society, among other issues.

Since my arrival in Somalia, I have been grateful
for the warm welcome by the Federal Government,
federal member states and all of the Somalis I have
had the pleasure of meeting. I also appreciate the
collaboration to date of the international partners
in Somalia and look forward to reinforcing that
collaboration. I am particularly grateful for the counsel
and close cooperation of Ambassador Francisco
Madeira, the Special Representative ofthe Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia, and I
pay tribute to the continued heroic sacrifice of forces of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for
the cause of peace in Somalia.

Since my return to a country I have followed
closely for many years, I have been impressed by many
visible signs of progress. I have visited each of the
federal member states and Somaliland, where I had an
opportunity to hear the perspectives of their leaders
and people. In my travels around the country, I have
observed many examples of recovery, development,
improving security and functional State institutions.
I have been deeply impressed, even moved, by the
resilience, commitment and courage of Somalis I
have encountered. This progress is a testimony to
the ambitious but achievable peacebuilding and
State-building agenda, to which Somalia's leaders
are committed.

Somalia and its international partners are eager
to see this progress advance between now and the
end of 2020 through constitutional reform, advances
in security operations and security sector reforms,
the achievement of debt relief leading to predictable
financing for development, and delivery on the
anticipated national elections. We must acknowledge the
gains made to date towards achieving these priorities.
Yet the window to achieve further necessary progress
on these issues is narrowing. Key benchmarks risk
falling behind agreed timelines. Further progress may
be delayed without renewed dialogue and cooperation
among all stakeholders.

Setting the stage to achieve these goals between
now and 2020 will require accelerated efforts in the next
several months. It will also require political consensus
and compromise among Somali leaders at the national
level - in both the executive and legislative branches
of Government - and particularly between the central
Government and the federal member states, on how
best to advance. We look forward to the next meeting of
the Somalia Partnership Forum in October, which will
provide an opportunity for Somalia and its international
partners to agree on the priority areas for action and to

catalyse progress on Somalia's State-building priorities
between now and the end of 2020.
The national electoral cycle in 2020 and 2021 offers
an opportunity to decisively advance the process of
democratization. Technical preparations continue to
make progress, a draft electoral law is under review by
the Federal Parliament and the National Independent
Electoral Commission is preparing for voter registration.

I encourage Parliament's House of the People
to expedite its review and adoption of the electoral
bill, including further consultations to achieve broad
political support. To that end, I welcome the resumption
of cooperation between the two Houses of Parliament.
I also encourage the Federal Government to establish
an electoral security coordination task force to develop
the arrangements by which the election will be secured.
We also urge that the empowerment of women in the
political processes be enhanced.

Even as we look ahead to national elections in 2020
and 2021, we must be attentive to electoral processes
in the federal member states. We are closely following
developments in Galmudug, where, with the support of
the Federal Government of Somalia, a reconciliation
forum is being put in place. We encourage this effort
aimed at achieving a broad-based consensus on
Galmudug's electoral process.

In Jubaland, we continue to urge a single, agreed,
consensual electoral process, without which there is
an increased risk of instability if there is a contested
outcome. The United Nations and other international
partners have pressed all sides to seek compromise on
an agreed path forward, but time is now, regrettably,
very short. Disorder in Jubaland would put in jeopardy
not only gains made in that federal member state,
but also many critical national priorities, including
preparations for the elections in 2020 and 2021, the
fight against Al-Shabaab and the development agenda.
Whatever the outcome in Jubaland tomorrow, I implore
all stakeholders to show restraint, refrain from violence
and resolve grievances through dialogue.

As noted at the beginning of my briefing, I visited
Somaliland on 27 and 28 July and had informative
consultations with its leaders. We continue to
encourage dialogue between authorities in Hargeisa
and Mogadishu, and others, building on past efforts.

The Federal Constitution, once adopted, will
provide a common vision for all Somalis, while clearly
defining the respective roles of the organs of the
federal State and relations with and between federal
member states. Progress has been made in the technical
review process, but Somalis now need to pursue an
inclusive dialogue to reach agreement on outstanding
critical issues, including the allocation of powers,
intergovernmental relations, the system of governance,
resource sharing and the status of Mogadishu.

The security situation in Somalia remains a serious
concern. The brutal Al-Shabaab attack on the offices
of the Benadir regional administration on 24 July
served as a painful reminder of the threat that terrorism
poses to progress. I pay tribute to the Victims of this
and other attacks. Yet there are encouraging security
developments. Somali security forces, working with
AMISOM, the UnitedNations and international partners,
are making progress in recovering and stabilizing areas
of Lower Shabelle, on the periphery of Mogadishu,
that had been held by Al-Shabaab. Those operations
have shown the effectiveness of this collaboration and
reinforced the commitment of key security actors to the
comprehensive approach to security. The operations are
simultaneously supporting the implementation of the
transition plan and the national security architecture by
advancing institutional reforms designed to generate,
professionalize and sustain Somali military and police
forces, as well as rule-of-law and justice institutions.

Somaliaismakingsteadyprogresstowardseconomic
recovery. Efforts are ongoing to improve the country's
economic resilience as well as the inclusiveness of that
growth. Government authorities have made important
strides towards improving fiscal performance and
strengthening governance. The decision point under
the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative is within
sight. The Federal Government of Somalia now needs
to ensure that it achieves the remaining preconditions
for reaching the decision point in early 2020, which
will require close collaboration with Parliament to pass
necessary legislation, and with federal member states
on the fiscal federal framework.

Meanwhile, the humanitarian crisis in Somalia
remains among the most protracted in the world.
Currently, 2.2 million Somalis are facing acute food
insecurity, and 2.6 million are internally displaced,
fleeing conflict and drought. The United Nations and
the Somali Government together issued a drought
impact response plan requesting $686 million, of
which approximately $350 million has been secured. I
call on Member States to urgently resource the plan.
At the same time, we must focus on legitimate Somali
priorities for longer-term development, as reflected in
the recovery and resilience framework and preparations
for the new national development programme.

Almost eight months have passed since 1 January,
when the United Nations family was shaken by a mortar
attack on our Mogadishu compound. Since that day, we
have made substantial progress to enhance the safety
and security of United Nations personnel. Staff security
and welfare will remain a priority for me throughout
my tenure.

Allow me to express my appreciation to my
Deputy, Mr. Raisedon Zenenga, for his leadership in
the challenging months before my arrival. I also thank
the United Nations Support Office in Somalia for its
steadfast assistance to AMISOM, the Somali National
Army and the United Nations family in Somalia.

Building sustainable peace and stability in a
country that has suffered the trauma and shocks that
Somalia has experienced over many decades will take
perseverance and patience. With the continued support
of the Security Council, and the wider international
community, UNSOM. remains committed to assisting
Somalis on their journey towards a peaceful and
prosperous future.

