Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General, the Chairs of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, and the Secretary
General of INTERPOL for their briefings. The picture
is clear. The threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters
remains particularly worrying.

We also want to thank the delegation of Lithuania
for organizing this debate, which allows the Council
to take action on a serious threat to international
security. I thank the Secretary for Homeland Security
of the United States of America and the United States
delegation for having successfully led the negotiations
on the presidential statement that we have just adopted
(S/PRST/2015/ll).

The Security Council summit held in September
2014 (S/PV.7272), which led to the adoption of
resolution 2178 (2014), was an essential step in the
international fight against terrorism, and in particular
against the foreign terrorist fighters. It enabled the
growing awareness worldwide of this phenomenon and
asks Member States to take the necessary measures
to contain it. The resolution 2178 (2014) also helped
to establish a robust legal framework to fight against
foreign terrorists fighters, a framework that shows its
operational nature every day.

Unfortunately, despite an increasingly mobilized
international community, the number of foreign terrorist
fighters continues to grow, as was rightly pointed out by
the Chair of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. This
phenomenon is a challenge of unprecedented scale, not
only for my country but also for many of our partners.
Nearly 1,700 French citizens or residents of France are

implicated in the Iraqi-Syrian track, and 470 of them
are currently in Syria and Iraq. Among them are many
young people; some are women. Some have committed
suicide attacks.

Faced with this challenge, France took the necessary
measures to counter this phenomenon early and without
waiting for the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014). The
answer is naturally a legal one, but it is also essential
to act as early as possible and prevent the phenomena
of indoctrination. That is why we have chosen to act
as soon as possible, staying close to families that are
often helpless in the face of the radicalization of their
relatives, working with civil society and associations
and operating under a logic of proximity.

For over a year, France has been implementing a
systematic plan against radicalization. The telephone
platform dedicated to the prevention of radicalization
set up by the Ministry ofInterior a little more than a year
ago has received more than 2,000 reports of radicalized
individuals, nearly 25 per cent of whom are minors. We
also act in schools, making our children understand the
importance of defending democracy and the diversity
of our societies.

Furthermore, at the legislative level, France has
adopted new tools in order to adapt to the evolving
terrorist threat and while respecting its international
commitments to protecting human rights. The Law
of 13 November 2014 established a procedure for
preventing individuals suspected of wanting to travel
abroad to join a terrorist organization from leaving
the country. The Law also allows us to ask Internet
providers to block or delist websites advocating
terrorism. Blocking is targeted so as not to undermine
freedom of expression. Prime Minister Manuel Valls
recently announced the establishment of specialized
teams to counter the jihadist rhetoric on the Internet and
analyse the evolution of propaganda speech to better
combat it. We have also strengthened the capacity of
our security services to dismantle terrorist networks.
It is also essential to create support mechanisms for
people returning from conflict zones. A structure will
soon be created in France to this end to help those who
wish to regain a place in society, as long as they are not
being prosecuted for their actions.

The response cannot be limited to the national
level, of course. An intensification of international
community action is essential to face this threat, which
goes beyond our borders. It is imperative to strengthen
the legal instruments to stem the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters and violent extremism.
In this regard, we welcome the recent adoption on
19 May by the Ministers of the Council of Europe of an
additional protocol to the Convention on the Prevention
of Terrorism. This text will in particular allow for
better operational cooperation between States in the
fight against foreign terrorists fighters. We also work
with our European Union partners to strengthen our
inspection arrangements at external borders. France is
calling for the rapid creation of a European passenger
name record. These measures will be consistent with
the protection of personal data and fundamental rights
of citizens.

The presidential statement that we have adopted
today is another step in the fight against the scourge of
terrorism. This text will allow us to go further in the
implementation of provisions of resolution 2178 (2014)
adopted last September, which is more than ever our
shared compass.

The United Nations has an essential role to play
in supporting the work of the States. It is important
that the relevant United Nations bodies, particularly
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee, with the support of Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, ensure
that the States fulfil their international obligations. On
the basis of evaluations, capacity-building programmes
should be implemented when necessary with the
help of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force. France welcomes and encourages the ongoing
strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations and INTERPOL.

We are now facing a major threat to our societies.
If they are to be effective and sustainable, national
responses should be enriched by dynamic international
cooperation and fall within in the framework of
international law, including respect for human rights.
It is under these two conditions that together we can
defeat the scourge of foreign terrorist fighters while
remaining true to our values; indeed, one cannot be
separated from the other.

