Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome you, Mr. President, in your
capacity as Chair ofthe Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). We listened with great interest
to your statement and the briefings by Ms. Nakamitsu,
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, and Mr. Ballard, representing the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). We are also grateful to the Bolivian chairship
of the Committee for its responsible and professional
leadership of that subsidiary body of the Council.

Resolution 1540 (2004), initiated jointly by Russia
and the United States in 2004, is one of the pillars
of non-proliferation. Ensuring that every country
can fully implement it is one of the international
community's pressing tasks, and it is our hope that
today's debate will be a major contribution to tackling
that global challenge. Resolution 1540 (2004) remains
the sole universal international document on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs), obliging all countries to establish effective
national systems for controlling WMDs, their delivery
systems and related materials, and preventing them
from falling into the hands of non-State actors.

That goal has taken on major significance in the
wake of the unprecedentedly complex and numerous
regional conflicts taking place in the world today. The
terror organizations involved in them have access to the
technology and infrastructure needed to develop and
use chemical weapons. We agree with Mr. Ballard that
this is no longer a mere threat but a harsh reality. The
events in the Middle East are a clear example of that,
and serve to emphasize the relevance of our meeting
today. The threat of chemical and biological terrorism
is becoming ever greater in scale and in its transborder
nature. We have heard again and again about militants
from the Islamic State and other groups using industrial
chemicals, and even chemical warfare substances, for
terroristpurposes, facts thathave been confirmed- even
officially confirmed - by the Western intelligence
community. With regard to such crimes, we would in
particular like to emphasize that we must realize that,
over the past five or six years, extremist organizations
have gained considerable experience not just in using
chemical weapons but in manufacturing them. The
proliferation of that knowledge is as much ofa threat as
is the use of such WMDs.

We support strengthening the counter-terrorist
aspects of non-proliferation. We understand how urgent
it is to find responses to new challenges and threats. In
the light of the current terrorist activities in Syria and
Iraq by the so-called Islamic State, the Al-Nusra Front
and other terrorist groups, the significance of resolution
1540 (2004) can only grow. The Council should
thoroughly investigate and respond to any reports that
non-State actors may have gained access to chemical
weapons, with an objective, impartial and professional
investigation with no potential for politicization. The
process should be based on credible and verifiable
facts and should avoid any potential for deliberate
disinformation. We need to see a tough reaction from
the Council to any violations of the resolution. Any
assistance to non-State actors in acquiring WMDs or
the materials, components and technologies used in
their production is impermissible. Only collaborative
efforts on the part of all Member States to implement
the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004) can ensure
successful results. We support the appeals that
Ms. Nakamitsu made on the subject in her briefing.

The issue of combating terrorist attacks is so acute
that the machinery designed to enable resolution 1540
(2004) to carry out its vital function is not enough. We
would therefore like to remind the Council of Russia's
initiative concerning the drafting of an international
convention on the fight against acts of chemical or
biological terrorism. Such a convention could cover
the advances that the international community has
approved in recent years, particularly through provisions
criminalizing activities falling within its purview,
defining jurisdictions and appropriate levels of legal
response, implementing the principle of extradite-or-
prosecute, and so forth. It is clear that traditional views
of what constitutes arms control, disarmament and
non-proliferation are gradually blurring. Effectively,
the entire area has acquired a new element and another
dimension - the counter-terrorism dimension. The
so-called Islamic State's acquisition of the industrial
capacity to produce chemical weapons and the danger
of their proliferation throughout the Middle East
serve to emphasize the relevance of Russia's efforts to
formulate the such a convention.

We believe that we should work actively to define
the national and regional components for implementing
resolution 1540 (2004). We should study best practices
and conduct seminars for points of contact, because
their benefits are clear. A number of Member States,
including Russia, have already commendedthe seminars
that have been held for national points of contact, and
we welcome the intention of the People's Republic of
China to organize a similar event in August.

In order to improve the effectiveness of the
Committee's work, we should draw on the capacities
of international and regional organizations and ensure
that their planned tasks conform with States' requests.
We also support the involvement of the scientific and
business communities. Needless to say, all of this
should take place under the leadership and oversight
of State entities. Russia is committed to strengthening
the non-proliferation regime, including within the
framework of the 1540 Committee, and will make every
possible effort to deal with this challenge.

With regard to the statement by the representative
of the United States, I would like to point out that
Syria's armed forces pose no threat to the American
specialists. We have no information about anything like
that, whatever the reports may be. However, we once
again affirm our position that Russia will continue to
insist on a comprehensive, professional and politically
impartial investigation of chemical attacks - not just
in Khan Shaykhun but also with regard to any other
occurrence, or recurrence, of chemical terrorism in
Syria and Iraq - as provided for in resolution 2319
(2016).

With regard to extending the mandate of the OPCW-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism for
another year, its geographic scope and counter-terrorism
dimension must be expanded. An objective investigation
is the only way to get to the truth - not based on
the fabrications of terrorists, extremists, opposition
members, their foreign sympathizers and sponsors and
non-governmental organizations and all their efforts to
blame Damascus. For now, it is important that we avoid
any provocation and prevent any unilateral acts, and
that we support the significant political momentum that
the discussions in Astana and the intra-Syrian talks in
Geneva represent.

