Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to welcome Crown Prince Al Hussein bin
Abdullah II, and to thank Jordan for having organized
this meeting on the role of youth in countering violent
extremism and promoting peace. I also welcome the
presence of the ministers who have joined us. I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Mr. Peter
Neumann and Mr. Scott Atran for their interventions.

Chad would like to associate itself with the
statement to be made by the representative of the
African Union.

The global security context has been characterized
by an increase in terrorism, which is one of today's
most serious threats to international peace and security.
The recent plethora and barbarity of violent terrorist
acts have plunged us into sadness and despair. Chad
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
I will focus on the issues raised in the concept paper
(S/2015/231, annex) on this very important topic.

With regard to young people and the factors that
lead to their radicalization, understanding the process
of radicalization is crucial to our being able to react
properly to Violent extremism and to prevent young
people from embarking on the path of Violence.
Indeed, young people constitute a breeding ground for
extremist group recruitment; however, at the same time,
they are the Victims of such groups. The conditions
that foster their radicalization change from one
country to another, but, according to many observers
of the phenomenon, the main factors include poverty,
ignorance, inequality, injustice, unemployment and
exclusion from social, political and economic life,
whether actual or perceived. Even though some reject
the idea that poverty can lead to radical extremism, the
gap between the expectations and the socioeconomic
realities of an individual or community can create an
environment that is conducive to radicalization. In that
regard, as far as Africa is concerned, the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict in Africa
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development there (S/2013/475) is very edifying.

Some, rightly or wrongly, consider religion to be
a factor in radicalization. However, no religion in the
world encourages its followers to commit Violent acts on
its behalf. For that reason, violent extremism cannot and
should not be associated with any religion, nationality
or civilization. Moreover, military intervention carried
out in violation of international law and the sovereignty
and political independence of States can be found among
the causes of radicalization. Such interventions not only
often provide a breeding ground for violent extremism,
but also only bring about more war, oppression and
violence, thereby destabilizng entire regions.

Terrorism, as a threat to international peace and
security, does not recognize any borders. Terrorist
groups have well organized networks that span the
entire world. The fact that groups active in Africa,
such as Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Al-Shabaab,
Boko Haram and others, are affiliated with Al-Qaida or
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is an excellent
illustration of that fact. The main responsibility for
addressing that situation rests on the shoulder of States
and international organizations. It is urgent that they
take the measures needed to eliminate the conditions
conducive to the spread ofterrorism, in accordance with
the first pillar of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

With regard to how we can go about decreasing
radicalization and the recruitment of young people, it
is extremely important to prevent terrorists from using
modern information and communications technologies
for the purposes of recruitment and propaganda. The
Internet, social networks and television are among their
preferred platforms. It is essential to take measures to
limit the use of those technologies for criminal and
terrorist purposes, while still respecting the rights of
individuals. The combat against violent extremism
also requires a focus on the education of young
people, who must be inculcated with the values, tools
and skills essential for individual success, and on the
promotion of economic opportunities for groups at risk.
Emphasis must also be placed on programmes for the
deradicalization, disindocrination and reeducation of
youth, including reintegration and rehabilitation. Youth
organizations themselves can be enlisted in activities
aimed at combating violent extremism.

With respect to foreign combatants, it is normal
to be worried by the departure of foreign nationals
from various countries for the conflict zones of Syria
and Iraq. We encourage international cooperation
to strengthen exchanges in intelligence and border
control, so as to bring terrorists to justice. We believe
that the best policy for discouraging the outflow of
foreign combatants towards Syria and Iraq is to resolve
the conflicts in those countries.

With respect to national efforts to combat terrorism
and youth recruitment, Chad supports the culture of
peace, tolerance and religious pluralism. In that vein,
a number of measures have been taken in line with
resolution 1624 (2005), including the establishment of
an annual day ofprayers for peace, bringing together the
three principal faiths practiced in our country, namely,
Islam, Catholicism and Protestantism. Moreover,
the leaders of those three faiths have created an
inter-religious platform to promote peaceful coexistence
and are represented in all regions. Furthermore, within
the framework of subregional and regional strategies,
Chad is reinforcing its security cooperation with its
neighbours and has deployed large contingents to
neutralize terrorist groups in the north of Mali, while
continuing its contribution to the fight against Boko
Haram in Cameroon, the Niger and Nigeria at the cost
of enormous human and material sacrifice.

Concerning the role that the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council, can play to strengthen
efforts to combat Violent extremism, we support the
proposals of the Jordanian delegation in its concept
paper (S/2015/231, annex). We hope that they will
strengthen the goals of preventing incitement to
terrorism and of stemming the flow of foreign
combatants, in accordance with resolutions 1624 (2005)
and 2178 (2014). We also welcome Jordan's initiative to
organize an international conference in August 2016 on
the role of youth in promoting world peace.

To conclude, the threat of violent extremism is by
now abundantly clear. The fight against that threat must
be shared by all States and international organizations,
including the United Nations, which can and must
strengthen their cooperation by pooling efforts and
resources and putting youth at the heart oftheir agendas.
It is urgent for us to collectively prevent and resolve
conflicts, promote socioeconomic development and
foster dialogue by stressing education and tolerance.

