Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We wish to express
our appreciation to Special Coordinator Mladenov for
his comprehensive and objective update.

On the political track, we have already expressed
our position on the expansion-of-settlements issue
several times before, and our generic position remains
unchanged, balanced and consistent, so I will not take
the Security Council's time to voice it again. I would
just add that the principle of two States for two peoples
is generally accepted by both Israel and Palestine,
along with the entire international community, and
should be taken into account as one of the foundations
for establishing a lasting peace in the Middle East.
We call on the parties to refrain from taking any steps
that could impede the resumption of the Palestinian-
Israeli negotiations. By saying the foregoing, we stand
for the taking of concrete steps that will preserve the
possibility of peaceful coexistence between the two
States and strengthen the prospects for peace based
on the inalienable right of Palestinians to Statehood
and Israel's right to security. We propose to start from
encouraging confidence-building measures between
the parties consistent with the United Nations pillar
related to development.

On the other hand, Kazakhstan welcomes the
United States diplomatic efforts aimed at resuming
the peace process and United States President Trump's
talks with the leaders ofboth countries at the time ofthe
general debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-
second session. We call on the Middle East Quartet
to revive its work on the Palestine-Israel track in the
context of the American side's efforts in that direction.
We also welcome the Russian Federation's and Egypt's
efforts to ensure intra-Palestinian consolidation and
urge all Palestinian political parties and movements to
integrate into one national political structure.

On the humanitarian track, we continue to observe
the difficult situation in the Gaza Strip, which we
believe contributes to the instability and frustration
that can fuel conflict and terrorist activities. In this
regard, we urge the official authorities of both Israel
and Palestine to help resolve the humanitarian crisis in

the Gaza Strip.

Finally, inthe interest ofpeace in this long-suffering
region, we shall collect and synthesize the best we can

find. We should undertake a collective search for the

best way to meet the contemporary challenges facing
this part of the globe.

