Mr. Karti (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to congratulate all peace-loving peoples
and countries of the world on the occasion of Eid
al-Adha. We meet today while the Islamic world and
Muslims everywhere celebrate this important holiday. I
also congratulate you, Sir, on your keen determination
to organize these deliberations on the Sudan at this
opportune time. I also would like, through you, to
congratulate and commend Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, my brothers the Ministers and in the
delegation of the Government of the Southern Sudan. I
had hoped they would be sitting next to me rather than
on the other side of the table. We shared the same title
in the meeting in Addis Ababa and in a meeting
sponsored by the Government of Austria.

I truly hope that the Council's deliberations today
will lead to a reasonable and wise approach that will
assist the two parties in achieving comprehensive
peace in a manner that will realize our objective of
sustainable peace and security without returning to war
and conflict.
As I am addressing the Council for the first time,
I wish to assure members of my Government's total
commitment to completing the final stages of the
requirements of the Agreement, including the holding
of the referendum on the right to self-determination of
the Southern Sudan, as well as the referendum on the
situation in the Abyei region. Should the Council recall
the efforts made to implement the Agreement over the
past years and the obstacles that have been overcome,
it will see that both parties are capable of arriving at
political settlements to the pending questions, which
will enable us to undertake a just, impartial and
credible referendum that will allow our brothers in the
South to express their genuine will, free of undue
influence.

The referendum is a commitment that must be
honoured, and we are willing to do so. However, we
must all understand that the referendum is not an end
in and of itself, but a means that must lead us to peace
and stability.

The agreement to grant Southern Sudan the right
to self-determination is among the more daring
decisions adopted anywhere on the African continent.
It was taken with a View to ending the civil war and
finding a peaceful conclusion to one of the most
protracted conflicts on the continent. At the national
level, it is the most daring decision taken by any
national Government since independence. Here, I
would like to draw the Council's attention to the fact
that the leadership that adopted these decisions must be
appreciated and commended rather than pressured,
maligned or falsely accused.

Before this Council, I reaffirm the commitment of
the Government of the Sudan to holding the
referendum as scheduled and to accepting its outcome,
be it in favour of unity or secession. The Government
of the Sudan accepted the referendum in order to settle
all pending issues peacefully. This choice should
therefore be brought to a clear conclusion.
Accordingly, the holding of the referendum should
enhance peace and stability in the Sudan and serve as a
prelude to a bright future and a new tomorrow for the
whole of the Sudan, South and North alike.

Allow me in this context to raise an important
issue, which is the financing of the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission. As members of the Council
may well know, it was agreed that the Commission
would be financed in the following proportions: 48 per

cent by the two parties to the Agreement and 50 per
cent by the international community. The Government
of the Sudan has honoured this commitment as agreed,
and apportioned its share against encumbered
obligations provided by the Commission. The
Government of the Sudan has paid, to date, a total of
$8.5 million as a first instalment. The Government had
actually begun payments even before the Commission
prepared the referendum budget. We will continue to
work accordingly and to honour our financial
commitments every time the Commission provides us
with a schedule of costs.

Since our Government has committed itself to
paying its dues in full, we call on the international
community, and the donor community in particular, to
honour their commitments in order to avoid any
disruption in the Commission's work. I would point out
that when some talk of the failure of the Government
to commit to financing, it is simply an attempt to
expedite the actual expenditure, which should be
decided by the Commission's programme of action.

With regard to the status of Abyei, it should be
recalled that when we talk of Abyei, we are talking
about two separate ethnic groups that have coexisted in
the region since time immemorial; we are not talking
about oil or wealth, which will eventually be depleted.
We are talking about the legitimate and inalienable
rights to citizenship and self-determination of two of
the largest ethnic groups in the region, and about the
status of the region in which they live. It therefore
behooves us to rely on reason and to be inspired by
wisdom if we seek to guarantee continued stability and
ensure the age-old peaceful coexistence of the people
of the region.

We recall these positive factors because we fully
understand that arriving at an objective settlement
accepted by both parties is our ultimate aim. We do not
want to rush into imposing solutions that would only
lead to further conflict. We therefore look to the
Security Council to adopt a comprehensive approach to
addressing the question of Abyei and the
implementation of the pending aspects of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA).

I wish to stress the need for the international
community to grasp the significance of the
achievements made so far in implementing the CPA.
The Council must assist both parties to the Agreement
in working towards rapprochement and promoting

confidence between them so that they can overcome
the obstacles to implementing and honouring their
remaining commitments effectively and peacefully.

While we continue to make intensive efforts to
settle the aforementioned issues before the holding of
the referendum, we also continue to address with the
same determination questions relating to wealth,
citizenship and security, as well as post-referendum
legal international agreements and instruments. I have
come to New York after participating in a meeting
hosted by the Government of Austria at which we
discussed with our brothers from the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement the scope of the relationship
between North and South and the post-referendum
situation. We stressed the fact that integration between
the North and the South should continue regardless of
the outcome of the referendum.

I would like to update the Council on the major
progress that has been made recently towards the
conclusion of a framework agreement to govern
relations between the North and the South. Both parties
to the CPA read and discussed the draft framework
agreement endorsed last night by the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel led by Mr. Thabo
Mbeki, former President of South Africa. This
historical agreement sheds light on the strategic
choices between the North and the South, the most
important of which is their shared resolve never to
return to war. The historic framework agreement sets
forth a blueprint for a very special and distinguished
relationship between North and South in which peace,
understanding and harmony prevail and both parties
can work for a better future. We will inform the
Council of the details in due time.

The achievement of the framework agreement
places a major responsibility on the shoulders of the
international community that is no less weighty than
the commitments of both parties. Translating this
agreement into reality will require tireless efforts and
continuous encouragement, as well as a continued flow
of resources. I would therefore appeal to the Council to
grant particular attention and care to this issue.

With regard to the situation in Darfur, our
position on the comprehensive political settlement is
indisputable. Our Government has always been the first
to implement all its commitments with regard to
negotiations. It has been willing to discuss issues in
good faith so as to achieve peace and stability

throughout Darfur. Moreover, from this very seat, I
would like to commend the Doha mediation efforts
under the auspices of the fraternal Government of
Qatar, the League of Arab States, the African Union
and the United Nations under the guidance of
Mr. Bassole, and supported by the countries of the
region. Peace in Darfur is our highest priority and the
strategic objective for the Government of the Sudan at
this stage. However, the realization of peace and the
signing of an agreement require a partner that would
negotiate in good faith. It also requires a clear vision
and determination to achieve peace.

Therefore, the much-reported positions of two of
the rebel leaders, who oppose the political settlement
in Doha and opted for the military option as the sole
option, require the Council to send a serious and
decisive message. That message should compel both
sides to sit down at the negotiating table in Doha.

It is unreasonable and unacceptable for peace to
be held hostage to controversial and arrogant positions
that are not related to the desires and expectations of
the people of Darfur, who chose peace and who hope
that it will become a reality for them in different areas
of the region. They made that choice despite
irresponsible military actions and violations, including
kidnappings and attacks against humanitarian
assistance convoys and peacekeepers. Such destructive
acts by the rebels who reject peace are aimed at
distracting the Government and pushing it towards a
military confrontation and the creation of instability in
the region.

As the Council knows, the Government of the
Sudan, while making every effort to promote security
and stability in Darfur, has adopted a strategy that is
currently being implemented through the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) while according special priority to
development, reconstruction and quick-impact
recovery projects. We therefore believe that one of the
first duties of UNAMID in the upcoming phase is to
assist in the implementation of these projects,
particularly since the Government of the Sudan has
allocated a budget of $1.9 billion for that purpose over
the next four years.
We hope that the Security Council will play a
pioneering role in supporting the implementation of
those projects by calling on donors and international
partners to contribute to their realization. We also
believe that the Council can assist in the direct
implementation of the projects, which will pave the
way for the return of internally displaced persons to
their villages and enable them to once again engage in
normal activities, with a stable security situation
ensured in over 90 per cent of Darfur. The Government
has actually started to implement those projects by
concentrating on infrastructure and on building
bridges, roads and other public facilities.

We therefore hope that the Council's deliberations
today will be an opportune occasion to launch an appeal
to international and other partners to contribute to the
implementation of these development projects, which
are being carried out in the framework of a new
strategy that has been adopted to address the situation
in Darfur. The strategy includes five major elements:
establishing security; resettling internally displaced
persons; improving their humanitarian situation;
achieving internal settlements and reconciliation; and
promoting a political approach that aims at arriving at a
political settlement through actions based on the will of
the people of Darfur and through their representatives
to the legislative and executive organs that were chosen
in the recent elections.

We have also taken measures to implement
development projects on the ground. This includes
focusing with local communities on the creation and
implementation of projects that will contribute to
balanced development in the region, as well as
providing resources for shepherds who live in the area.

I must stress to the Council that the new strategy
gives priority to fighting impunity, including the
impunity of those who target peacekeepers and
humanitarian workers. These workers are essentially
our guests. We must protect them and facilitate their
work, which, in essence, is focused on helping us to
achieve peace and stability in Darfur. Our ongoing
efforts will not end until saboteurs are brought to
justice. We know that it is sometimes difficult to
identify them, because they hide behind the lines of the
rebel movements.

In the light of what the Secretary-General said
concerning the need to implement resolution 1593
(2005), I must recall here that this was one of the
resolutions that elicited the most disturbance in the
Sudan. I would have hoped that the situation in the
Sudan since the adoption of that resolution would have
given the Council reason and courage to reconsider its

position. The resolution opened the door to evil and
instability and targeted the leadership on which we
must depend to conclude the peace agreements and
honour our commitments. Despite all the pressure that
was brought to bear and the attempts to isolate us, the
Sudanese people entrusted us, through the general
elections in April 2010, to undertake this task. The
support of the people of Darfur for President Al-Bashir
was unprecedented and overwhelming in the history of
our country. I therefore believe that the resolution
should be reconsidered.

With regard to the peace process, I would like to
share with the Council the fact that, since the signing
of the Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement, the national
unity Government has sought to implement the
Agreement on the ground. In doing so, it has worked
alone and without any outside assistance whatsoever.

I would like to recall to the Council that, in the
framework of the implementation of the Eastern Sudan
Peace Agreement, the Government is trying to organize
an international donors and investor's conference, to be
hosted by the fraternal country of Kuwait. We would
like to thank Kuwait for the efforts it is making to
promote stability in Eastern Sudan. I therefore call on
all members of the international community to support
the conference through either direct support or
investments in the reconstruction of Eastern Sudan. I
urge all Member States and international organizations
to participate in the conference.

In conclusion, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your initiative to convene this
meeting. I would also like to thank the ministers and
representatives of members of the Council. We hope
that the Council's deliberations will serve as a positive
element in helping us to overcome our challenges by
promoting confidence, helping us to arrive at a
rapprochement and by renewing the determination to
complete the last leg of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement in a civilized, smooth and safe way, in
conformity with the core of the Agreement and its
purposes.

