I would first like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important meeting. I also thank the briefers - Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock - for their comprehensive briefings. Upon hearing their briefings, a grim picture emerges, especially after hearing Under-Secretary-General Lowcock's report on the numbers, particularly of those who are vulnerable and on the indirect effects of the pandemic. Resolution 2532 (2020) is an important resolution, and I would like to once again thank France and Tunisia as co-penholders. I also, like Jonathan Allen, wish to pay tribute to our colleague Ambassador Nicolas de Riviere and to Ambassador Kais Kabtani for his exemplary Tunisian diplomacy and contribution to the work of the Security Council. Resolution 2532 (2020) contains important provisions, including calls for the cessation of hostilities, 90 days of humanitarian pause and intensified international cooperation. As the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) situation continues to evolve, this meeting is timely to take stock of the progress on the implementation of the resolution and to identify any need for further improvements. The briefers were already very clear on where we are currently. The next question, naturally, is where are we going to go? In this regard, allow me to highlight three points. First, we must strengthen our call for a ceasefire. Despite the call to put conflicts on lockdown, unfortunately, as we learned in various reports, in many countries and situations various conflicts have continued, if not intensified. Some ceasefire commitments have not been held, while terrorist groups continue to maintain, and even enhance, their area of influence and capacity to conduct serious attacks. We have to continue supporting the peace efforts by the Secretary-General and his representatives, including through building synergy with regional and local actors in confidence-building and strengthening violence-reduction efforts at the local level. Indonesia is of the view that continued monitoring on the progress of ceasefire implementation is necessary. It will deter actors from engaging in violence and send the message that ceasefire commitments must be honoured. Secondly, we must continue to support the work of United Nations missions on the ground. Despite the challenging situation and some restrictions caused by the pandemic, peacekeeping missions have managed to adapt and implement their core mandates professionally, including in facilitating peace processes, maintaining an environment conducive to security and protecting civilians through community engagement, as well as ensuring the effective implementation of the Secretary- General's call for a global ceasefire by parties to conflict. Indonesia commends the steps taken by peacekeeping missions in assisting host countries in dealing with the impacts of the pandemic, within its mandate and available resources. At the same time, we also call upon the Secretariat to strengthen the medical capacities of missions to ensure the safety, security and health of peacekeepers. As we recently adopted resolution 2538 (2020), on women peacekeepers - widely supported by Members of the United Nations and supported by all members of the Council - it is now more timely than ever to ensure its implementation in conjunction with resolution 2532 (2020), which we are discussing now. Women peacekeepers have an important role to play in this time of pandemic in utilizing a community engagement approach, enhancing awareness, engaging with local communities, providing basic health care and protecting women and children. As one of the largest troop- and police-contributing countries, rest assured that Indonesia will remain committed to continuing its contribution to peacekeeping operations during this difficult time. We also would like to pay tribute to the many peacekeepers and humanitarian workers on the ground who have been affected by COVID-19. Thirdly, with regard to ensuring the delivery of critical humanitarian assistance, the 90 days of humanitarian pause envisioned in the resolution will expire by the end of this month. The humanitarian pause is vital for humanitarian actors to provide respite to affected people. Yet we continue to witness hindrance to humanitarian assistance in some areas. We must explore ways to further enable humanitarian actors to reach the populations in need in a timely manner and ensure a durable pause beyond the period called for by the resolution. It is also crucial to mobilize partners in sustaining the funding of the Global Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID-19. This should be supported by informed risk analysis to ensure that humanitarian assistance is equitably distributed where it is needed. In conclusion, resolution 2532 (2020) is merely a first step in addressing the impacts of COVID-19 to international peace and security. We must continue to follow it up with concrete actions. In the longer term, we must ensure that disruptions created by COVID-19 will not reverse the gains achieved in countries in conflict and post-conflict situations. We must think beyond pandemic response and towards a long-term comprehensive strategy, including to alleviate the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic to ensure long-term recovery and the resilience of people. We must also strengthen international cooperation, including in the development and distribution of vaccines, as well as capacity-building, so that countries obtain fair and equitable access to vaccines and medicines. To that end, on many previous occasions, we have advocated the importance of all actors working together in a coherent manner. I also support the point mentioned by Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo on the call by the Secretary-General for unity and solidarity. All United Nations agencies, including on the ground, must work together, based on their comparative advantages and expertise. Indonesia, with five other United Nations Members, took the initiative to launch the first General Assembly resolution 74/270, on global solidarity to fight the coronavirus disease 2019. We stand ready to contribute further to this concerted effort to tackle the COVID-19 pandemic.
