The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General Hans
Corell for his substantive report regarding United
Nations anti-terrorism efforts. This question has a
direct bearing on the Security Council's mandate.
Terrorism has become one of the most dangerous
threats to international peace and security and a
catalyst of conflicts. No single State can allow itself to
ignore the problem of terrorism or to seriously expect
to resolve it on its own.

In a number of cases, international terrorists have
already outstripped the international community's

efforts to counteract them and have established a broad
network of transborder interaction to implement their
unsavoury objectives. Of particular concern is the
emergence of a new arc of terrorist activity: the
Balkans, the Middle East, the Caucasus, Central Asia
and Afghanistan. An adequate rebuff to a danger on
such a scale is impossible without the unity of all
States, without exception.

The main source of the threat of international
terrorism is Afghanistan, which is under the control of
the Taliban. Despite the international community's
urgent appeals, the Taliban movement is not carrying
out the demands by the Security Council that it cease
harbouring and training international terrorists and ban
the use of territory under Taliban control for the
establishment of terrorist camps or the preparation of
terrorist acts against other States.

We are witnessing the metastases of this terrorist
tumour that is striking States on all continents. During
the Millennium Summit and the Millennium Assembly,
the President of the Russian Federation, Mr. Vladimir
Putin, and the Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Igor Ivanov, once again reaffirmed our country's
position of principle that in circumstances of growing
consolidation of terrorist structures throughout the
world, increasing responsibility is being placed on the
United Nations to mobilize international potential to
counteract terrorism. That work must, inter alia,
promote the implementation of the principles enshrined
in Security Council resolution 1269 (1999); that is, no
support or havens must be offered to terrorists and
punishment for all terrorist acts must be irreversible.

It is also important to establish an effective
system of interaction within United Nations organs in
resolving the terrorism problem, particularly within the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Secretariat, which must work together, complementing
each other on the basis of their relevant jurisdictions
under the Charter, and through cooperation with
regional mechanisms.

A very important condition for effective anti-
terrorism cooperation among States is the existence of
a broad and reliable international legal basis. Like my
colleagues have done, I associate myself with the
appeals made to all countries to adhere to the existing
universal anti-terrorist conventions and to ensure the
speedy conclusion of work on the necessary additional
instruments designed to fill the existing legal gaps in

S/PV.4242

 

anti-terrorism cooperation. In that connection, we
attach particular importance to the draft convention to
suppress acts of nuclear terrorism and we welcome the
start of practical discussion on the draft, submitted by
India, of a comprehensive convention on the
suppression of international terrorism.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

Since there were no specific questions addressed
to Mr. Corell in the discussion, Mr. Corell will not be
taking the floor. In conclusion, I would like to thank
Mr. Corell for his statement and for his participation in
our meeting.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council will continue its
consideration of the item on its agenda immediately
following the adjournment of this meeting.

The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.
21
