Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I wish to thank Special
Representative Jean Arnault for his invaluable briefing
on the situation in Afghanistan and on the preparations
for the upcoming elections.

In January 2004, when Brazil was starting its
present term in the Security Council, Afghanistan was
completing an important initial step on its way to
reconstruction and normalcy with the adoption of its
Constitution approved by the Loya Jirga.

Since then, with international assistance, the
country has progressed steadily in rebuilding its
institutions, in repairing its infrastructure, in promoting
disarmament and reconciliation and in empowering its
own society, finally, to assume the entire responsibility
for its destiny as a nation. The peaceful holding of the
presidential election last year made clear Afghans'
attachment to the democratic process and their
determination to leave behind decades of war and
destruction and inaugurate a new era of peace and
development.

During this time, Brazil has had the opportunity
in the Council to support the achievements towards
fulfilling the Bonn agenda and, in particular, to support
the international community's strong resolve to carry
out the process in a free and peaceful environment.

Since the last time the Security Council discussed
the situation in Afghanistan, much progress has been
made in preparation for the upcoming legislative
elections to be held on 18 September, which will mark
the completion of the Bonn process. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2005/525) indicates that technical
preparations for the voting are on schedule; that is
evidence of keen interest and confidence in the
political process. This morning, Mr. Arnault added new
information to the Secretary-General's report, and we
thank him for that.

Nevertheless, the already daunting obstacles to
the electoral process have become even more
significant in recent weeks. A relentless war is being
waged, aimed not only at detailing the electoral
process, but also at eroding the legitimacy of Afghan
institutions and thwarting the broader effort by the
international community to ensure the reconstruction
of the country. Meanwhile, the wave of violence in
Afghanistan is estimated to have taken more than 1,000
lives since last March.

Military insecurity is compounded by many
alleged cases of intimidation against candidates,
especially women, but no candidates have so far
resorted to the protection provided by the system for
complaints put in place by the Joint Electoral
Management Body, which probably points to the need
to improve that system.

In this context, I stress once again the paramount
importance of achieving and maintaining a suitable
security environment. The disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme has achieved significant
success. The training of the national security forces is
ahead of schedule. Although the Afghan Government
continues to work hard to improve security, much
remains to be done, notably the disbanding of more
than 1,800 illegal armed groups.

The decisive international support and the
commitment of 30,000 troops on the ground, matched
by unequivocal support from neighbouring countries,
are key to preventing the current security threats from
degenerating into an even more serious and widespread
problem.

In spite of the slight decline that has been
estimated in the area devoted to poppy cultivation for
2005, the drug trade, along with the actions of the
insurgency, continues to be an extremely worrisome
obstacle to putting the country back on the track to
normality. In our view, the search for alternate
livelihoods for poppy growers must be combined with
a tougher stance against processors and traffickers.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the need to
address specifically the economic and humanitarian
problems that have been imposing immense suffering
on the Afghan people, especially its most vulnerable
segments. Indicators relating to health, sanitation,
education, human rights and many other areas continue
to be low. The effect of natural disasters has been
amplified by the lack of adequate response capacity.
Furthermore, the return of more than 3 million refugees
has added a burden to efforts to improve social and
economic conditions for the population.

The reconstruction of Afghanistan will succeed
completely only when even the poorest of its citizens
has hope for a better future, free not only from war and
violence, but also from blights such as misery, hunger
and disease.

