Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): On
behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, I would like
to start by thanking all three briefers for the valuable
joint visit to South Sudan last month, and for their
briefings today in the Council. I would like to also
thank them for emphasizing the need for tangible action
to ensure the meaningful participation of women in the
political process and in future security arrangements.
In the light of that, I want to reiterate that the women of
South Sudan should be at the centre of all of our efforts.
It is they who suffer most from the ongoing brutal and
widespread fighting. It is they who dared to call for peace
long before their political leaders were willing to listen.
Today I would like to make three points on the following
topics in support of the women of South Sudan - the
implementation of the revitalized peace Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, accountability, and unhindered access for the

United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
(UNMISS) and humanitarian actors.

My first point concerns the implementation of the
peace Agreement, whose signing we welcome, and we
thank the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and the African Union for its leadership in that regard.
We also welcome the ratification of the Agreement by
South Sudan's National Assembly. We are nonetheless
concerned about reports of ongoing fighting in Wau,
Yei and Unity states. The full implementation of the
peace Agreement, and success in silencing the guns
in South Sudan, constitutes the only way forward.
However, successful implementation will require
women's full and meaningful participation, as they
offer a vital perspective in the analysis of conflict. It
is also they who show leadership in building bridges
between opposing factions. Their full and meaningful
participation increases the inclusiveness, transparency
and sustainability of peace processes. That is why
the Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly welcomes
the 35 per cent quota for women's participation in the
South Sudan Agreement and would like to encourage
all parties to meet the quota and ensure the meaningful
participation of women in all instruments and processes
related to the peace Agreement.

That brings me to my second point, the need for
accountability. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
underlines the importance of chapter V of the peace
Agreement, which deals with accountability and
transitional justice. There can be no sustainable peace
if impunity persists. That clearly also applies to sexual
violence in conflict. As we highlighted during the Arria
Formula meeting of 22 October, we must move from
a culture of impunity to a culture of deterrence. That
is why we remind all parties in South Sudan that the
Security Council has the ability to sanction perpetrators
of sexual violence. However, sanctions can never be a
substitute for full accountability, which is why we echo
the call by the African Union Peace and Security Council
on 10 October for the signing of the memorandum
of understanding on establishing a hybrid court. We
also welcome the signing of a joint communique on
the prevention of sexual violence by the Government
of South Sudan, and call for its full implementation.
Ensuring justice is essential for reconciliation and for
paving the way for sustainable peace.

My third point concerns the need for unhindered
access for UNMISS and humanitarian actors. UNMISS
personnel risk their lives on a daily basis to provide
security to civilians throughout South Sudan. We urge
UNMISS to continue to strengthen its forward-leaning
posture in order to protect civilians from physical
violence, including sexual violence. We regret that we
continue to see reports of violations of the status-of-
forces agreement, and again urge the Government of
South Sudan to ensure full freedom of movement for
UNMISS. We also urge full and unhindered access for
humanitarian workers, as they are providing essential
support to the population. The peace Agreement
provides an opportunity to strengthen the people's
resilience. That especially helps women and children,
and with them, the future of South Sudan. Humanitarian
actors are on the front line of those efforts, sometimes
paying the highest price.

In conclusion, there is light at the end of the tunnel.
The signing of the peace Agreement represents a
historic step, but the work is not done. In fact, it has
just started. Let us work together to ensure that this
light shines for all the people of South Sudan and that
women play a decisive role in shaping the future.

