Let me join others in thanking Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her briefing. Indonesia notes the thirty-second report of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC) on the situation in Darfur. As the Sudan marches towards peace and stability, Indonesia believes that the country's commitment to pursue justice and accountability remains a critical element of its transition. My statement will therefore focus on three key issues. First, public confidence in the legal system is crucial. In that connection, we welcome the historic Juba Peace Agreement and the Government of the Sudan's national plan for the protection of civilians. We now need to focus on implementing those instruments. To that end, public confidence in the legal system, especially law enforcement, is critical. Indonesia is concerned at the growing lack of public confidence in the legal system, especially among internally displaced persons. Indonesia welcomes the Sudan's commitment to establishing a truth and reconciliation commission in relation to Darfur, as enshrined in the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan. It is an important step to restore confidence in the overall transition. Furthermore, we call on the Government of the Sudan to work together with all legitimate stakeholders in Darfur to nurture public confidence in the legal system. Secondly, we stress the need to strengthen the Sudan's legal system. Indonesia once again emphasizes the importance of the Sudan's effective leadership of its transitional process, including with regard to the pursuit of justice and accountability. We commend the Sudan's effort to improve the effectiveness of its legal system, including by establishing a special court for Darfur crimes - a testament of the Sudan's constructive approach to improving its legal system - and we look forward to its further cooperation, especially with the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan, in that regard. Thirdly, it is important to bolster the Juba peace agreement. The efforts to pursue justice must go hand in hand with wider efforts to sustain peace in Darfur. While peace cannot be complete and sustainable without justice, justice cannot prosper in the absence of peace. That requires credible efforts by the parties to achieve and maintain reconciliation and uphold the peace agreement. Actions taken by the international community must not hamper efforts to fully implement the peace agreement, especially with regard to bringing in all parties outside the peace agreement. We expect that everyone - nationally, regionally and internationally - will work together to strengthen the implementation of the historic peace agreement. In conclusion, Indonesia is confident that by working together to enhance the Sudan's national legal system, there can be further progress towards peace and stability in the Sudan. I therefore reaffirm Indonesia's long-standing support for lasting peace and stability in the Sudan.
