Mrs. Smith (Norway): A month ago, the
international donor community met here in New York
in the framework of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee to
assess the progress made on building Palestinian
institutions in the Palestinian territory. At that meeting,
the World Bank reported to the donor community that
the Palestinian Authority (PA) is now "well positioned
for the establishment of a State at any point in the near
future".

Over the past few years, the PA has made
impressive efforts in building transparent and
accountable institutions. Economic growth, combined
with a steady decline in budget deficits, gives hope that
the Palestinian economy is gradually moving towards
financial sustainability. However, the World Bank
report also stated clearly that this emerging State
structure is not sustainable in its current form, but
remains dependent on foreign aid.

Sixty per cent of the West Bank is still under full
Israeli control. These areas are currently serving as
military or environmental zones or are occupied by
illegal settlements, and the PA cannot serve the
Palestinian population in these areas properly either
with regard to security or in ensuring proper
infrastructure and utilizing the economic potential.

If the PA is to become independent of the support
of the international donor community, it must be
allowed to tap into the potential for economic growth
that these areas hold. And the potential is substantial.
Independent surveys suggest that the Jordan Valley
could generate $1 billion-worth of industrial and
agricultural output annually, and employ as many as
100,000 Palestinians.

East Jerusalem has traditionally been the engine
of the Palestinian economy. Today, restrictions on the
movement of goods and people have severed ties
between the city and the rest of the West Bank,
harming trade and economic growth. The continued
expansion of Israeli settlements, exemplified by the
recent decision to add another 240 units to settlements
on occupied territory, only adds to the separation of
East Jerusalem from the West Bank. The expansion of
PA governance into these areas is necessary to secure
economic growth and a sustainable Palestinian
Authority.

At a time when direct talks have stalled over
Israel's decision to continue the expansion of illegal
settlements, it is worth recalling that the stakes are
high. The Palestinian State structure is there and ready
to assume statehood responsibilities. The donor
community stands ready to carry its share of the burden
in seeing the Palestinian State-building process
finalized. In the international community, there is
consensus that there is no alternative to the two-State
solution and that detailed final-status negotiations over
many years have dealt with many, if not most of the
critical issues. Norway strongly supports all initiatives
to bring credible negotiations back on track, and
supports actions taken by the parties and the
international community to underpin continued
Palestinian State-building efforts.

