Mr. Jagne (Gambia): Essentially, all that we are
trying to achieve through the draft resolution before us is to
give ourselves the necessary legal framework within which
to continue, together with the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the long-term process of rebuilding civil
society in that country. The key element in this whole
process involves the safe return of all refugees and
displaced persons.

Rebuilding a civil society goes hand in glove with the
restoration of law and order so that there is security and
justice for all.

This is what the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) has been mandated to do, in close
collaboration with the International Police Task Force
(IPTF) and the Stabilization Force (SFOR). Initially,
UNMIBH was concentrating primarily on monitoring,
observing and reporting; but with reasonable progress the
emphasis is now shifting to training of the local police.
This takes time, and we are therefore not surprised that in
the report of the Secretary-General it is stated that police
reform needs patience and persistence.

In addition to that, and despite the substantial
progress achieved so far, some serious incidents of arson,
physical assault, murder and harassment have been
reported. In fact, in the Secretary-General's report it is
indicated that there has been an increase in such violent
incidents directed against minority groups in particular. In
order to ensure that the Bosnian authorities create an
environment free from these hostilities, we share the
Secretary-Generals view that the success of the
programmes in Bosnia and Herzegovina will depend upon
the ability of the international community to secure the
compliance of the parties with their commitment in the
Peace Agreement.

In the light of the foregoing, therefore, and in view
of the Secretary-General's recommendation that the
presence of a credible military force is a precondition for
the effective implementation of the mandate of UNMIBH
and for further progress in the peace process in general,
my delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution
calling for the extension of the mandate of UNMIBH.

