Mr. Elaraby (Egypt): Allow me at the outset to
express the appreciation and the admiration of my
delegation, Madam President, for the sterling leadership
qualities you have so competently demonstrated throughout
this month.

(Spoke in Arabic)

I would like at the outset to express my thanks to the
Secretary-General for his report, which gives a positive
picture of the situation in Haiti and a clear indication that
the United Nations has brought about a sure success,
whether in terms of the lessening of tension and acts of
violence or in terms of beginning to establish the
institutions required for the building of a modern State.

The United Nations Mission in Haiti has contributed
effectively in supporting the democratic changes witnessed
in Haiti recently - which culminated in the peaceful
transfer of power to the President-elect, Rene Preval - in
establishing the pillars of a newborn democracy and in
assisting the Haitian Government to maintain security and
stability in a transitional period. In this connection, my
delegation would like to commend the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, who has shown his usual wisdom,
vision and leadership skills.

Egypt's position vis-a-vis this draft resolution stems
from the close relationship between the social and economic
development badly needed in Haiti and the importance of
the international presence there, which reflects the
importance of maintaining stability in the country. Egypt's
position is based on our belief in the inalienable right of
developing countries to be given assistance whenever they
so require. If a developing country sends an 5.0.8. to the
United Nations asking for an international presence to
protect and maintain security on its territory, it is very
important, from our point of View, that this should be
approved.

On this basis, Egypt supports the extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission for an extra four
months in order to support and promote stability and
security and to contribute to the training of the Haitian
National Police force so that it can assume that role after
the mandate ends. Concerning the size of this Mission,
Egypt's position reflects our conviction that United
Nations peace-keeping operations must have the size and
power needed to implement fully their mandates.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that the very
delicate balance in this draft resolution is a good basis for
the new aspects of the mandate that are set out in
paragraph 5. The delegation of Egypt believes that the
Council should adopt this draft resolution and that the
General Assembly should take up its role in post-conflict
peace-building so that, receiving appropriate international
support for its efforts in the areas of social and economic
development, Haiti can reap the rewards of this
endeavour.

