Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): Our delegation welcomes the convening ofthis
debate under Peru's presidency and wishes to reiterate
that the question of Palestine is of vital importance to
the international community and the Security Council,
which bears the primary responsibility conferred on
it to ensure prompt and effective action by the United
Nations, as stipulated in the Charter of the United
Nations, namely, to maintain international peace
and security.

We welcome the briefing by Under-Secretary-
General Rosemary DiCarlo.

A month ago, the Council met (see S/PV.8557) to
hear the tenth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), covering
the period from 25 March to 10 June 2019, which was
introduced by the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov's briefing was very clear. He offered
evidence that the expansion of settlements over the
past two years continued, particularly in occupied East
Jerusalem, and that demolitions - including punitive
demolitions - and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures by the Israeli authorities were also ongoing.

In that regard, Ecuador's position on the settlement
policy has not changed. All settlement activity,
evictions, demolitions, and home seizures are illegal
under international law. The financial crisis of the
Palestinian Authority, resulting from Israel's decision
to withhold part of its tax revenues, remains unresolved.
We are concerned that the humanitarian situation,
human rights violations and breaches of international
humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian territory
continue to worsen and deteriorate. Deaths, attacks,
arrests, Violence and clashes are not stopping.
Provocative actions, statements that incite violence and
inflammatory rhetoric continue, as the report points
out. Our country condemns all acts of violence and
terrorism from wherever they come.

The 2004 advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice in The Hague stated that the
construction of the barrier in the occupied territory was
contrary to international law, which is why the recent
demolition of several buildings in East Jerusalem
erected near the security barrier is deeply worrying. It
is imperative that the Council take action to ensure full
respect of the fundamental principles of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations, as it has
been repeatedly called on to do. Its inaction gives rise
to events that run counter to the repeated calls of the
Middle East Quartet for immediate positive steps to be
taken to reverse the negative trends on the ground that
are endangering the two-State solution, around which
there is a near international consensus.

Our delegation reiterates its call for the international
community to make concrete progress in supporting
the advancement of a peaceful, definitive and just
political solution, based on the existence of two States,
Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace and
security, with borders negotiated on the basis of the
1967 borders, which is the consensus reaffirmed in
resolution 2334 (2016).

It is imperative that the prospect of a two-State
solution be preserved, as it is only way to achieve peace
and stability in the Middle East, restore the rights of the
Palestinian people and realize the establishment of an
independent State of Palestine, which would enjoy full
membership in the United Nations. Our delegation also
appreciates and reiterates its support for the various
international initiatives that have been taken for the

purpose of having negotiations and peace talks resume
between Israel and Palestine.

We are also concerned about the deep-seated
humanitarian and political crisis in Gaza. In this
regard, our delegation recognizes the tireless efforts
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and reiterates its
full support for its mandate. We call upon all donors to
maintain their financial commitments so as to alleviate
the financial deficit.

In conclusion, I would like to recall Nelson
Mandela's first maxim: "no problem is so deep that
it cannot be overcome...through discussion and
negotiation rather than force and violence".

