Mr. Bassole (spoke in French): At the outset I
would like to convey to you, Sir, and to the members of
the Security Council our gratitude for the Council's
consistent interest in and support for the peace process
in Darfur and to the work of the Joint Mediation Team,
which I lead in an exemplary and fruitful partnership
with the State of Qatar and the support of regional and
international partners.

I welcome the opportunity afforded me today to
brief the Council on the results we have achieved to
date, and especially to share with the Council the
activities of the Mediation Team within the framework
of the Doha negotiations, the ultimate goal of which is
to achieve a final, inclusive and comprehensive peace
agreement in Darfur.

It will be recalled that, in order to achieve this
objective, the mediators - in consultation with the
United Nations, the African Union, the League of Arab
States and regional actors - had decided to focus their
efforts concomitantly on three main axes: direct
dialogue and negotiations among the parties to the
conflict; raising awareness and involving civil society
in the peace process; and improving relations between
Chad and the Sudan. With the backing of the
international community, these efforts resulted in the
signing in Doha of a Framework Agreement on
23 February 2010 between the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM) and the Government of National
Unity of the Sudan, which was initialled in
N'Djamena, and a Framework Agreement for a
ceasefire on 18 March between the Liberation and
Justice Movement (LJM) and the Government of the
Sudan.

Along with the recommendations of the first
forum of Darfur's civil society, these agreements
constitute the reference points and the agenda of the
peace negotiations, which resumed on 6 June in Doha.
Indeed, following the suspension of peace negotiations
on 7 April, due to the schedule of the recent elections
in the Sudan, the mediators invited the signatories of
the Framework Agreements to Doha to continue efforts
to finalize the final peace negotiations. I take this
opportunity to draw Council members' attention to the
fact that the Government of the Sudan and the LJM
have seized the opportunity of the resumption to
reaffirm their commitment to the Doha peace process
as the only forum for peace negotiations on Darfur.

The important issues for the newly launched
negotiations are to finalize the ceasefire agreements
and security arrangements with the assistance of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), and to draft the terms of reference
for a peace agreement based on the Sudan People's
Initiative, civil society recommendations contained in
the Doha Declaration, the achievements of the Darfur
Peace Agreements, the recommendations of the African
Union High-Level Panel for Darfur and the Heidelberg
Darfur Dialogue Outcome Document, as well as the
peace offers and proposals of the parties to the conflict.

If definitive and lasting peace is to be achieved in
Darfur, it is imperative that all armed movements
without exception adhere to the peace negotiations.
The mediators will therefore pursue their consultations
with Mr. Khalil Ibrahim aimed at bringing the JEM
back to the negotiation table so that, as a priority and
in conformity with the commitments contained in the
agreements of 17 February 2009 and 20 February 2010,
the Government and the JEM. can finalize and adopt the

draft ceasefire agreement submitted by the mediators
on 3 March 2010, as well as the draft agenda. The
Government of the Sudan and the JEM. must cease their
armed clashes, or risk irreparably undermining all
efforts to promote peace, security, reconciliation and
socio-economic development both in Darfur and the
neighbouring region of Eastern Chad.

In addition to the effective involvement of all
armed movements of Darfur in the peace negotiations,
the role of civil society is also of special importance, as
stipulated in paragraph 10 of resolution 1828 (2008)
and paragraph 6 of the Framework Agreement of
18 March 2010 concluded between the Government
and the JLM. This is why, in conformity with the Doha
Declaration of 20 November 2009, the mediators and
the State of Qatar, with the assistance of UNAMID,
will, during the first half of the month of July 2010,
convene the second forum of civil society representatives
of Darfur, who represent displaced persons, refugees,
women, young people, opinion leaders and all
components of the Darfurian community.

The main objective of the forum will be to back
the efforts of the Mediators to assist the parties to the
conflict in defining the objectives to be achieved and to
determine the modalities for the implementation of any
peace agreement to the benefit of the people of Darfur.
In addition, it will enable the mediators to promote
civil society ownership of the process for emerging
from the crisis.

Before the convening of the forum, a group of
some 100 refugees and displaced persons will
participate in the Doha negotiations starting 24 June
2010, side by side with the delegations ofthe JLM. and
the Government. Following these discussions, the
mediators will propose to the parties that they sign a
protocol for an agreement on compensation, the
voluntary return of displaced persons and their
socio-economic reintegration. The launching of the
implementation of such a protocol will be a test of the
good will of the parties to the conflict to find
satisfactory solutions to crucial problems facing the
people of Darfur, who have been battered by the war.
Today, despite the very bloody clashes of recent
weeks, to which Mr. Gambari has just referred and
which constitute a violation of the agreements reached
between the JEM. and the Government, efforts in
favour of peace are palpable. Indeed, the normalization
of relations between the Sudan and Chad, and the

general elections that took place on 13 April are factors
conducive to the achievement of peace and stability in
Darfur.

It is, however, incumbent on the Government of
National Unity of the Sudan, in its implementation of
the Darfur Peace Agreement and the decisions of the
Sudan People's Initiative and within the framework of
the Doha peace negotiations, to make significant
concessions that will promote the establishment of an
environment of genuine security and justice in Darfur,
the resolution of land disputes, reparation and
compensation for damages caused by the armed
conflict, the social reintegration of displaced persons
and refugees, socio-economic development, and
institutional reforms likely to provide the people of
Darfur with the benefits of decentralization and good
governance, among others.

The mediators will target their efforts towards a
successful conclusion of the peace negotiations in
Doha. No effort will be spared to ensure the effective
participation of all the armed movements of Darfur in
this final phase of negotiations. The time has come to
put an end to the crisis in Darfur. I therefore request
Council members to encourage the Sudan and Chad to
continue improving their relations of good-
neighbourliness and trust in order to strengthen
security on their joint border with Darfur; to demand
that the Government and the JEM. immediately cease
hostilities and effectively implement article 1 of the
Framework Agreement of 23 February 2010; and to
encourage all the armed movements of Darfur and the
Government to make dialogue the only way to resolve
the crisis and to commit firmly to the negotiations
process which is under way in Doha.

Finally, the communique of the advisory meeting
on the Sudan, which was held on 8 May in Addis
Ababa, stipulates in paragraph 9 that every effort must
be made to ensure that a political agreement on the
crisis in Darfur be achieved before the referendum of
January 2011. The meeting also underscored the need
for the peace process in Darfur to be inclusive and to
take into account all issues of concern to the people of
Darfur, bearing in mind the progress achieved within
the framework of the Doha process, which must
continue.

Directly in line with these recommendations, my
colleagues Mr. Gambari and Mr. Haile Menkerios and
myself have consulted among ourselves and with

President Thabo Mbeki on a coordinated approach to
our peace efforts in the Sudan. In this regard, the
mediation has drawn up a schedule of negotiations that
will enable us to finalize partial protocols and then an
inclusive and final agreement as quickly as possible.
The agreement, which will be open to all the parties to
the conflict, should mark the end of international
mediation as a means to resolve the crisis in Darfur and
promote ways and means to effectively implement the
consensus that will have been achieved with the
involvement of civil society.

