Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
First of all, we would like to thank Equatorial Guinea for
organizing today's open debate. We would also like to
thank the Under-Secretary-General, the African Union
High Representative, and the founder and Executive
Director of the African Centre for the Constructive
Resolution of Disputes for their insightful briefings
this morning.

Today's open debate on the African Union's Silence
the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative is an excellent
opportunity to reflect on the deepening of the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. Today, I would like to focus on three
main messages.

First, Belgium welcomes this important initiative.
It demonstrates, once again, the importance of African
leadership and ownership on peace and security issues
on the continent. It also demonstrates how strong the
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations is. We share the same challenges and we have a
collective duty to provide answers.

Secondly, we must certainly continue to reflect
on the issue, but we must first and foremost act in
the field. The ambition of the initiative to silence the
weapons by 2020 reminds us of the magnitude of the
challenges on the ground. At the international level, we
must redouble our efforts to improve the regulation of
the international trade in conventional weapons and to
prevent and combat illicit trafficking in weapons. We
must also seek better coordination between the various
regional and international arms-control systems and
mechanisms. At the same time, at the national level, we
must also ensure that we ratify and implement existing
instruments, such as the Arms Trade Treaty.

Finally, for Belgium, and for many colleagues who
have spoken before me, it is essential to maintain a
holistic approach to this initiative. This initiative aims

first and foremost to create an African continent free of
armed conflict. But it also makes it possible to deepen
the reflection on the continent's development and on
its further integration. In this context, this initiative
must pay attention to the deep roots of conflicts, be
they political, economic or linked to the violation of
human rights.

While the political challenges, including the
importance of good governance, participation and
inclusion are well known, the economic challenges are
less so. In this context, Belgium calls for particular
attention to be paid to the problem of the exploitation,
trafficking and illegal trade in natural resources,
particularly conflict minerals, such as tin, the 3T, gold,
diamonds, coal and wildlife. These have contributed
to the outbreak, intensification and continuation of
many armed conflicts. That is why we encourage
organized, transparent and sustainable management of
natural resources, including through the promotion of
responsible practices throughout the chain of supply.

This initiative must also recognize the crucial
role of women and young people. Belgium considers it
particularly important to strengthen access to justice for
women in conflict or post-conflict situations, as well
as to ensure adequate reparations for victims. We must
also recognize the important and positive contribution
of young people in conflict prevention and resolution
and in post-conflict situations.

