Mr. Semerikov (spoke in Russian): I wish at the
outset to thank the Russian presidency of the Security
Council for the invitation to participate in this meeting
of the Council. I am convinced that our meeting
today will help us to work out additional practical
cooperation mechanisms and help to pool the efforts
of the United Nations and regional organizations
for the purpose of maintaining peace and security.
Our organization - the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) - is considered a partner in
this kind of interaction, as expressed at the seventy-
third session of the General Assembly and set out in
resolution 73/331, entitled "Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization".

The resolution states, inter alia, that in the 25
years since the signing of the Collective Security
Treaty, the Collective Security Treaty Organization
has transformed into a multifunctional structure with
the potential to provide an adequate response to a
wide range of threats and challenges within the area of
its responsibility.

Joint efforts are particularly necessary today
against the backdrop of potential major conflict, the
very real threat of the existing international security
architecture being dismantled, a crisis in terms of trust
and an atmosphere of confrontation. The world is facing
the threat of global terrorism, which now covers a larger
geostrategic space and has expanded its subversive
activities using new technologies, in particular
information and communications technologies and
social networks.

In terms of steps to pool the efforts of the
international community, we deem very important the
fact that Mr. Antonio Guterres placed the combat against
terrorism high on his list of priorities as Secretary-
General and singled out as a key area in this respect
the need to undertake broad international cooperation.

Combating terrorism and extremism is one of
the main elements of the activities of the CSTO. In
2016 our Heads of State considered the situation in
our area of responsibility and decided to implement
a set of measures aimed at countering international
terrorism and extremism. These include a number of
practical organizational activities as well as political
and military measures aimed at developing the CSTO's
capacity to combat terrorism, most of which we have
already implemented.

Given that trafficking in illegal drugs and
weapons, as well as illegal migration, fuel the activities
of terrorists and extremists, we have increased
the effectiveness of our annual special preventive
activities, for example Canal, aimed at combating
drug trafficking, and Nelegal, aimed at curbing illegal
migration. In the course of these operations, in 2018 we
seized more than 16 tons of drugs, including various
kinds of synthetic drugs. We also confiscated 470
weapons of various types. We apprehended 443 people
who had been wanted internationally, of whom 30 had
links to terrorist and extremist activities.

In order to prevent international terrorists from
using information and communication technologies,
including for the purpose of recruiting new members,
we conduct an annual operation aimed at countering
crimes committed through the use of such technologies.
In the course of such an operation in 2018, we
identified more than 10,000 sources that disseminate
information serving the interests of terrorist and
extremist organizations.

Given the threat posed by international terrorist
organizations, we enhanced our collective rapid-
reaction force, adding special units dedicated to the
fight against terrorism. In the course of exercises
involving that force, we focus closely on counter-
terrorism activities.

In order to enhance our efforts to counter terrorism,
we are working on coming up with a single list of
terrorist organizations recognized as such in our States;
the scope and importance of this work is impossible to
overemphasize. We are also reacting to the threat of the
return to their countries of origin from the Middle East
of foreign terrorist fighters trained by terrorist groups
and who have participated in their activities. To that
end, last year we conducted Operation Mercury, whose
goal was to block terrorist recruitment channels and
fighters' entry into and exit from our countries with
the goal of participation in terrorist activities, and to
neutralize the resource base of terrorist organizations
in CSTO areas. We can already state that as a result, the
operation was effective, necessary and timely and made
a direct contribution to the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017).

We view the measures that I have just listed as
best practices elaborated by the CSTO, as corroborated
by the fact that our activities have been of interest to
United Nations agencies, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, the Commonwealth of
Independent States and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, as well as those of individual States,
especially in the area of countering drug trafficking.
They all participated actively in the organization and
implementation of those activities and monitored them.

We believe that in order to promote international
cooperation in stemming the spread of terrorist
ideology and propaganda, in line with Security Council
resolutions 1624 (2005) and 2354 (2017), we must pool
our efforts in the area of information security. We attach
special attention to the development and acceptance,
under the auspices of the United Nations, of universal
norms and principles of responsible conduct in the area
of information.

Despite the measures we have undertaken in order
to combat terrorism regionally, the States members of
the CSTO, as well as other countries, are increasingly
encountering new forms of terrorism and tactics used
by terrorists. The CSTO Permanent Council, in a
statement adopted in November 2018, determined that
one of the organization's priority aims was to enhance
joint efforts to combat terrorism and extremism.
Recently we have noted with concern that efforts have
been made by certain forces to relocate their terrorist
activities to Central Asia and Afghanistan, towards the
southern CSTO borders, as made clear by the various
terrorist acts committed in Afghanistan. We were
therefore compelled to react in order to ensure the
security of our States in the region. In particular, the
Council of Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Council of
Defense Ministers and the Committee of Secretaries
of Security Councils prepared, for the consideration
of our Heads of State in November, a list of additional
measures aimed at lowering tensions on the border
between Tajikistan and Afghanistan. At the same time,
we enhanced our work on developing and accepting a
targeted inter-State programme on strengthening the
border between Tajikistan and Afghanistan.

Security issues in Central Asia are also reflected
in the updated plan of the collective activities of CSTO
States aimed at implementing the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy for the 2019-2021 period.

The main lesson that we can draw from our
experience in countering terrorism is that we need
to enhance our collective efforts to fight terrorism,
without double standards or exceptions, on the basis
of the strict implementation of Security Council
anti-terrorism resolutions and the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We believe that
here it is important to act in line with the Code of
Conduct towards Achieving a World Free of Terrorism,
which was initiated by Kazakhstan at the opening of
the seventy-third session of the General Assembly (see A/73/PV.13) and acknowledged by most countries.

We are by and large pleased with the way our
cooperation with the United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism is developing, as well as that with Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, within
the framework of existing memorandums, and we
advocate for the broadening of such cooperation. We
deem it useful and effective to have contacts with the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities; the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism; and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011).

In that connection, we would like to express our
gratitude for the appraisal of the work done by the CSTO
in the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism strategy, as set out in resolution
73/331, on cooperation between the United Nations and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization.

We see great potential in ensuring security in the
area of responsibility of the CSTO to consolidate the
efforts of international and regional organizations.

Sometimes, however, at the political level, actors and
regions behave in a manner that is more autonomous,
which means that various processes in certain regions
are less unified than one would think. Figuratively
speaking, just as we look at small-scale maps, we also
need to look at more detailed, large-scale maps and
see the bigger picture. If we take a comprehensive
global and regional approach to issues of international
security, including the issue of fighting terrorism, it
is important to make sure that we do not see those
elements as opposites other, but rather find links
between the general and the specific.

In conclusion, as the international
community - international and regional organizations
in particular - consolidate their efforts to counter
terrorism, I would like to ask the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the States members of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization to consider and respond to the
open letter of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
States of the CSTO calling for increasing trust and
fostering cooperation on issues related to countering
global threats and challenges. The call was made by
the CSTO Council of Foreign Ministers in May and
circulated here at the United Nations. We still hope that
that call will be heard.

