Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
join others in welcoming Ambassador Lauber and
Special Envoy Kafando back to the Security Council
today, as well as thanking them for their useful
briefings. They both have our strong support in their
important endeavours. We also appreciate the solid
and comprehensive update in the written report by the
Secretary-General (S/2018/1028). Let me also recognize
the presence of the Permanent Representative of
Burundi, Ambassador Shingiro.

Since the crisis in 2015, the situation in Burundi
has improved and is now - as was stated by the
Special Envoy - relatively calm. However, reports of
human rights violations and abuses, acts of violence
and intimidation and restrictions of the democratic
space continue. The humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation is dire and deteriorating. Mistrust and
divisions continue to run deep in Burundian society,
but also with neighbours and international partners.

It was therefore deeply disappointing to learn
that, since our previous meeting (see S/PV.8325), the
Government did not participate in the fifth session ofthe
inter-Burundian dialogue in Arusha. The Government
has chosen to embark upon confrontation with United
Nations human rights mechanisms rather than engage in
dialogue. In addition, there are still no memorandums of
understanding in place for African Union (AU) observers
or for resumed cooperation with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
It was also disappointing to learn that the activities of
international non-governmental organizations were
suddenly - albeit temporarily - suspended. That
trajectory of confrontation must change if we are
to avoid a repetition of the crisis in 2015. Restoring
confidence and trust is urgent and critical, including
in preparations for peaceful and credible elections
in 2020.

As has been stated by others today, an inclusive
political dialogue among all stakeholders remains the
only way towards peace and stability in Burundi. Trust-
building measures among all parties remain absolutely
key. In that regard, it is important to continue to
build on the progress made within the framework of
the inter-Burundian dialogue, including by ensuring
that women are represented in the dialogue. The
achievements of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement have laid the foundations for peace, security
and stability in Burundi and in the broader Great Lakes
region. They must be safeguarded.

In that regard, continued regional efforts are critical.
We commend the East African Community (EAC)
mediator, President Museveni, and the facilitator of the
inter-Burundian dialogue, former President Mkapa, for
their tireless efforts. We now look forward to President
Mkapa's recommendations on the way forward,
including the envisaged joint road map for elections.
We strongly believe that the EAC-led mediation efforts
must continue, and we look forward to the outcome of
the EAC summit at the end of this month. The AU also
has an important role to play, including by supporting
the EAC, and we welcome the recent visit by the AU to
Bujumbura. We reiterate the need for the memorandum
of understanding to be signed so that the AU observers
can work effectively and meet their objectives.

Continued international attention, support and
engagementiskey.Thelaunchofthenationaldevelopment
plan anchored in the Sustainable Development
Goals is welcomed and provides an opportunity for
engagement, as well as for socioeconomic dialogue. In
that regard, the efforts of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, under the stewardship
of Ambassador Lauber, should be actively supported.
The PBC offers a unique platform for engagement and
can help contribute to a common understanding of the
political and socioeconomic situation, as well as the
most urgent peacebuilding needs.

An international presence and support in Burundi
is important, including in order to contribute to building
trust. The United Nations country team continues to be
an important partner. The process of completing the
United Nations Development assistance framework
is therefore important. We call on the Government
to cooperate with all United Nations human rights
mechanisms. The presence of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to carry
out objective human rights monitoring and capacity-
building will be key, and we hope that the memorandum
of understanding can be swiftly concluded. It is
also important to continue the process of allowing
international non-governmental organizations to return
and continue their important humanitarian work.

As the Secretary-General concludes in his report,
the situation in Burundi remains fragile. That has
implications as well for peace and security in the
broader region. It is therefore important that the Security
Council remain constructively engaged. The Council's
continued support for regional efforts is crucial. We
must together continue to encourage and facilitate
genuine and inclusive national dialogue, ensure respect
for human rights and an end to violence and promote
the opening of political space. Only through progress
on all those fronts can peaceful and credible elections
in 2020 be held, and longer-term stability, peace and
prosperity be achieved.

I would like to direct my concluding remarks to
Ambassador Shingiro. The doors for constructive
partnership with the region and with the broader
international community to assist in Burundi's national
efforts are open. The East African Community, the
African Union, the United Nations, including the
Peacebuilding Commission, and the European Union
all offer opportunities for constructive international
engagement. Moving forward, international support
will be needed to build trust and overcome the deep
divisions. We therefore strongly encourage Burundi
to make use of all that goodwill and begin a new era
of cooperation.

