Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): As
you requested, Mr. President, I will deliver a condensed
version of my statement.

Belgium fully associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the observer of the European
Union, as well as with the statement delivered by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Protection of Civilians. The situation of
civilians in armed conflict has deteriorated seriously.
Indiscriminate attacks and attacks directly targeting
civilians are on the rise. Schools and hospitals are
being bombed, and access to food and water is being
deliberately restricted.

A growing number of parties to armed conflicts
choose to ignore the most basic rules of international
humanitarian law. That trend is particularly visible in
Syria, where parties to the conflict continue to hinder
the delivery of humanitarian assistance. We call on the
parties to the conflict in Syria to ensure humanitarian
access to the civilian population. In that connection,
we recall the recent adoption of resolution 2286 (2016),
co-sponsored by Belgium. We reiterate our call on the
Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court, and, of course, we must,
at the same time, continue efforts to find a political
solution to the crisis.

With regard to the protection of civilians in the
context of peacekeeping operations, I would like to
touch on three points: the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, the fight against impunity and political
preparation.

Regarding the mandate ofpeacekeeping operations,
many challenges persist in terms of the effective
implementation of protection-of-civilians mandates in
peacekeeping operations. Such a large and complex
task requires the full engagement of the troop- and
police-contributing countries, as well as careful
planning. Missions should be able to rely on precise,
clear, coherent and realistic mandates that are adapted
to the needs of the field.

The protection of civilians cannot be treated as
a static given; rather, it requires a tailored approach.
Priority must be given to the protection of civilians
in the mandates of peacekeeping operations; a phased
approach should be used, accompanied by greater
coherence across the United Nations system on the
ground. We welcome the decision of the Secretary-
General with regard to the deployment in peacekeeping
operations of senior advisers responsible for developing
a comprehensive strategy for the protection of civilians.
The effective implementation of protection-ofcivilians
mandates rests on the establishment of strategies that
take advantage of all available tools and that take into
account the fact that, ultimately, the protection of
civilians can be guaranteed in a sustainable manner
only by political solutions.

I take this opportunity to touch upon the
revised mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), in which the protection of
civilians is a central priority. Action by MONUSCO
must be extend not only to areas in the east of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where violence is
rampant, but also to cover the security risks that may
accompany the electoral process. We look forward
to taking note of the measures taken or proposed by
MONUSCO in that context in the next report of the
Secretary-General.

Secondly, there is the fight against impunity.
Those responsible for the most serious crimes cannot
remain unpunished. Peacekeeping operations should be
equipped with the capacity and expertise to provide,
in a professional manner, the desired support for the
procedures initiated by national or international
jurisdictions. Here, we welcome the efforts of the
Government of the Central African Republic to
establish a special criminal court, supported by
a joint arrangement between the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and the
United Nations Development Programme.

The fact that the Security Council has, at the
request of the Central African authorities, mandated
MINUSCA to support the operation of the special
criminal court, particularly in its operational activities,
seems to us to be a very positive element. Similarly, we
welcome the fact that the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) includes support for the efforts of
the Malian authorities, which, in 2012, referred the
violations there to the International Criminal Court.
The United Nations and Member States must also act
decisively against crimes committed by peacekeepers or
mission staffagainst civilians, for whose protection they
are responsible. In that regard, we welcome the policy
of zero tolerance with regard to sexual exploitation and
abuse, which was set by the Secretary-General.

Thirdly, there is political preparation. I would
like to make three brief comments in that connection.
First, the Kigali Principles on the Protection of
Civilians, which Belgium has recently endorsed and
pursuant to which Member States undertake to fully
implement protection-of-civilians mandates, represent
an important step in the right direction. Secondly,
we must do more to ensure that all staff members of
peacekeeping operations are better prepared to protect
civilians. Belgium will shortly assume leadership ofthe
European mission in Mali for the training of Malian
troops, starting this summer, in close cooperation with
MINUSMA, in order for those troops to also be able to
assume, in a sustainable manner, their responsibility to
protect civilians.

Finally, the best protection for civilians is, ofcourse,
prevention. The Secretary-General's Human Rights Up
Front initiative makes a significant contribution in that
regard. Here, we also wish to acknowledge the positive
role played by the Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on the Prevention of Genocide, who, from the
beginning of the crisis in the Central African Republic,
has alerted the Security Council to the grave violations
of human rights and the cycle of violence that has been
unleashed. In the context of prevention and the Security
Council's response, we thank France for the efforts it
has made and for the leadership demonstrated through
its initiative on restraining the use of the veto.

