Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): In Spanish there is a saying that, no matter
how brave one is, one must still be courteous. I would
therefore like to add my voice to those of the previous
speakers by congratulating, at the outset, all the women
in world on this very special occasion, with a special
thought for the women of my country. I would like
to recall how important this day is, as it makes us
remember how important the women in our lives are.
Indeed, in my country, Equatorial Guinea, this is a
national holiday that is celebrated in acknowledgement
of the work that our sisters, wives, daughters and so
forth do.

Before I focus on the topic under discussion, I would
like to thank Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and Ms. Angelina Nyajima
Simon Jial, Founder of Hope Restoration South Sudan,
for their fruitful briefings. I would also like to welcome
the presence of my brother Mr. Akuei Bona Malwal,
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of South
Sudan to the United Nations.

The Government of Equatorial Guinea believes
that the signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, on 12 September 2018, was a significant step
forward on the path towards South Sudan's return to
peace and stability. For that reason, on behalf of my
country, I congratulate the signatories on the spirit
of that agreement. Furthermore, we believe that the
formation of the Transitional Government of National
Unity has been an achievement for the peace process.
We therefore encourage the parties to redouble their
efforts to reach a general security agreement for the
cantonment and integration of security forces.

We understand that the overall situation in South
Sudan has improved, as has been acknowledged by the
Ambassador of South Africa. However, we would like
to remind the parties to the conflict that the time has
come to assume their responsibilities and demonstrate
the necessary political will for the full and timely
implementation of the peace agreement in its letter and
spirit, as it has been demonstrated that the only viable
way to resolve the situation in South Sudan is through a
negotiated political solution among the parties. In that
regard, my country hopes that the confidence-building
measures that have begun to be put in place will help
silence the guns. I think that the phrase "silencing the
guns" should be familiar because of resolution 2457
(2019), which we recently adopted.

We regret the persistence of sporadic fighting
between the Government and opposition forces in
Central Equatoria, as well as among opposition groups.
We also condemn in the strongest terms all sexual
assaults against civilians. We urge the parties, above
all the Government, to spare no effort to bring to justice
all those responsible for those atrocities.

We welcome the improvement in the humanitarian
situation and encourage donors to continue to support
humanitarian agencies. Attacks against humanitarian
workers and the personnel of United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) are unacceptable. I therefore
urge all parties, in particular the Government, to
ensure a safer environment for humanitarian personnel,
who work tirelessly to provide assistance to the most
vulnerable civilians in South Sudan. At the same time,
we welcome the fact that some displaced people are
already beginning to return to their homes.

Equatorial Guinea congratulates the Government of
South Sudan and all the stakeholders for having put their
country's overriding interests above personal ambition.
As the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
said, there is no plan B to the agreements in South
Sudan, so there can be no going back in the process that
has begun. Equatorial Guinea will always stand with
South Sudan in those efforts.

We support the renewal of the mandate of UNMISS
because we continue to believe that it is essential for the
country's stability.

In conclusion, my Government thanks the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development for its
the mediation and commitment, as well as the Heads
of State and Government of Ethiopia, Kenya, the Sudan
and Uganda for their collective efforts to achieve
the signing of the Revitalized Agreement, without
forgetting the important contribution of the United
Nations and the African Union.

