Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Just over a year
ago, last January, during the United States presidency
of the Security Council, the issue of HIV/AIDS was
first introduced into the Council's agenda. Ambassador
Holbrooke pioneered a significant and far-reaching
initiative in establishing the need for discussing, in this
forum, non-traditional threats to international peace
and security. We are aware of the difficulties he faced
initially in breaking this new ground, but his
persistence and effective reasoning prevailed. During
our subsequent deliberations, we realized how useful
the Council debate and the action thereafter were for
the international community as a whole. It is therefore
fitting - as you have said, Mr. President - that we are
discussing the issue of HIV/AIDS in the Council, with
the participation of Ambassador Holbrooke, on his last
day in office.

In Council resolution 1308 (2000), we stressed
that HIV/AIDS, if unchecked, may pose a risk to
stability and security. As the ramifications of
HIV/AIDS extend into the very fabric of society, its
long-term social and economic impact is grim. Due to
its global reach, the implications for peace and security
are ominous.

Africa is the most affected, but no one region or
country is immune. AIDS has the potential to spread
like wildfire, particularly in the developing parts of the
world, if we fail to contain it in a holistic manner. HIV
causes AIDS, but it is social factors, such as poverty,
that are a major force behind its spread. Patterns of
behaviour- fed by ignorance, misinformation and
social stigmatization - have led to a disease so
widespread that it has left millions of breadwinners
dead and their children orphaned. It threatens to
destroy the economies of highly affected countries and
to wipe out a generation of young people. The
developing countries are already home to 90 per cent of
its victims.

We have had the opportunity to discuss the
seriousness of the threat at our meetings last January
and July. The special relationship between poverty and
AIDS came out quite strongly. The Executive Director
of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS), Dr. Peter Piot, is present here today, for a
third, very useful interaction with the Council. Before I
quote his words, I would like to convey to him our
appreciation for the important statement he made
today. Now I quote him. "AIDS creates poverty, AIDS
deepens poverty, and AIDS makes poverty harder to
escape from." AIDS and poverty work together in a
destabilizing, destructive alliance.

The challenge may be staggering, but humanity
has not remained silent with inaction. The fight against
HIV/AIDS may be difficult and prolonged, but we have
not given up. Scores of leaders in the Millennium
Summit referred to the terrible death and destruction
that AIDS had been bringing to people, and pledged to
act firmly. The scourge may be spreading, but there are
examples of success where an explosive epidemic was
reined in. This is encouraging.

A new report jointly issued by six United Nations
agencies last December emphasises that "AIDS
epidemics are not inevitable." An estimated 3 million
people have died in the year 2000, but the report argues
against accepting the inevitability of a worsening of the
AIDS scenario. Success stories from 20 different
countries, encompassing a wide variety of economic,
social and geographic backgrounds, show how
effective strategies can considerably reduce HIV
infection rates.

We believe that a number of elements must be
pursued with earnestness to spread this success around
the globe.

First, the ongoing global efforts need
strengthening. The special session of the General
Assembly on HIV/AIDS this June is expected to forge
a new global partnership in our fight against
HIV/AIDS.

Second, our approach needs to be holistic and
multisectoral. AIDS is not only a health problem; its
impact crosses all levels of society. Combined response
involving all aspects of social, educational, welfare and
economic planning is needed.

Third, new and sustained partnerships of the key
stakeholders must be built. These include the public
and the private sector and the communities. Fourth, the
scientific community should receive full support to
speed up its work to develop effective vaccines. Fifth,
effective treatment should be made available to people
at costs that affected societies can afford.

Finally, and most importantly, adequate resources
must be made available to fight the epidemic, to
develop preventive measures and to mitigate the harm
already done.

We will have an opportunity to build a formidable
alliance against the epidemic through our collective
commitment and action in the upcoming special
session of the General Assembly. Our meeting in the
Council today will undoubtedly give the world a strong
signal of support and show our determination in
standing together against a common enemy of
humanity.

In each peacekeeping resolution adopted by the
Council, there is now a reference to the need to train
peacekeepers in HIV/AIDS. Bangladesh, as a major
troop-contributing country, has initiated practical
education and awareness-raising in the training of our
peacekeeping troops. In this context, Bangladesh also
recognizes the wide-ranging measures taken by the
United Nations Secretariat, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) in particular, to
effectively implement the Council's decisions. We very
much appreciate the statement made by Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno at the beginning of our
meeting.

In conclusion, I pay tribute to Ambassador
Richard Holbrooke, whose vision and persistence has
re-energized the United Nations in its fight against one
of the gravest threats that humankind faces today. The
momentum he has build up in our combat against
HIV/AIDS will be remembered as one of his lasting
legacies during the period we have found him as our
colleague and friend at the United Nations.

Today is the final day for Ambassador Holbrooke
in his office as the United States representative to the
United Nations. I would like to applaud him, as the
representative of Bangladesh to the United Nations as
well as on my own personal behalf, for the brilliant and
substantive contributions he has made during his short
tenure at the United Nations. His vision, his
commendable initiatives and his outstanding leadership
will be remembered by all of us long after he is gone,
and what a remarkable farewell speech he made to us
today. We will miss you, Richard.

