Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate. Let me congratulate you on assuming the presidency. I would also like to welcome all the other new members of the Security Council as they start their mandates. Portugal is strongly committed to a reinforced multilateral system with the United Nations at its centre. We view peace as a broad concept, promoting both human rights and sustainable development. We therefore support the comprehensive ongoing reform of the United Nations system to fully uphold our collective vision of international peace and security, including through conflict prevention, as enshrined in Article | of the Charter of the United Nations. Only political solutions and preventive diplomacy allow the international community to act with responsibility in order to avoid escalation and spillover risks. The Security Council plays a central role in promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes. Negotiation, inquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration and resort to regional mechanisms are some of its best tools. Moreover, we think that the working methods of the Security Council should be adapted to enhance transparency and efficiency. Peacekeeping operations are a_ privileged instrument of the Security Council in maintaining peace and security. Supporting those operations has been and will remain a priority for my country. That commitment is translated in our presence in eight of the United Nations current missions. The Action for Peacekeeping initiative and the joint Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations are further evidence of positive steps. Furthermore, we need to focus on the peace continuum and the paramount role of peacebuilding, namely in transition scenarios. In that vein, we support stronger and more regular coordination between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission, as well as additional focus on climate challenges and other potential sources of conflict. The critical importance of reinforced participation by women and youth has been proved in recent and ongoing missions. Let me conclude by expressing our firm belief that this year's commemoration of the United Nations seventy-fifth anniversary will be an opportunity to reaffirm our collective commitment to multilateralism, grounded on the primacy of international law and on the principles and values of the United Nations Charter. We owe it to the past to prevent the same tragic mistakes. We owe it to the present, to those still mired in conflict and poverty. We also owe it to the future, as caretakers of this irreplaceable and essential Organization.
