Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks Mr. Mladenov
for his briefing today.

We once again are participating in an open debate
on the subject of the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. The truth is that
the reality of the Palestinian people - with more than
5 million of them living as refugees; the inhumane
conditions experienced by those living in the Gaza
Strip, who have been subjugated to a heinous blockade
by the Israeli occupying Power for nearly 10 years; and
the increasing number of illegal settlements - is, to
the say the least, discouraging, and there does not seem
to be a solution in sight. In addition to that, hundreds
of adolescents and children have been abducted and
incarcerated in Israeli jails in violation of international
law, for example, as Mr. Mladenov pointed out, in the
case of Ahed Tamimi.

My delegation categorically rejects the blatant
intention of the Government of Israel, the occupying
Power, to build settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories. A little more than a week ago, the Israeli
Minister for Defence announced to the press the plan
to build 1,285 new settlements in the West Bank.
That announcement translates into a direct violation
of resolution 2334 (2016), as well as many other
resolutions adopted by the Security Council and by the
General Assembly that reiterate that the establishment
of settlements in Palestinian territories occupied since
1967, including East Jerusalem, has no legal basis, is a
flagrant violation of international law and presents a
major obstacle to achieving the two-State solution and
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace.

We also wish to express our concern about the
decision of the Government of the United States to
cut financing to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). We believe that such a decision significantly
affects the humanitarian support that the Agency
provides to the nearly 5 million Palestinian men and
women currently registered with UNRWA. We echo
the statement of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
of 16 January that the services provided by UNRWA
are of great importance not only for the welfare of
the population, but also as a major factor for ensuring
stability. Reducing funding only serves to deny them
the right to access basic services - such as education,
health and emergency relief - for a people who
since 1948 has been dispossessed of its land, homes,
farms and, ultimately, its entire history. We therefore
commend the decision of the Kingdom of Sweden,
which has taken the initiative speed up its contribution
of $58.5 million to UNRWA. We have no doubt that
that support will certainly to some extent alleviate the
impact of the hardships affecting Palestinian refugee
men and women.

Bolivia once again expresses to the international
community its firm condemnation ofthe decision of the
United States Government to recognize Jerusalem as
the capital ofIsrael, as it constitutes a flagrant violation
of various Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, including resolution 478 (1980), which
calls on States to withdraw their diplomatic missions
from Jerusalem. The decision serves only to undermine
any possibility for dialogue between the parties and
significantly delays arriving at a peaceful and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. As a
pacifist country, Bolivia believes that the only option
for ensuring a just and lasting peaceful conclusion to
the conflict between Israel and Palestine is through
dialogue and negotiations, with clear expressions
of political will by both parties, so as to achieve the
two-State solution, concerning which we pledge our
full commitment to multilateralism and respect for
international law.

We express our firm commitment to supporting
all the international efforts leading to the peaceful
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In that
regard, we subscribe to initiatives such as the Quartet
road map, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and all others that ensure achieving a just
and lasting peace so that both peoples can live within
recognized and secure borders. Bolivia believes that
the only long-term option for resolving the conflict is
the two-State solution, with the establishment of a free,
sovereign and independent Palestinian State, within the
pre-l967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital,
pursuant to the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions.

Allow me to conclude my intervention by
quoting from the speech by Anwar Al-Sadat made on
20 November 1977 in the Knesset, which was referred
to earlier.
(spoke in English)

"Conceive with me a peace agreement in Geneva
that we would herald to a world thirsting for
peace, a peace agreement based on the following
points: ending the Israeli occupation of the Arab
territories occupied in 1967; the achievement of
the fundamental rights of the Palestinian people
and their right to self-determination, including
their right to establish their own State; and the
right of all states in the area to live in peace within
their boundaries".

