Mr. Ham Sang-wook: It is a pleasure to address
the Security Council today on behalf the 35 partners
of the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR). I
would like to discuss the Regime's efforts and what we
can do together in the area of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD).
The MTCR and Security Council resolution 1540
(2004) have been complementing and reinforcing each
other since that milestone resolution's adoption, in
2004. The resolution provides a binding international
norm under the Charter of the United Nations, and
some of its provisions are directly relevant to the
work of the MTCR. It not only recognizes efforts by
multilateral arrangements such as the MTCR, it also
stipulates that States should establish national export
controls in order to prevent the proliferation of WMDs,
their means of delivery and related materials. There can
be no doubt that the resolution has led to more countries
enacting export control legislation, as we can see from
the comprehensive review report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

For its part, the MTCR has played an important
role since 1987 as the only export control regime for
means of delivery. In 2002 its mandate expanded to
include preventing terrorists from acquiring missiles
and missile technology. Two aspects of its work
are particularly important to the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). One is its work on updating the
MTCR technical annex list of controlled items. Thanks
to the efforts of technical experts to keep the list up to
date, the annex serves as an international benchmark
for export controls on means of delivery. A growing
number of non-partners of the MTCR now adhere
to the annex, and it is also cited in certain Security
Council resolutions.

The second significant aspect of the MTCR's
work is its efforts to engage with non-partners. We are
conducting outreach activities with various entities,
including non-MTCR partner States, international
organizations and industry and academic actors. The
Regime hopes to enhance awareness through such
outreach on export controls and to reduce the capacity
gaps between nations.

What can the MTCR and the 1540 Committee
achieve together in the future? The Committee's report
points out that, despite some progress, it is clear that
significant effort will be needed to address the gaps
in export controls in many States. I believe that the
MTCR can be helpful in two ways. First, it can share
its expertise, experiences and best practices with
States Members of the United Nations through further
exchanges with the 1540 Committee. From the first
contact, in 2005, between our two bodies until the latest,
which occurred last year, we have been talking to each
other, but we still have room for further cooperation.
We would like to continue to participate in the 1540
Committee's meetings, while the Committee could
also consider taking part in the future in our biennial
technical outreach meetings, in order to deepen our
mutual understanding.

Member States may also find the MTCR's adherence
policy helpful in implementing the resolution. When
a State declares its full adherence to the MTCR, the
Regime invites it to technical outreach meetings
and provides it with select materials presented at the
MTCR licensing and enforcement experts' meetings. In
addition, the MTCR meets with adherent States to give
them updates on the Regime, and those countries are
listed on its website and in its public statement. Ibelieve
that becoming an adherent is the easiest and best way
for Member States to improve their implementation of
missile-related export controls. Ultimately, the MTCR
guidelines and resolution 1540 (2004) share the same
goal - stopping the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery worldwide. It is
more important than ever that we cooperate in order to
achieve that common goal.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming the MTCR's
continued support for resolution 1540 (2004).

