Mr. Kiiriisi (Hungary): As the last speaker in today's
open debate, I would like to pay tribute to Prosecutor
Fatou Bensouda, the members of the Security Council
and the other Member States that are still here at
this late hour. I also wish to thank you, Madam, for
convening this open debate and for preparing a focused
concept paper (S/2014/725, annex).

As a member of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency (ACT) group, Hungary aligns itself
with the statement made by the representative of
Switzerland, as well as with the statement delivered by
the representative of Liechtenstein. Let me add a few
observations in our national capacity, starting with
the relationship between the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court (ICC).

It is our firm belief that, when the Council exercises
its prerogative to refer cases to the ICC, it is the Council's
responsibility to follow up and ensure cooperation with
ICC proceedings. While the Council has announced its
readiness to do more in that regard, all seven letters of
the ICC President related to cooperation have remained
unanswered to date. That is hardly surprising, since
the Council has no internal framework to address such
issues in a systematic manner. Therefore, we reiterate
our call for the creation of a permanent internal
mechanism for the purpose, which should deal with all
aspects of the Council's relationship with the ICC.

Taking a broader View, ensuring accountability
for crimes is a top priority for peace and security. As
we have stated many times, there is no lasting peace
without justice. Furthermore, military means may
only stop the perpetration of further atrocity crimes,
but cannot prevent them. Prevention is best served
by the perspective of inevitability, as far as bringing
perpetrators to justice. However, this preventive aspect
is non-existent without a coherent accountability
strategy, developed and applied by the Council in a
predictable and evenhanded manner.

A failure to act will only invite further atrocities. To
appreciate that we just have to look at the lack of action
by the Council on the request for referring the situation
in Syria, and the crimes committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and other armed groups, in
particular against religious and ethnic minorities both
in Syria and Iraq. Those crimes most probably amount
to war crimes and crimes against humanity.

In order to establish and nurture the mutually
reinforcing correlation between peace, security and
accountability, the Council must act decisively, This
relates to another type of accountability, that of the
Council. As pointed out by the International Law
Association back in 2004,

"Accountability is linked to the authority and
power of an international organization. Power
entails accountability, that is, the duty to account
for its exercise."

In our humble view, there is also a duty to
account for the lack of action. That aspect of Council
accountability also requires the development of a set of
clear and public criteria to guide the Council's future
decisions on referrals.

Furthermore, there seems to be a lack ofappreciation
for the important interrelationship between peace,
security and accountability in general, and the duties of
the Council in the area of accountability in particular.
A look at the Council's homepage, not a word is devoted
to the role ofthe Council in ICC-related proceedings. In
our View, that omission has to be rectified.

With regard to the Sanctions Committees, Hungary
appreciates the work carried out by those bodies.
We work closely with them and, when called upon,
fully assists in their investigations. Having said that,
Hungary is also ready to support initiatives aimed at
further enhancing due process in the Committees.
Hungary acknowledges the important and growing
role played by the Ombudsperson for the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee, as a necessary element for checks
and balances. Despite the lack of a formal agreement,
Hungary is willing to assist the Ombudsperson with
sharing confidential information on an ad hoc and as-
necessary basis. Furthermore, as other countries have
done as well, Hungary strongly supports the initiative
to extend the mandate of the Ombudsperson to the other
Committees.

The fact that we are still here at 6.35 pm. shows that
many countries, including Hungary, truly appreciate
the opportunity to speak in the Council and the holding
of open debates. In that regad, Madam President,
I commend your leadership. In our view, this most
welcome interaction could be further strengthened if
Member States, in providing suggestions and ideas,
could get some form of feedback from the Security
Council on such initiatives.

