Mr. Valero Briceflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the
reports of the Chairmen of the Committees established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004) and
1267 (1999), which are useful for Member States.

The fateful events of 11 September 2001 shocked
the world. All States Members of the United Nations
firmly condemned the scourge of terrorism. The
Security Council adopted resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1624 (2005), in which it urged States not to give refuge
to terrorists and not to resort to political motivations
for refusing requests for extradition. The United
Nations thus assumed the commitment to fighting
terrorism within the framework of multilateralism and
international cooperation based on respect for the self-
determination and sovereignty of peoples and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States. It was
a fight against terrorism within the framework of the
United Nations Charter and international law.

The events of 11 September 2001 also served as a
pretext for unilateralist, imperialist and aggressive
actions against sovereign countries. The rubric "war
against terrorism" was used to justify a preventive war,
regime change and State terrorism and to set aside or
undermine the fragile international legal architecture.
In the name of the fight against terrorism Afghanistan
and Iraq were invaded, thousands of innocent people
have been murdered and State terrorism has been
promoted. Ten years after the terrible events of
11 September, the world is not a safer place.

That same State, claiming to wage a global war
against terrorism throughout the world, refuses to
condemn the vicious terrorist Luis Posada Carriles or
to extradite him to Venezuela, where he was serving a
prison sentence for the bombing of a Cubana de
Aviacien airliner in which 73 Cuban athletes were
killed. This notorious international terrorist today
walks free through the streets of Miami, Florida, after
having been acquitted in a court in El Paso, Texas, not
on charges of terrorism but of having lied about his
immigration status.

A few days ago, Mr. Posada Carriles admitted in
an interview on CNN in Spanish to being a CIA agent
and boasted of having carried out numerous political
assassinations in several Latin American countries.
Like him, other terrorists live freely in that country,
including Raul Diaz Peria, Jose Antonio Colina and
German Rodolfo Varela, who were sentenced to prison
in Venezuela for the 2003 bombing of the Spanish and
Colombian consulates in Caracas. While self-
confessed, convicted terrorists are protected, five
innocent Cubans, who themselves worked in the fight
against terrorism, remain detained in United States
prisons.

As long as the practice of classifying some
terrorists as good and others as bad persists; as long as
State terrorism is promoted; and as long as innocent
people are being killed under the pretext of a supposed
fight against terrorism and the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law are
violated, the world will not be a safer place.

The deplorable living conditions in various parts
of the world; injustice and inequity; ethnic, religious
and other kinds of discrimination; and foreign
occupation of and interference in sovereign countries
all fuel terrorism. Those terrible scourges, which
undermine the dignity of millions of human beings
throughout the world, must be eradicated.
11-33901

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms
its commitment to the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
reiterates its commitment to the fight against this
scourge, in all its forms and manifestations, whatever
its origin or motivation, including State terrorism,
which today constitutes an instrument for subjecting
countries and peoples to foreign occupation and neo-
colonial domination.

