Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The fact that the Security Council is once again dealing
with the situation in Angola reflects once again the
importance the international community attaches to the
efforts for peace in that brotherly African country. The
international community is concerned over the serious
stalling of the peace process and is interested in seeing
the suspicious relations between the parties become
constructive relations based on mutual trust, coexistence
and reconciliation. It is also interested in seeing the
supreme interest of the nation prevail so that the hopes of
the international community can be realized and the
Angolans themselves can succeed in putting an end to the
tragedy they have experienced for more than two decades.

The delegation of Egypt has carefully studied the
report (S/I997/640) of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Angola. We would like to express our
appreciation for the efforts made by the Secretary-
General, by his Special Representative, Maitre Blondin
Beye, and by the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola. They are all discharging their tasks efficiently
under difficult circumstances made even more difficult by
one party's lack of full cooperation with the international
Mission.

The Secretary-General's report makes it clear that the
peace process has taken a crucial turn and that the
progress made during the past two and a half years is
threatened by UNITA's delay in implementing its
obligations under the Lusaka Protocol: complete military
demobilization, facilitation of the Angolan Government's
restoration of State administration throughout Angolan
territory, the transformation of radio VORGAN into a
non-partisan radio station and UNITA's genuine
transformation into a political party. As has rightly been
stated by the Secretary-General, the international
community is awaiting the faithful, unconditional
implementation of these major obligations.

On the other hand, it is regrettable that paragraph 13
of the report states that last July more than 120 flights
landed at airports under UNITA's control and that new
mines are being laid in major roads. These practices
confirm UNITA's desire to promote itself as a State
within a State. This is unacceptable after the formation of
the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation.

Emerging from the current stalemate in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol hinges on strong
political will and the clear choice by UNITA to abandon
the option of war, to be transformed into a political party
and to refrain from old practices that delay the
implementation of the peace accords. We are convinced

 

that this will not be possible unless the international
community, particularly the Security Council and the troika
countries, bring appropriate pressure to bear on UNITA and
oblige it to respect its obligations.

Operative paragraph 4 of the draft resolution before us
would oblige all States to deny the families of UNITA's
leaders entry into or transit through their territories, except
those officials necessary for the full functioning of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation, the
National Assembly and the Joint Commission. Despite our
full support for the general thrust of the draft resolution, I
would like to express Egypt's reservations on including the
families of UNITA's leaders in such measures, since this
constitutes a breach of a legal norm: nulla poena sine
crimine, or no punishment without a crime. It is
inadmissible to punish families whose only crime is their
relationship to those leaders. In addition, this measure may
constitute a form of collective punishment, which Egypt
strongly rejects in principle.

Despite this general reservation, UNITA's persistence
in defying the will of the international community, its
refusal to abide by the Lusaka Protocol and the
Government's approval of the draft text prompted us
reluctantly to accept the draft resolution before the Council,
provided that it would not constitute a precedent in the
annals of Security Council resolutions.

We hope that UNITA will take advantage of the time
from now to 30 September to respond to the will of the
international community, as represented in the resolutions
of the Council, and to implement the commitments it
undertook in the Lusaka Protocol. This would provide an
opportunity for the Council to reconsider the measures set
out in the draft before they go into effect.
The delegation of Egypt would like to reaffirm its full
support for the recommendations of the Secretary-General
with regard to the strength of United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA), in particular for postponing
the withdrawal of the United Nations military units and
retaining some 2,650 military personnel until the end of
October, and for the link made between the withdrawal of
those personnel and the completion of all the military
aspects of the Lusaka Protocol. This is absolutely necessary
if we are to ensure the safety and security of United
Nations personnel and those of other international
organizations. Egypt supports the request made to the
Secretary-General reiterating the importance of a meeting
taking place between President Dos Santos and Mr.
Savimbi inside Angola as soon as possible so as to move
on from the current stalemate.

Bearing in mind the reservations I have expressed
with regard to certain references in the draft resolution,
the Egyptian delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Council.

