Ms. Colakovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, and your delegation
for convening this open debate and thereby showing
that your country attaches particular importance to the
issue of children in armed conflict.

Allow me to express our appreciation to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflicts, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake,
and especially to Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, for their
excellent briefings today.

Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the adoption
of the Security Council's action-oriented resolution
2143 (2014), on children in armed conflict.

I would like to start with some statistics. According
to UNICEF, 10 million children were traumatized by
war in the past decade. Furthermore, in armed conflict,
children are the most vulnerable group in society
and are often subjected to rape, sexual violence and
abduction. Tens of thousands of children continue to
be recruited, killed, maimed or deprived of their rights
to education and health care. Poverty and conflict are
frequently obstacles, as children barely in their teens
are compelled to support hungry families or forced to
become child soldiers or comfort wives.

The practice of the recruitment and use of children
in armed conflict still persists. It is a grave human
rights violation. The involvement of children in armed
conflict presents serious challenges on the ground
for both States in conflict and for the United Nations
presence. There are a number of examples that we see
in the world today.

We stress the primary role of national Governments
in providing protection and reliefto all children affected
by armed conflicts. We also urge all parties to conflicts
to fully comply with international humanitarian law
and human rights law with regard to protecting the
civilian population as a whole. All countries and groups
must place the protection of children in situations of
conflict above politics.

Education is increasingly being highlighted
as essential to the advancement of society, as well
as crucial to opportunity for individuals. Defining
education as a fundamental human right is an important
start. In spite of that recognition, we are witnessing a
growing number of attacks against schools, educational
facilities, teachers and pupils. Hundreds of thousands
of children all over the world are today suffering from
the absence of any opportunity to be appropriately
educated. Two out of three children do not attend
secondary school. The majority of them become
completely lost, and a forgotten generation for good.
Such a situation establishes a historical basis for future
international peace and security challenges.

Malala Yousafzai, targeted by the Pakistani
Taliban for assassination for promoting education for
a generation of young men and women, stands out as
a symbol for millions who are denied opportunity and
access. Therefore, in times of conflict, all steps should
be taken to safeguard the right to education. All parties
to conflict should safeguard schools as protected areas
and zones ofpeace for boys and girls.

What more can be done, both in practice and
definition, by the United Nations and the international
community? We reiterate that targeted, gradual and
more vigorous measures against groups and individuals
who persistently commit grave violations against
children should be undertaken.

In order to end impunity for violations against
children, Member States must uphold existing
international standards and put into practice their
obligations through accelerated national legislative
reform and systematic implementation and monitoring.
Perpetrators should be brought to justice in compliance
with international justice mechanisms, criminal courts
and tribunals. We are encouraged by the fact that
some parties to armed conflict have made progress in
releasing child soldiers. In that context, we stress the
primary role of national Governments in providing
protection and relief to all children affected by armed
conflict.

With regard to the practice of reintegrating
children into communities, domestic and international
stakeholders dealing with situations of conflict in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations often face
difficulties. To resolve such complex issues, efficient
coordination among different actors is needed, including
by the host country, host Government, United Nations
entities, donors and non-governmental organizations.
Special attention should be given to refugees and
displaced children, children with disabilities and those
who have been subjected to sexual violence. We believe
that their participation in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration practices is critical.

In addition, we believe that the cooperation and
exchange of information between the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and the
relevant Sanctions Committees should be improved.
We commend the "Children, not soldiers" campaign
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children
by Government armed forces in conflict. Regional
and subregional organizations have an important role
to play in the promotion and protection of children's
rights.

United Nations-mandated institutions, including
the Offices of the Special Rapporteurs, UNICEF, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Human Rights Council, provide regular
reviews on the status of, and respect for, human rights
within the borders of any United Nations State Member.
The protection of children must remain at the top of any
review agenda for the sake of our future.

When we talk about the future of child protection,
we should also keep in perspective the post-2015
development agenda and sustainable development
framework. During the discussion in the Open Group
on Sustainable Development Goals in February, many
countries voiced the issue of conflict and violence
prevention and the pursuit of durable peace as one of
the starting points or prerequisites of development and
sustainable development. Furthermore, education is
promoted as one of the most critical priorities among
the Millennium Development Goals.

In conclusion, we firmly believe that the Security
Council should remain committed to the protection
of children in armed conflict, including through
determination to ensure the full implementation of,
and respect for, its resolutions on the issue. Bosnia and
Herzegovina stands ready to contribute to that aim.

