Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I welcome
the presence of Mr. Didier Burkhalter, President of the
Swiss Confederation, and I congratulate his country on
its accession to the chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in
2014. The United Nations and the OSCE share common
objectives, one at the global level and the other at the
regional level, namely, to strengthen the links and
dialogue among States to better ensure their security.

In that regard, I welcome the proposed mediation
in Ukraine put forward by the Swiss Chairperson-in-
Office of the OSCE. All efforts must be made to end
the crisis peacefully while respecting the wishes of
the Ukrainian people and the legitimate interests
of all stakeholders. Following the violence that has
caused such grief in Ukraine in recent days, we must
support the transformations under way in that country.
Institutions are being established. A new Government
will soon have to organize elections as soon as possible.
France and the European Union will continue their
efforts to favour democratic reform and modernization
in Ukraine, with full respect for its unity, integrity and
independence.

The OSCE will have a major role to play. As it
unites all of the States concerned by the crisis, it finds
itself in a unique position to overcome the geopolitical
concerns of the various parties. An artificial fault line
must not again be created in Europe, as Ukraine would
suffer from that by losing its role as a bridge at the heart
of our continent.

I will dwell on three points regarding cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE. From
Central Asia and Georgia to Kosovo and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the OSCE and the United Nations have
shown their capacity to work hand-in-hand. That
complementarity draws on the commitment of the
OSCE on the ground. Through its missions, the OSCE is
present in the Caucasus, Central Asia and the Balkans,
often side-by-side with the United Nations. In the
Caucasus, the OSCE is working to promote dialogue
and rebuild trust - indeed, the Swiss chairmanship has
made that one of its priorities.

As co-chair of the Minsk Group with the United
States and the Russian Federation, France has worked
to help Armenia and Azerbaijan find a peaceful solution
to the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh. The resumption
of high-level talks between the two Presidents gives us
hope for progress in the peace process.

On Georgia, France supports the Geneva talks
and the role played by the OSCE together with the
European Union and the United Nations, and reaffirms
its support for the territorial integrity of the country.
We welcome the readiness of the Swiss chairmanship
of the OSCE to reopen discussions on the presence of
the OSCE in Georgia on the condition that the parties
show flexibility and creativity.

In Central Asia, the OSCE contributes to regional
stability. Its cooperation with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime in combatting crosscutting
threats is an example of successful cooperation with the
United Nations. The OSCE will also have a role to play
in observing the presidential elections in Afghanistan
scheduled for the spring.

In the Balkans, the OSCE's collaboration with the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo allowed the Kosovo electorate to participate
in peaceful municipal elections in November 2013.
The OSCE carried out that task with professionalism,
thanks again to its substantial presence on the ground.
It will once again be called upon in 2014 to facilitate the
holding of a number of elections to be held in Kosovo,
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Secondly, the in-depth analysis undertaken within
the OSCE contributes to broader progress on security.
We welcome the willingness of the Swiss chairmanship
to update the 2011 Vienna Document on Confidence-
and Security-Building Measures. Likewise, we support
the intention to encourage the implementation of the
Code of Conduct on Politico-Military Aspects of
Security, which is important for ensuring democratic
oversight of security and the armed forces. Moreover,
we welcome the Swiss intention to organize a number
of workshops focused on transnational threats and
aimed at promoting cooperation between police forces.

Finally, we endorse the priority given to promoting
the upholding of commitments undertaken by
participating States on human rights over the past
40 years. In that regard, we attach particular importance
to the freedom of expression and media freedom.

It is a fact that the OSCE covers a vast area,
stretching from Vancouver to Vladivostok, that shares
common values - an expanse marked by the beliefthat
the security of the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions
goes hand-in-hand with the promotion of human rights,
democracy and the rule of law. Those values are also
at the heart of the work of the United Nations. France
therefore supports the dialogue launched at the Dublin
Ministerial Council on the political future of the OSCE
in the context of the "Helsinki+40" process. Those
reforms will allow the OSCE to continue to be a modern
and effective partner for the United Nations.

France endorses the desire of the Chairperson-in-
Office to strengthen the mediation capacities of the
OSCE, which is a measure ofits continuing commitment
to work with the United Nations in seeking lasting
solutions to conflicts.

I conclude by once again wishing Switzerland- and
its successor, Serbia, with whom it has defined the
OSCE's priorities - the greatest of success during its
term in office and by assuring it of France's support.
