The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a few comments and pose a few questions in my
capacity as the representative of Mexico.

I thank Mr. Lubbers for his substantial
presentation and for participating in today's meeting,
which was invaluable for the Security Council. I thank
him too for having mentioned Mexico's experience
with Guatemalan and other Central American refugees.
He was right to note that there may be something in
that experience that could be applied in the search for
solutions to refugee problems in other regions. Here, I
would focus on two elements: the successful use of
voluntary repatriation, principally for Guatemalan
refugees returning home from Mexico; and, as noted by
Mr. Lubbers, the willingness of the Mexican
Government to naturalize and normalize the status of
certain refugees who were born in our country. That is
being extended also to some members of the families
of refugees born in Mexico.

Let me also underline something else that has
already been mentioned: that, by establishing the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), the United Nations shouldered an
eminently humanitarian responsibility that is part of the
complex political picture that gives rise to the refugee
problem. That is why it is of the utmost importance to
my country that the humanitarian nature of the work of
UNHCR be preserved, notwithstanding the demands of
the fight against terrorism. It is our hope that the fight
against terrorism will not aversely affect the ability of
the United Nations to keep providing support,
assistance and protection to refugees.

Mr. Lubbers has rightly said that the United
Nations and UNHCR play a coordinating role and must
work with a broad range of other international,
multilateral and national bodies. He spoke also of the
interface that is necessary to ensure that not only the
UNHCR but all those other institutions as well are
involved at every phase of the process. That process
ranges from immediate humanitarian assistance to
refugees when a problem first arises to protecting
them, providing security and seeing to their return and
their rehabilitation. We are certain that Mr. Lubbers
would agree that it is necessary also to prevent
situations that could lead to refugee problems. It is our
view that this is a central international security issue,
and that it therefore requires a strategic partnership
among all relevant institutions. As Mr. Lubbers has
said, we must seek lasting solutions because only these
can provide a foundation for peace.

We also believe that the central problems of
development must be tackled, since these are at the
root of many of the factors that in turn give rise to
displacement, migration and refugee problems; we
consider that this is the spirit guiding the preparations
for the Monterrey, Mexico, International Conference on
Financing for Development and that will guide its
deliberations.

I should therefore like to put the following
question to Mr. Lubbers: in the light of his experience
at UNHCR, what does he consider the prospects to be
for this strategic association, this partnership, involving
not only the Security Council but all the agencies of the
United Nations system? On that basis, could we also
create a leadership phenomenon at the institutional
level, which will bring in the support of other
countries?

We are certain that the central problem with
which Mr. Lubbers will have to come to grips over the
coming months and years will be how to make
resources available to deal with that gigantic
phenomenon that currently involves more than 21
million people. How can we channel those resources
across the board, not just to provide immediate
assistance to refugees but to deal with the phenomenon
in its entirety? I put that question to Mr. Lubbers on the
understanding that time may not allow him to respond
fully here and now. However, it would prove very
useful - for Mexico and for the entire Council - if he
were able to submit a note to us reflecting his thoughts
on the partnership and the strategic association that
needs to be created to come to grips with the problem
of refugees, across the board, in a lasting and stable
way, as part and parcel of efforts to maintain
international peace and security.

I conclude by once again thanking Mr. Lubbers
for having joined us at this Security Council meeting
and expressing the hope that he will soon do so again.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I should now like to call on Mr. Lubbers to
respond to the comments made and questions posed.

