The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso.

I would like to thank Mr. Amre Moussa,
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, His Royal Highness Prince Saud
Al-Faisal of Saudi Arabia and Ms. Shalev for their
statements, and particularly for the light that they have
shed on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. I would also like to thank all
other speakers who preceded me for their statements.

The position of my country is very clear. Burkina
Faso has always held that negotiations should hold
sway over the military option in order to resolve a
conflict. We wish to reiterate that call for dialogue,
which is crucial for bringing the parties closer together
and the only way that can lead to the establishment of
two sovereign and independent States, Palestine and
Israel, coexisting side by side in peace and security, as
desired by the international community.

Very fortunately, we are seeing some encouraging
signs. Annapolis and many other previous agreements
charted the way for that cohabitation. It is important
now to demonstrate the political will to transform
wishes into reality. Other promising signs include the
ongoing regular contacts within the framework of the
Annapolis process, a relative calm observed following
the truce secured by Egypt, and the release of
Palestinian prisoners.

However, those very encouraging signs are not
enough to restore trust. Many other aspects of the
question require a greater effort on the part of both
parties. I refer to the persistent threats that do not
reassure Israel and Israel's pursuit of its settlement
policy in the Palestinian territories.

All initiatives, whether they come from the
Quartet, the League of Arab States - which managed
to bring Lebanon out of its deadlock - or any other
State, deserve support from the Security Council and
the international community. At stake are the interests
of the peoples of the Middle East, in particular the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.
