Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for her report on
the situation in Darfur.

Chad is deeply concerned about the serious
deterioration in security conditions in Darfur, owing
to ongoing clashes between the Sudanese Government
and the armed rebel groups and to worsening
inter-community violence. The involvement of
paramilitary units and tribal militias in the conflict
are clearly a primary cause of the violence among
civilians and the chief cause of displacement in the
population. All violence, including the destruction of
villages, rapes and abductions, and including attacks
on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), must be halted. We condemn
every act perpetrated on civilians by the Rapid Support
Forces and other militias involved in the conflict.

As we have emphasized many times, there can be
no military solution to this conflict. An open political
settlement is essential to the restoration of peace in the
region, which has been ravaged for more than a decade
by an unprecedented civil war. On the humanitarian
front, the escalation of the conflicts has resulted in a
renewed deterioration of the situation. Since February,
400,000 people have fled the violence in numerous
areas. This serious situation demands the attention of
the entire international community and renders it vital
that everything be done to stop the violence and protect
innocent civilians. In that regard, we ask the Government
of the Sudan to pursue the presumed perpetrators of
these crimes and to help combat impunity.

Regarding the issues of insecurity and access that
have hindered the ICC's investigations, as discussed
in the Prosecutor's report, we call on the Sudanese
Government to show proof of its flexibility and
willingness to cooperate. Chad takes note ofthe Court's

judgement in the case of Mr. Abdallah Banda and would
like to express its support for the ICC in its efforts to
bring justice to the victims and to end impunity.

It is clear that implementing the various Security
Council resolutions on the crisis in Darfur has been
difficult, due to the complexity of the crisis and to the
fact that the concerns of the regional and subregional
organizations involved in the quest for a way out of
the crisis are not taken into account. We believe that it
would be helpful to broaden the scope of our thinking
on how to support the ICC in accomplishing its mission,
by emphasizing the cooperation and involvement of all
concerned through dialogue and by raising awareness.
It would be counterproductive, in our view, to try to
use the Security Council to exert systematic pressure
in order to help the cases make progress in the Court.
The issue of a solution to the follow-up of cases referred
to the ICC could be usefully and judiciously discussed
within the Conference of States Parties.
As we have always stated, concerning the issue
of Chad's cooperation with the ICC, despite some
difficulties linked to our status as a neighbour of the
Sudan and our role as a facilitator in the Darfur crisis,
Chad has always fully cooperated with the Court. It
should be recalled that the ICC has conducted all its
Darfur investigations from Chad, where it opened an
office at the beginning of the crisis in the region. The
situation in Darfur has had a huge impact on Chad, and
it is no accident that almost 300,000 Sudanese refugees
have ended up in the border area with Darfur since
2003. A lasting peace in Darfur would be a guarantee of
stability and security for Chad and for all the countries
bordering Darfur.

Furthermore, for the aforementioned reasons and
at the international community's request, Chad has
taken on the role of facilitator in settling the crisis in
Darfur. It would be difficult, if not impossible, for us
to play that part without being in contact with all the
Sudanese parties. Chad nonetheless remains committed
to its obligations under the Rome Statute and will do
all in its power to meet them. However, considering the
necessity of achieving security and stability, we ask for
understanding on the part of the Court and the States
parties for the non-compliance with certain procedures.

Lastly, in future Chad will take advantage of the
consultation process outlined in the Rome Statute,
enabling it to advise the Court in advance should it have
difficulties in meeting its commitments.

