Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I apologize for requesting the floor once again.

First, a scandal concerning WikiLeaks documents
has revealed the intentions of the United States
Government to overthrow the regime in my country
since 2006. The WikiLeaks documents have been
published in the United States, and the book is available
on Amazon for whoever wants to acquire it.

Second, in her memoir, Hillary Clinton confesses
that it was the United States Administration that
created Da'esh, Al-Nusra, Al-Qaida and others. Many
books written in the United States and Europe have
all pointed to the manipulation of Islamic political
terrorism, particularly to undermine Governments in
our Arab and Middle Eastern region.

Third, have we forgotten about what happened in
Iraq? Can we forget the scandal of the invasion of Iraq
and all the resulting afflictions in our region and in that
country?
Fourth, who asked and permitted the so-called
international coalition forces to enter my country, and
what is the United States military doing in parts of the
national territory of Syria? Is there any justification
for that? How can the sovereignty of my country be
militarily violated in many areas, in a blatant and
extreme violation of international law? What are
American forces doing on our land and who asked them
to come?

Fifth, why has the United States Pentagon run an
operations room in Amman since the beginning of the
crisis in my country? Is it not to train terrorists and
send them across the border to my country?

Sixth, have we forgotten that the former United
States Administration spent $500 million to train
a mere 39 terrorists to liberate Syria from its ruling
regime? Ultimately, those 39 terrorists joined Da'esh
and the Al-Nusra Front with their American weapons.

Seventh, who attacked the Syrian Army position in
Jabal Thurdah, in Deir ez-Zor, on 17 September a year
ago? Was it not the United States Air Force that attacked
the Syrian Arab Army position in Deir ez-Zor that was
protecting 300,000 civilians there from Da'esh? What
was the result? The American attack on the Syrian
Arab Army position in Jabal Thurdah allowed Da'esh
to seize the position and attack Deir ez-Zor for an entire
year. This happened again recently.

On 21 September, the Syrian Defence Ministry
and the Russian Defence Ministry announced that Deir
ez-Zor would be liberated from Da'esh within a week and
that our army was at the gates of that city. The Russian
and Syrian air forces have eliminated 850 Da'esh
terrorists in Deir ez-Zor. The terrorists have withdawn
and the Syrian Arab Army has regained control of Deir
ez-Zor and the surrounding areas. It is easy to imagine
what happened next. The international coalition, led
by the United States, ceased its operations in Raqqa,
which is the stronghold of Da'esh, and pushed the so-
called Syrian Democratic Forces, which it supports, to
Deir ez-Zor, which our army was liberating. It is almost
as if the Americans were racing the Syrian Army to
reach Deir ez-Zor instead of fighting Da'esh in Raqqa.

There were, of course, aerial images captured by
our ally and friend, the Russians. These satellite images
reveal American troops and the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant forces exchanging locations without
fighting. Helicopters transported Da'esh leaders to
some unknown location.

What I want to say is that the American and
European conduct now and their attitude towards
what is taking place in my country goes against all
resolutions that the Security Council has adopted since
the beginning of the crisis in Syria on the political
situation in my country and on counter-terrorism.

The United States Government must be made
aware of and understand that we are a sovereign State,
just like the United States itself. We have no desire to
fight the United States, but we want the United States
to change its erroneous policies towards my country.
What benefit is there to Syrians if millions ofus remain
outside the country? My colleague said that the Syrians
have fled the practices of the Syrian Government, and
I now say before everyone that the Syrian Government
wants the host countries to return the refugees to
our country. If millions of Syrians are to return with
dignity, we must lift the coercive unilateral sanctions
so that those millions can find work opportunities,
manufacturing facilities and a dignified life, instead of
keeping them in neighbouring States.

As we have said before, the Syrian Government is
being blackmailed. Either it must make concessions,
or the situation of refugees and the so-called moderate
opposition - which is genetically modified, as we told
Mr. De Mistura - will continue. It is blatant blackmail.
That is not how political solutions work; they must be
based on our assistance as a Government, and not work
against us as a Government and exploit the humanitarian
situation to exert pressure on us.

The meeting rose at 4.40p.m.
