Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): My delegation would like
to express its high appreciation to the Dominican
Republic's presidency for organizing this very important
open debate. We also thank the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process for his
updates on the recent developments and remaining
challenges with regard to the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.

Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Deputy Permanent Representative of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

A year ago, at the open debate on 25 January
2018, representatives expressed their hope for
positive changes in the Middle East (see S/PV.8167).
Throughout the year, the Security Council and other
United Nations bodies made continued efforts to
resolve those untenable problems. However, excessive
and indiscriminate force continued to be used. Innocent
civilians continued to be victimized. The death and
casualty tolls were the highest in the past five years.
People, especially women and children, continued to be
displaced. The future of the peace process and the two-
State solution remained uncertain. The United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) faced a major funding crisis.

The situation in the Middle East remains unstable.
The plight ofthe Palestinian people is worse than a year
ago. One of the main reasons is that Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016), have
not been respected or implemented, and have even
been violated. There is clearly a lack of goodwill and
practical steps by many of the parties concerned to
comply with the Security Council and other United
Nations resolutions. As a country that has been through
many wars, Viet Nam shares the concerns over the
unjustifiable suffering of civilians. We follow the
situation closely, with a heavy feeling in our heart at
every sad event that takes place.

Viet Nam would once again like to reiterate its
solidarity with and support for the just struggle of the
Palestinian people and their inalienable rights, as well
as the two-State solution through the establishment of
an independent State of Palestine living in peace with
the State of Israel within the pre-1967 internationally
recognized borders.
Viet Nam opposes the excessive and indiscriminate
use of force and expresses concern over the escalation of
tensions and violations of Security Council resolutions
and international law. We urge all parties to uphold
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including Security Council resolutions 478
(1980) and 2334 (2016), and to resolve the conflict by
peaceful means in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.

Moving forward, Viet Nam supports the regular
consideration of such issues by the Security Council
with a view to strengthening its efforts to ultimately
achieve a long-lasting solution for the region. The unity
of the Council is crucial. Concrete actions are urgently
needed to uphold the Security Council resolutions, to
put an end to the suffering of the people on the ground
and to stop the violence and hostilities.

All efforts should seek to create an environment
that is conducive to reaching a comprehensive, fair
and sustainable solution that ensures the protection of
human life, dignity and safety, as well as regional peace
and security, while taking into account the legitimate
interests of all parties concerned. The work of UNRWA
and the efforts of the international community need to
be supported in order to address humanitarian concerns.

We sincerely hope that in 2019, the Council will
demonstrate its strong and effective leadership through
action-oriented efforts and call on all parties concerned
to abide by its decisions and resolutions with a view
to achieving a peaceful and long-lasting solution. Viet
Nam stands ready to support all efforts in that regard.

