Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive statement. I
also thank Under-Secretary-General Holmes and High
Commissioner Navi Pillay for their briefings this
morning.
10-43853

Brazil would like to join you, Madam President,
and previous speakers in paying special tribute to
Sir John Holmes. We have greatly appreciated his
work. During his tenure, we went through numerous
humanitarian crises and his leadership and dedication
made the response of the international community
more effective and the suffering of those affected less
unbearable. We wish him every success in his future
endeavours.

Brazil attaches great importance to the protection
of civilians in all its aspects. We have sought to
actively contribute to the many dimensions of the
issue, including the questions of humanitarian access,
improving compliance with humanitarian, refugee and
human rights law, strengthening the International
Criminal Court, and promoting the well-being of
internally displaced persons, among others. Today, I
wish to focus on the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations.

This year's report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations (A/64/ 19) demonstrated the
growing consensus on the importance of the protection
of civilians by peacekeepers. It encouraged the
Secretariat to continue its conceptual and operational
work in that area, including through the preparation of
training modules. We deem it very important that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations continue to
closely engage with troop- and police-contributing
countries throughout that process.

The Special Committee also requested the
Secretariat to prepare strategic frameworks for
mission-wide protection strategies. Such strategies are
particularly important inasmuch as they reinforce the
fact that the protection of civilians is a
multidimensional task. They should clarify the relevant
protection roles of all mission components, including
police, human rights, civil affairs and public
information.

The Council has been very clear with regard to
the priority that it attaches to the task of protecting
civilians. Nevertheless, we must ask ourselves if that
priority is adequately reflected in the means and
resources that are given to those responsible for
making protection a reality on the ground.

On the military side, we must continue to
consider issues such as training, guidance, oversight
mechanisms, intelligence, the dissemination of
information on international humanitarian law, and the
10-43853

use of non-lethal armaments and techniques. We must
also ensure, however, that the civilian aspects of a
mission receive equal attention, including in terms of
adequate staffing and guidance materials. The
Secretariat and the General Assembly must work
together to ensure that the civilian components of
missions are properly backstopped at Headquarters.

Civilian components play a central role in the
preventive dimension of the protection efforts of
peacekeeping missions. Missions must work together
with other actors, particularly those in the areas of
development and human rights, to create a protective
environment. In addition, establishing a positive, two-
way dialogue with the local population is an important
factor in ensuring the sustainability of post-conflict
peace and stability.

The debate on the protection of civilians by
peacekeeping operations should not be read as a false
opposition between protection and other mandated
tasks. When confronted with gross violations of human
rights, peacekeepers face a moral obligation to act.
Moreover, standing by while such abuses are
committed can imperil the mission's credibility in the
eyes of other actors and compromise its ability to fulfil
other mandated tasks. On the other hand, a mission that
protects civilians under imminent threat but makes no
progress in helping address the underlying causes of
the conflict or in peacebuilding tasks will not lead to a
sustainable peace. Helping States onto the path of
peace, stability and development is, ultimately, the best
way for the United Nations to contribute to the long-
term protection of civilians.

The protection of civilians by peacekeeping
missions is one dimension of a multifaceted issue.
Many others deserve careful attention from the relevant
bodies. Among those, I would cite how to ensure
compensation for damages to civilian victims of
conflicts even when they derive from actions
committed in accordance with international law; how
to preserve cultural, collective and community rights in
situations of armed conflict; and how to strengthen
local mechanisms of justice, monitoring and
prevention.

My delegation is ready to work with other
Member States and the United Nations system in order
to address those and other central questions in our
collective strategy to ensure the adequate protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
27

