Ms. Makotose: I would like to express my
appreciation for all the comments by Council members.
They are very helpful to the mission and can also
pave the way for our continued engagement regarding
further support.

I will begin with the last question. The steps we
are taking to protect women include actually sending
patrols with them, especially when they are doing
activities related to their livelihoods, since they are
more vulnerable when they are farming, collecting
firewood and gathering the grass that they use in their
work. Apart from patrols for the camps for internally
displaced persons, we have introduced patrols in the
areas that women visit, which we plan in conjunction
with the women's leadership. Thus we specify certain
days when they can go out to fetch water and collect
firewood. We have also been able to intervene in a
personal capacity, by using the women's association
network to introduce fuel-efficient stoves, which have
helped to reduce the need to send out patrols.

I would also like to respond briefly to the issue
raised by the representative of France on language and
culture. We do indeed have to deal with such challenges
in the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID). We do our best to learn the
local language, as well as to teach English to the local
communities, and that has improved our interaction
with them. They really appreciate the lessons, and we
appreciate being able to learn Arabic.

UNAMID appreciates the offers to do with the
issue of training, as raised here today, and I am sure
that the Police Division will be following up so that
we can benefit from such offers for further training.
I also want to mention the ongoing Police Division
efforts regarding tactical and strategic guidance for
mission development. I would mainly like to highlight
the importance of deploying the 20 per cent of women
individual police officers, but also to ask to see that
extended to the formed police units (FPUs), because the
need is there. The problem is that women are sometimes
attacked by men carrying guns, and as a result, when
they are patrolling they sometimes feel intimidated
because most of the patrols are also made up of men
carrying weapons. We would therefore love to see more
women in the FPUs.

Another area where we are getting guidance is
through the aforementioned women's association
network. Another Police Division initiative is the
gender toolkit, which helps us tailor our outreach to
communities in our gender mainstreaming efforts.
A website is being developed to help us reach out to
women and police-contributing countries in order to
enable them to contribute more women to missions.
We also encourage prior training for women to better
prepare them for deployment to missions and surviving
the rigorous requirements of mission life. The Police
Division is also developing a roster for members,
especially the senior leadership, so that when they are
needed women can be deployed more quickly.

I therefore do see us being able to surpass the 20 per
cent target ratio for female police that we have set, and
that in future a ratio of male to female deployment that
actually represents the population is possible, with the
Council's support. More importantly, however, I see it
as essential if we are to meet the needs of the male,
female and child populations.

