Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Australia's initiative to hold this open
briefing of the Security Council on United Nations
peacekeeping policing. We welcome Minister for
Foreign Affairs Bishop, who is personally presiding
over our deliberations today. I thank Under-Secretary-
General Ladsous and the Police Commissioners of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) for their briefings.

China salutes all United Nations peacekeeping
police officers, who are working in very difficult
conditions, for their dedication. The maintenance of
international peace and security is one of the purposes
of the Charter of the United Nations and a pillar of the
United Nations work. In recent years, as the nature
of conflicts and disputes has become more diverse,
peacekeeping operations face increasingly complex
situations and tasks. The United Nations peacekeeping
policing mandates have also grown continuously.
To ensure the sound and effective conduct of United
Nations peacekeeping police work, it is necessary to
change with the times and to strike a balance between
mandate formulation and implementation results, and
between efficiency and scale. In that connection, China
would like to make four points.

First, United Nations peacekeeping police should
strictly abide by the Council's mandate and the three
principles of peacekeeping. They must respect the
sovereignty of the host State, heed the opinions of host
States while helping them carry out activities such as
security sector reform, constructively provide training,
advisory assistance and support, and work to find
assistance programmes that are best suited to local
conditions.

Secondly, to strengthen the focus of United Nations
policing, when the Council deploys peacekeeping
operations it should ensure that the peacekeeping
mandate is viable and practical, explicitly prioritize
tasks, and avoid all-inclusive mandates. The
implementation results of peacekeeping policing
mandates should be reviewed in a timely way. The
mandated tasks and deployment scales should also be
adjusted according to the developments in the host
States in a timely way.
Thirdly, in order to comprehensively increase
the efficiency of peacekeeping policing, the rapid
deployment and operational capabilities of peacekeeping
police have a bearing on whether the missions can play
their role at key moments. The Council, the Secretariat,
host States and troop-contributing countries should
strengthen communication and coordination,
improve the formation and deployment processes of
peacekeeping civilian police and formed police units,
and optimize logistics. In that process, the Secretariat
should carefully heed and value the opinions and
recommendations of the police-contributing countries.
The mission should strengthen scientific planning
and management, improve the efficiency of resource
utilization, and avoid unnecessary waste and overlap.

Fourthly, in order to strengthen capacity-building
for peacekeeping police, China supports the Secretariat's
engaging in close consultation with police-contributing
countries and the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations; developing standards for the organization,
training and monitoring of peacekeeping police; and
strengthening the safety and security of peacekeeping
police in view of the security situation in the areas
of operation. The United Nations should step up its
support for capacity-building for peacekeeping police
from regional organizations, such as the African Union,
and help them play a bigger role in maintaining regional
peace and stability.

China sent peacekeeping police to the United
Nations for the first time in 2000, and we are now an
important police-contributing country at the United
Nations and also the biggest contributor ofpolice among
the permanent members of the Council. To date, China
has sent altogether more than 2,000 peacekeeping police
officers to eight missions. Currently, we have over 170
peacekeeping police officers working to implement
peacekeeping mandates of the United Nations Mission
in Liberia and the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan.

Chinese peacekeeping police fulfil their duties
strictly, perform well and have won extensive acclaim.
China is willing to send more peacekeeping civilian
police, formed riot police units and specialized
police experts, such as forensic experts and criminal
investigation officers, to the United Nations Blue
Helmets and is committed to helping police-contributing
countries, including those of Africa, improve their
capacity-building.

China stands ready to work with the international
community to make a positive contribution to the
promotion of sustainable development of United
Nations peacekeeping police as well as the maintenance
of international peace and security.

