Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I want to begin
by putting on record the United Kingdom's
appreciation not only for Ambassador Denisov's
briefing, but also for the work done by him as
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
and by paying tribute to the staff of the Russian
delegation, who have worked hard to support the CTC
during this period of transition. I would also like to
thank Mr. Ruperez for the effort he has devoted to
pursuing the earliest possible establishment of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED).

I can associate my delegation with the remarks to
be made in due course by the representative of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union, so I
will comment on only a few points, beginning briefly
with the question of the establishment of the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate.

From the United Kingdom's point of view, the
delays in the CTED's establishment have been
frustrating. Nevertheless, we are now on the threshold
of the functioning of the new structure. We very much
hope that it will be in place and fully operational by the
time of the next of these open meetings. It is important
that the CTED be staffed with experts who are able to
bring with them a real understanding of the issues of
counter-terrorism. The CTC has an ambitious agenda in
dialogue with States, in dialogue with international,
regional and subregional organizations and in dialogue
with other parts of the United Nations. The CTC is also
developing its role in technical assistance and taking
on new responsibilities - for instance, in compiling
best practices. We are all going to need highly
qualified and experienced experts to help us take that
work forward.

There are several important elements to the
CTC's agenda in coming months. My delegation sees
two key areas. The first is a welcome deepening of the
CTC's relationship with States. I would like to use this
meeting to encourage all States - not least through
their missions in New York - to get to know the CTC
and the staff of the CTED. The Committee, I know, is
very keen to understand the particular circumstances
and challenges of each country in developing its
approach to counter-terrorism and in implementing its
obligations under resolution 1373 (2001).

In that context, the beginning of the CTC's
programmed visits to States is extremely welcome to
us. We look forward to those visits becoming a regular
part of the CTC's work. They are a very direct way to
help countries tackle terrorism, and they offer an
unparalleled opportunity for the CTC itself to
understand in depth the challenges on the ground.

Another part of the CTC's outreach approach is
its dialogue with international, regional and
subregional organizations. Between them, those
organizations have a more specialized and detailed
knowledge of the challenge of implementing resolution
1373 (2001) than the CTC can ever have. We look
forward to the CTC's meeting in Almaty next week and
would like to thank the Commonwealth of Independent
States and the Government of Kazakhstan for their role
in making it possible.

As current Chair of the Group of Eight, the
United Kingdom would like to emphasize the
commitment of that grouping, in particular its Counter-
Terrorism Action Group, to working with the CTC and
the CTED.

Technical assistance will continue to be a second
key area for the work of the CTC and the CTED. The
developing direct relationship with States - both
donor and recipient States - will, of course, be key to
that, as will the relationship with organizations that can
provide specialist advice. As Chair of the Group of
Eight's Counter-Terrorism Action Group, the United
Kingdom will also work to ensure that the Group
continues to develop its role in supporting the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. And we look forward to greater
cooperation between those two bodies.

The United Kingdom will be working through the
CTC to support a more proactive and targeted approach
to assistance. We think it vital that in the work of the
CTC we consider not only whether we are meeting our
responsibilities to process reports but whether we are
in fact meeting our greater responsibility to help States
tackle terrorism nationally and internationally.

It is worth noting at this point, however, that
unless States engage with the CTC, it will be
impossible for us on the Committee to be able to
analyze accurately what States need. For that reason, as
well as for many others, I should like to add my voice
to those who have already called on States to meet the
timetable for reporting and, if doing so poses
difficulties, for them to get in touch with the
Committee to start a conversation about how it can be
done.

Before I close, I would like to mention two areas
of work that will be happening in parallel with the
work of the CTC. First, Council members will be
considering how best to make sure that the Council's
counter-terrorism effort is as effective as it can be. By
that I mean, among other things, how we can best use
and coordinate the expertise that we have in the four
Council subsidiary bodies that deal with the issue.

The second area of work parallel to that of the
CTC is the work that has already started, to consider
the report of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change. Some of the key proposals in
that report address terrorism. One in particular is worth
mentioning this morning: the recommendation for a
comprehensive "pan-United Nations" strategy on
terrorism. The United Kingdom fully supports that
proposal. The Secretary-General has already said that
he is acting on it, preparing a strategy that will bring
together a range of tools and organizations across the
United Nations system. I am sure that the CTC will be
a key part of the United Nations approach.
Nevertheless, the issue of how to make a real
difference against terrorism goes further than the work
or the competence of the CTC alone. The United
Kingdom looks forward to engaging in that broader
debate as well.

The Council has a busy agenda on counter-
terrorism in the coming year. The CTC is designed to
play a central role in the international effort against
terrorism. It is important, we think, for the Committee
and the Council that we are seen to do so. 2005 should
be an important year for the CTC, one in which we can
use our new resources to have a real impact. The
United Kingdom and my mission stand ready to play
their parts in shouldering that responsibility, rolling up
our sleeves and getting on with the substantive work
ahead.

