The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I would first like to join my colleagues in thanking
our briefers - Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson,
Assistant Secretary-General Simonovic', Director of
Operations Ging and Ambassador Apakan. Teams from
the United Nations and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) are active on the
ground, working in extremely difficult conditions, and
we would like to express the gratitude of the United
States and, I am sure, of the broader international
community to them. We thank Foreign Minister
Klimkin and Foreign Minister Linkevicius for joining
us.

I would like to start by apologizing for the late start
to this meeting; the delay was unavoidable and very
important to protecting the integrity of the Security
Council. I also must stress the absolute criticality
and centrality of the independent reporting of facts to
the implementation of the Minsk agreements and of
resolution 2202 (2015).

In arguing, as the Russian Ambassador did earlier,
that the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) should not brief, one does wonder
what Russia seeks to hide. But we understand its very
unfortunate desire to prevent the Council from hearing
inconvenient facts, and it is absolutely essential that we
not let that happen and that the facts be presented such
as they are.

As we have heard today, the present situation in
Ukraine looks different than it did when we last met in
June, just a few days, then, after a combined Russian
separatist force offensive that coordinated attacks
west of the ceasefire line in Donetsk. But the horrific
situation back in June cannot become the baseline for
our assessments or our actions. While major combat
is down since the 1 September ceasefire, and that is
extremely important for all of the lives affected, this
crisis remains no less real, no less urgent and no less
troubling. There are still, as we have heard, daily
ceasefire violations, and, as has been described in great
detail today, the citizens of Ukraine, all of Ukraine,
continue to suffer enormously.

Let us be clear about why we are gathered again and
what continues to drive this crisis. We are here because
Russia continues to occupy Ukraine's autonomous
region of Crimea, in defiance of international law,
its treaty obligations, the Helsinki Final Act and
resolution 68/262, adopted by 100 members of the
General Assembly, which rejected the phony Crimea
referendum and called for Ukraine's territorial integrity
to be respected.

Its authorities there have opened criminal cases
against critics of the occupation and specifically
targeted the Tatar community, subjecting them to
beatings, arbitrary detention and police raids. We
are here because even today Moscow continues to
arm, train, support and fight alongside separatists in
eastern Ukraine. On Wednesday, OHCHR confirmed
the continued "inflow of ammunition, weaponry and
fighters from the Russian Federation into the territories
controlled by the armed groups". A robust combined
Russian separatist military force, led by Russian
officers, continues to operate in Ukrainian territory.

We are here because Moscow and the separatists
continue to obstruct international monitoring efforts,
undermining the ceasefire and the prospects for peace.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) monitors face obstruction on a daily basis.
Just this past weekend, OSCE monitors on patrol were
threatened by separatists with automatic rifles.

We are here because, in blatant disregard for the
commitments that have been made, the Russian-backed
separatists continue to attack Ukrainian positions along
the line of contact almost every day, at times with
mortars banned under weapons-withdrawal agreements.
Ukrainian soldiers and civilians continue to be killed
or wounded in these attacks, and we cannot afford to
get used to that. The cumulative impact of Moscow's
aggression remains the widespread and unnecessary
suffering of Ukrainian civilians. Almost 1.5 million
people are unable to return to their homes, their schools
or their daily lives. Winter has arrived, and as many as
300,000 people residing along the contact line are in
need of blankets, fuel and clothes to get them through
the cold weather.

Yet despite the urgent need, few relief organizations
are able to work in the separatist-controlled areas,
because, as we heard from John Ging, the separatists
suspended and expelled United Nations and
international humanitarian organizations in July. Only
a fraction of the aid required by the 2 million people
in need in these areas is getting through. We heard
earlier a very moving account by the Ambassador of
the Russian Federation on the plight of people living
in Donbas, yet it is Russia's separatists that expelled
humanitarian organizations and, by and large, have not
let them resume their functions.

We urge Moscow to finally honour the commitments
that it made when it signed the Minsk agreements and
ensure that separatists lift restrictions and allow the
immediate resumption of critically needed aid. We also
encourage the Government of Ukraine to accelerate
efforts to facilitate the movement of civilians and cargo
across the contact line and continue the provision of
social, educational and economic benefits to internally
displaced persons and others in need.

There has also been a deeply concerning
deterioration of the human rights situation in Donbas,
as described in depth by the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission. Their report this week notes
"new allegations of killings, torture and ill-treatment,
illegal detention and forced labour" in separatist-
controlled areas. The self-appointed authorities in the
east have systematically failed to stop, investigate or
hold to account those believed responsible for abuses
and ill-treatment. The mission also reported incidents
in areas controlled by the Ukrainian Government; we
urge the Government to immediately investigate all
serious and credible allegations.

Just as we know who is driving this conflict, we
know what must be done to end it. The September 2014
and February 2015 Minsk agreements are the best and
only way to achieve peace in eastern Ukraine. Over
the six months since we last met, we have seen how
even incomplete steps towards the implementation of
Minsk, like the 1 September cease-fire, can reduce
casualties and provide space for progress on other
fronts. What is needed now, what is long overdue is
the full implementation of the Minsk agreements. All
sides must seize the opportunity to bring this conflict
to a peaceful end. This year has seen some progress in
this direction, with fewer casualties and some limited
weapons withdrawals. Now is the time to implement
Minsk and settle this conflict. This would allow the
people of Ukraine to resume a normal life and focus
on building the democratic European society that
Ukrainians have fought and, in many cases, died for.

Let me be specific about the path to peace laid out
by the Minsk agreements. Most immediately, the daily
violations of the ceasefire line must come to an end.
Heavy weapons must be withdrawn from the front line,
and the OSCE must be allowed full access all the way to
the border. Legitimate local elections must then be held
in Donbas. Minsk is crystal-clear on the requirements
for these elections: they must be held according to
Ukrainian law and OSCE standards, and they must be
held under OSCE observation.

In October, President Putin recommitted to these
Minsk-required standards and agreed on the urgent
need for the sides to agree on election mechanics that
conform to these standards. But since then, Russia and
the separatists have rejected proposals by Ukraine and
the OSCE because they included elements such as free
media access and the right okarainian political parties
to participate. While the rest of Ukraine held local
elections on 25 October and 15 November, residents of
Donbas continue to be deprived of legitimately elected
representatives, and Russia and its surrogates continue
to stonewall the work of the Trilateral Contact Group.

Holding legitimate elections is the key to unlocking
the remaining steps ofMinsk and enabling the separatist-
held territories to be peacefully reintegrated back into

the Ukrainian political and legal system. As agreed
in Paris in October, the elections must be followed by
the implementation of Ukraine's special-status law
and the entry into force of the amnesty legislation.
Constitutional reform must also occur, and Ukraine has
been working towards this for many months. Its draft
amendments on decentralization were endorsed by the
Venice Commission's international legal experts and in
August received the first of two required approvals by
Parliament.

Finally, Russia and the separatists must fulfil
other outstanding Minsk obligations, which include
withdrawing all foreign fighters and military equipment,
releasing all hostages and unlawfully detained persons,
including Nadia Savchenko and Oleg Sentsov, and
turning over control of the international border back to
the sovereign Government of Ukraine.

When all sides faithfully uphold their commitments,
we will see progress on this conflict. Until then, there
will be casualties, and their number will inevitably rise.

Let me conclude by trying to humanize the stakes.
Marina Reznik is 13 years old. On a Saturday back in
January, Marina was visiting her father in a residential
neighbourhood of Mariupol. That day, separatists
announced an offensive against the city. The rocket fire
that followed killed at least 29 people and injured 97
others. Marina was one ofthose injured. When the shell
hit the house, her father tried to use his body to shield
her, but two shell fragments sliced into her. One hit her
spinal cord. Nearly a year later, Marina, whose love
of dance led her to dream of being a professional hip-
hop dancer, still cannot feel her right leg. She cannot
walk. Instead of dancing, she now hopes to help other
children who have been affected by this conflict.

We are here today because ofMoscow's aggression,
because of how it continues to fuel this conflict and
because of how this conflict hurts innocent people like
Marina. We will continue meeting about this crisis.
We will continue to insist that we hear the facts until
the aggression ceases and until Ukraine's sovereignty
and territorial integrity are restored. We urge Moscow
to choose the path of peace and uphold its Minsk
commitments.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Pavlo Klimkin, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.

