Mr. Haque (Pakistan): Mr. President, we are happy to
see you preside over these important deliberations on the

situation in Afghanistan.

Today the Council is considering once again the
unfortunate situation in Afghanistan, which first came to its
attention almost two decades ago when the independent and
sovereign nation of Afghanistan was brought under foreign
occupation. Since then, the people of Afghanistan have
continued to suffer the devastation inflicted on their
country, initially by foreign occupation and later by civil
conflict.

Having suffered under foreign occupation for more
than a decade, the Afghan people had expected that with
the withdrawal of foreign forces from their country, peace
would return to Afghanistan, and that the international
community, which had helped them in warding off foreign
servitude, would also help them in reconstructing and
rebuilding their shattered infrastructure, economy and
lives. Unfortunately, soon after the withdrawal of foreign
forces the Afghan people were left to their own devices
at a time when they most needed external help, assistance
and encouragement in rebuilding their society. The result
was an internal power struggle which continues to rage
today. The people of Afghanistan yearn for peace. Like
all other peoples around the world, they too wish to build
their lives, so that they can live in peace, security, honour
and dignity. Unfortunately, this has not been possible
because of the strife that continues to engulf that country.

Howsoever ardently may Pakistan desire to insulate
itself from events in Afghanistan, it cannot do so. The
2,500-kilometre-long border shared by Pakistan and
Afghanistan in an extremely difficult terrain has always
been very porous. Many tribes straddle the border areas.
Historically, there have been tribal movements from
Afghanistan to Pakistan during the winter months and
back to Afghanistan during the summers. Millions of
Afghan refugees trekked to Pakistan after the Soviet
occupation, and their movement to and from Afghanistan
has since been largely uncontrolled. Pakistan has to cope
with these realities. That is the fundamental difference
between our situation and those of others, who, sitting at
a distance, find it easy to tender advice or to level
baseless, self-serving allegations against my country. The
reality in Afghanistan also is that the Taliban controls 90
per cent of the territory, including the capital, Kabul.
Pakistan and indeed the international community must
recognize and live with this reality.

There is no country in the world which stands to
gain more than Pakistan from the return of peace and
stability in Afghanistan. Continuing conflict and
instability in Afghanistan impose a very heavy burden on
Pakistan. Around 1.8 million Afghan refugees, the largest
group of refugees in any country in the world, continue
to stay on in Pakistan. This body is well aware of the
major economic and social costs that Pakistan has had to
bear in providing basic amenities such as housing,
education, medical facilities, drinking water, infrastructure
and so on to the Afghan refugees over the last few
decades. The Council is aware also of the price that the
people of Pakistan have paid and continue to pay in terms
of the impact on the quality of their lives and on their
personal security, the impact of drugs on the youth of
Pakistan and a number of other factors. A peaceful and
stable Afghanistan with its unity, territorial integrity and
sovereignty fully intact is therefore in the highest national
interest of Pakistan.

 

The Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mr. Mohammad
Nawaz Sharif, is personally committed to finding a peaceful
solution to the Afghan conflict. To this end, Pakistan has
fully supported the efforts of the United Nations, the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy - to whom we
send our best wishes and prayers for his early return to
health - as well as the initiatives of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference (OIC).

Similarly, Pakistan has welcomed and is actively
engaged in the "six plus two" process in the shared
endeavour to bring normalcy to Afghanistan. In addition to
our support to all international initiatives, we have also
undertaken several rounds of shuttle diplomacy between the
parties on either side of the Afghan divide in the hope of
bridging their differences. The latest exercise was
completed only a few days ago, when a delegation from
Pakistan twice visited Tajikistan to meet with the
representatives of Engineer Ahmad Shah Masoud and went
to Kandahar to meet with the leader of the Taliban. I
would, however, like to stress that our bilateral efforts to
promote a peace process in Afghanistan are aimed at
supplementing and not supplanting the efforts and the work
of the United Nations, the OIC and the "six plus two"
countries.

Durable peace in Afghanistan is possible only on the
basis of an intra-Afghan consensus. Any solution to the
Afghan conflict must be indigenous. Afghan history is
witness to the fact that external solutions cannot be imposed
on the fiercely independent people of Afghanistan. The
international community is well aware that during the
course of their history Afghans have never accepted
domination by outsiders or foreign dispensations
irrespective of the might or status of foreign Powers. This
holds true even today. Pakistan understands this reality. It
has no desire to interfere in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan. Nor does it harbour any illusions about its
ability to control or change the course of events in
Afghanistan. It would be folly for any country to seek to
control the destiny of the Afghan people.

Pakistan does net lend any support to any side in
Afghanistan. We know, however, that some countries in the
neighbourhood and beyond are doing so by various means,
including provision of defence experts, military equipment
and even landmines, and for reasons which are apparent
and well known to the international community. As such,
I will not belabour them. Our advice to these countries also
is to desist from such efforts since they would only prolong
the agony of the Afghan people, without succeeding in
advancing their own perceived interests.

The international community must engage both
Afghan sides and continue to encourage them to embrace
peace through the establishment of a broad-based
multi-ethnic Government in Afghanistan. In order to
promote an intra-Afghan dialogue, it is imperative that all
outside interference in Afghanistan must cease. The most
glaring aspect of such interference is the supply of
military equipment, which continues to stoke the fires of
conflict in Afghanistan.

We agree with China's proposal made in the
Security Council today for an arms embargo on
Afghanistan. We have also in the past proposed the
imposition of a verifiable arms embargo applicable to the
whole of Afghanistan. We believe that this proposal
merits serious consideration by this body since this is the
only way to limit the ability of the Afghan factions to
wage war against each other.

Such an embargo must also be accompanied by a
comprehensive international programme for the
reconstruction of Afghanistan and the rehabilitation of the
refugees. Afghanistan has been totally ravaged by war. It
has no infrastructure, roads, telecommunications or power.
Its agricultural sector is almost non-existent. We believe
that programmes for reconstruction and rehabilitation will
provide a powerful incentive for peace in Afghanistan,
since the Afghan people will see for themselves the
tangible benefits of peace and stability.

Any policy of castigating, isolating or ostracizing
one or more Afghan factions can only feed the flames of
war in the volatile situation in Afghanistan. The
international community must not be seen to be taking
sides in the conflict. It is possible to argue that the
Taliban believe that they are being unjustly treated by the
international community. Despite the fact that they control
90 per cent of the territory, including the capital, and
have successfully restored law and order in the areas
under their control, the international community and the
United Nations continue to recognize another faction in
Afghanistan as the legitimate Government. The Taliban
would be right to wonder about the criteria by which
international legitimacy and recognition are conferred by
the United Nations. The Security Council should, in our
view, give the Taliban an equal opportunity to be heard
by the Council.

We have heard of some moves for the imposition of
sanctions by the Security Council against the Taliban. We
firmly believe that sanctions would be counter-productive.
They would give rise to the feeling of injustice and

 

victimization, which could strengthen extremist sentiments.
Sanctions also would further impoverish the people of
Afghanistan, but are unlikely to bring about any appreciable
change in the political landscape of that country. It is
through engagement and not isolation that the international
community can hope and work to bring about peace in
Afghanistan. It is therefore imperative that punitive
measures be held in abeyance and efforts for peace be
intensified.

The recent meeting of the "six plus two" group was an
important event. For the first time, the two main Afghan
parties met with the group. The Tashkent meeting marked
the beginning of a process which seeks to bring together the
two major Afghan factions in the process of a dialogue.
Pakistan supports and fully subscribes to the decisions
adopted by the "six plus two" group and believes that the
group must continue and intensify its laudable efforts.

The resumption of hostilities immediately after the
meeting of the "six plus two" was indeed extremely
unfortunate. We do not believe that the Afghan issue can be
resolved through conflict. We are disappointed at the
resumption of conflict because it was after great efforts on
our part that the Taliban were persuaded to participate in
the meeting despite their reservations. The Taliban take the
position that the latest round of hostilities was started by
the forces of Engineer Ahmad Shah Masoud, which
rocketed the Kabul airport immediately after the meeting.
Pakistan does not wish to enter into a futile argument on
the issue of who fired the first shot. We favour neither the
continuation of the conflict nor its impact on civilians and
their voluntary or involuntary displacement.

Having played host to millions of Afghan refugees for
two decades, we are only too well aware and conscious of
the plight of displaced persons. We also condemn terrorism
by whomsoever committed in all its forms and
manifestations. Having been subjected to State-sponsored
terrorism from across our eastern border, we are only too
conscious of the need to uproot this menace from the
world.

Pakistan, and I am sure the Council, does not need
lessons in civilized behaviour from those who are inflicting
the worst kind of oppression and State-sponsored terrorism
on people under their illegal occupation.
In the wake of the recent outbreak of fighting in
Afghanistan, it has been alleged that some Pakistani
nationals have been participating in the fighting, which is
cited as proof of Pakistan's involvement in the conflict.
This is a false and malicious allegation, and Pakistan
rejects it. It is possible and likely that because of the
porous border between Pakistan and Afghanistan, young
Afghan refugees may have returned to Afghanistan and
may well be participating in the fighting in support of one
group or the other. It cannot be expected of Pakistan to
force Afghan refugees to stay on in Pakistan if they wish
to return to Afghanistan voluntarily. Many of these
refugees have been brought up in Pakistan over the last
two decades and could well be mistaken for Pakistanis.
However, they cannot be given the status of Pakistanis by
virtue of their having stayed in Pakistan as refugees. It is
also not beyond the realm of possibility that some
Pakistanis may have, on their own, slipped across our
borders with Afghanistan. Surely Pakistan cannot be
accused of being involved in the conflict on this
untenable ground.

The debate on Afghanistan comes at an opportune
moment. We hope that the Security Council will continue
to encourage the promotion of a durable and just peace in
Afghanistan. Peace and stability will return to Afghanistan
not through threats of sanctions and punitive measures,
but through engagement, reconstruction of the devastated
country, rehabilitation of the people and the establishment
of a multi-ethnic government through the process of an
intra-Afghan dialogue.

