The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of the United States for the kind words he
addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Argentina.

The resolution we have just adopted represents an
important step forward towards the consolidation of the
peace process initiated in Lusaka in July 1999. As we
have said on earlier occasions, we do not believe that
there will be a lasting solution to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo if the following
fundamental elements are not taken into consideration.

These elements include, first of all, full respect for
the territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the principle of non-intervention in its internal
affairs, and the withdrawal of all of the foreign forces that
are currently in that territory without the express consent
of its Government, as well as recognition of the legitimate
security concerns of the countries neighbouring the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and of the need to
create a solid system of security guarantees for all of the
countries in the Great lakes region of Africa.

We trust that the deployment of the 500 military
observers provided for in the resolution will contribute to
consolidating the ceasefire. The success of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUC) will depend, however, on the
degree of cooperation it will enjoy from the parties and
their spirit of reconciliation and pacification.

We reaffirm the importance that we attach to the
provision of firm and credible assurances for the security
and freedom of movement of the staff of MONUC, as set
out in the thirteenth preambular paragraph and operative
paragraph 5 of the resolution. We feel that operative
paragraph 8 is particularly relevant; it empowers
MONUC, within specific circumstances, to act under
Chapter VII of the Charter to protect civilians under
imminent threat of physical violence.

Similarly, we would like to mention two topics of
particular concern. First of all, the reports about human
rights violations and non-respect of international
humanitarian law, which, according to the most recent
report of the Secretary-General and later information, are

 

particularly serious in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of Congo. We feel that these crimes cannot
remain unpunished. It is indispensable that an international
inquiry be held to bring those responsible to justice.
Secondly, we are concerned by the illegal exploitation of
the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of Congo.
We consider that there is a link between these illicit
activities and the prolongation of the armed conflict. We
believe that these activities must cease immediately. We
support the carrying-out of an objective investigation by a
panel of experts, and we await the Secretary-General's
report, as called for in the resolution.

Finally, we would like to state that, as a way of
reaffirming its commitment to the Lusaka Process and a
peaceful and negotiated resolution of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of Congo, the Argentine Republic will
make a contribution to the funding of the activities of the
Joint Military Commission and the tasks of Sir Ketumile
Masire as facilitator of the inter-Congolese dialogue.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Council has concluded its consideration of the
draft resolution.

The representative of the Democratic Republic of
Congo has asked to speak and I invite him to make a
statement.

