Mr. Ainchil (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. At the same time, we thank
the Emergency Relief Coordinator and Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Jan
Egeland, for his briefing to the Council. We also
especially wish to express our appreciation Mr.
Egeland's excellent work leading the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in
challenging times for the humanitarian community. His
commitment and devotion have made a difference in
the life of populations affected by humanitarian
emergencies, vulnerable groups and displaced
populations.

The situation described by the Emergency Relief
Coordinator clearly shows the persistence of atrocities
committed against civilians on a scale that goes beyond
the statistical fact of the increase or the decrease of
certain categories of Violence or attacks.

My delegation strongly condemns these attacks
and would like to reiterate that no national security
consideration can prevail over the primary obligation
of all States and parties to a conflict to fulfil the rules
of international humanitarian law as contained in the
Hague Conventions and the Geneva Conventions and
their additional Protocols.

The Security Council has substantially
contributed to the international regime of protection of
civilians through its resolutions 1265 (1999), 1296
(2000) and 1674 (2006). At the same time, the Council
has been given a clear mandate by the General
Assembly to take collective action in a timely and
decisive fashion to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity.
The previously mentioned legal framework places
at the disposal of the Security Council a set of tools for
the protection of civilians. It is the task of the Council
to make full use of them.

In this respect, we would like to underline the
importance of ensuring that the mandates of
peacekeeping, political and peacebuilding missions
include provisions regarding the protection of civilians,
in particular, groups requiring special attention, women
and children. These provisions should also address
matters related to ensuring full and unimpeded access
by humanitarian personnel to civilians affected by
armed conflict.

At the same time, the Council has expressed its
disposition to examine situations of systematic,
flagrant and widespread Violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, to adopt adequate
measures to contribute to the establishment of a secure
environment, and to consider establishing zones and
corridors to protect civilians and provide humanitarian
assistance.

In addition to these important mandates, there are
areas in the work of the Council in this matter where
further improvement could be achieved. One example
would be the improvement of the reporting mechanism
on protection of civilians, in order to allow an
appropriate follow-up in each of the situations included
on the agenda of the Council.

The improvement of reporting mechanisms is
also important in the initial moments of a crisis when
civilians are affected and where an early warning might
allow the Council to deploy preventive measures to
protect civilians.

We also consider that there is room to advance in
the normative work of the Security Council on the
protection of civilians, in particular in areas where
current crises show that there is a clear need for further
development.

The situations of internal displacement are one of
these areas. We commend the work and the leadership
of OCHA in providing assistance and protection to
internally displaced persons. At the same time, broader
mandates are needed if there is political will in the
international community to address the issue in its
complexity. Other fields where further normative work
can be explored include the linkages between small
06-6406]
arms and the protection of civilians, the
disproportionate use of force and the use of war.

Finally, we understand that the situation of
journalists in conflict also deserves the attention of the
Council and we welcome the initiative of France and of
other European countries in this respect.

