Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): First of all, I
wish to thank the Presidents and the Prosecutors of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their very comprehensive and
useful briefings. Allow me a special word to
congratulate Judge Meron on his recent election as
President of the ICTY, to wish him all the best and,
through him, to convey to Judge Robinson our
appreciation for the excellent work as President of the
Tribunal.

Some major progress has been made in the
implementation of the completion strategies of the
ICTY and the ICTR in the period covered by the latest
reports of the Tribunals and the Prosecutors.

First and foremost, of course, is the capture of
Ratko Mladie and, more recently, Goran Hadzie, the
remaining ICTY fugitives. That is a development with
vast implications for the fight against impunity in the
Western Balkans. It has also removed an important
stumbling block in Serbia's European path. Also
important is the capture of Bernard Munyagishari,
which was a good example of fruitful cooperation
between the ICTR and the national authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also welcome
the fact that the ICTR has worked hard to stay on track
to complete all of its trial work by mid-2012.

In short, in the past six months, the Tribunals
have continued to perform their invaluable work in the
field of accountability for the worst crimes in a most
professional way under difficult circumstances. Both
Tribunals have also made valuable contributions to the
setting up of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals in due course, including by
contributing to the ongoing drafting process of its rules
of procedure and evidence, the preparation of the
budget and other necessary activities.
As Chairman of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, I wish to commend the support
of both Tribunals and the Office of Legal Affairs in the
many different tasks of that rather complex process
aiming at enabling the Residual Mechanism to perform
fully its functions from day one, that is, from 1 July
2012. I also seize the opportunity to thank all members
of the Working Group for their cooperation in that
collective task and for their support to the Chair.

That brings me to the challenges ahead. They are
of two sorts: first, staff and resources; and secondly,
national and regional ownership and cooperation.

On the first challenge, both Tribunals share a
grave concern about the effect that staff attrition and
recruitment issues are having on their ability to fulfil
the completion strategies endorsed by the Council.
Despite a number of Security Council resolutions
recently adopted referring to the issue, the problem
persists, and even seems to increase in intensity.
Creative, realistic and cost-effective solutions to the
issue need to be found and implemented as a matter of
urgency.

We therefore encourage practical and ad hoc
solutions, such as those put forward by Presidents
Meron and Khan concerning retention incentives and
the waiver of the six-month rule for application for
professional posts, which could be of tremendous
practical help in the context of the Tribunals'
completion strategy. We have to bear in mind the
particular nature of the Tribunals as judicial bodies that
require a distinct or, at least, a more flexible
interpretation of the general administrative norms.
Those norms were meant to regulate the administrative
bodies of the Secretariat, not the Tribunals. Moreover,
we cannot forget the need to align that interpretation
with the particular situation of those judicial bodies,
which are struggling to abide by trial deadlines while
pursuing the process of discontinuing all court activity.

Conversely, the measures suggested by President
Meron to expedite translations and, in particular, his
intention to assign ad litem judges to contempt cases,
may indeed have important and beneficial
repercussions in speeding up the work of the Tribunal
in line with the completion strategy. As such, those
measures are welcome management improvements.

With regard to the second challenge, as the
Tribunals enter the final stages of their work, the issue
of national and regional ownership in the fight against
impunity for the war crimes committed in Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia acquires new importance. In that
context, we welcome the significant outreach and
capacity-building efforts by the Tribunals aimed at
strengthening local judicial institutions and raising
awareness among members of civil society. Through
those efforts, the ICTY and the ICTR are ensuring that
their legacy of accountability and reconciliation will
bear fruit in a lasting way.

An essential element of regional ownership is the
extent to which States cooperate among themselves in
war crimes investigations and prosecutions. We
encourage strengthened cooperation in that regard. We
should not forget the large volume of war crimes cases
that remain to be domestically prosecuted.

Also, we cannot overstate the importance of
cooperation with the Tribunals and, in that regard, the
need to arrest the nine remaining fugitives being
searched for by the ICTR. In that respect, we urge the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue efforts
to facilitate the arrest of those fugitives, and we
encourage the Kenyan authorities to continue their
cooperation in tracking the whereabouts of Felicien
Kabuga.

As we approach the end of the Tribunals' work
and the projected number of convictions, we have to be
prepared for the increasing number of requests from
the Tribunals addressed to States to host convicted
persons to serve their sentences and to respond to the
need to find appropriate and prompt responses to those
requests. We also must find definitive solutions to
address the situation of the acquitted persons, such as
those referred to by the President of the ICTR, who
remain under protective measures in safe houses in
Arusha because they cannot safely return to their
communities or find host countries willing or able to
accept them. That is an unsustainable situation with
human rights implications, and a prompt solution must
be found.

In conclusion, Portugal wishes to congratulate the
Presidents, Prosecutors and staff of the two Tribunals
on their outstanding work. Above and beyond the
important trial-related activities under the completion
strategy, they are also laying the groundwork for the
future. They are helping to set up the Residual
Mechanism and are assisting the countries of the
respective regions, their judicial authorities and their
civil societies as they take over the vital task of
fighting impunity for the gravest of crimes.
