Mr. Lajeak: When I spoke to the Security
Council some six months ago we faced what many
would describe as a political crisis. I am pleased to
inform the Council today that the situation has
improved noticeably. The country of Bosnia and
Herzegovina has taken a significant step towards the
stabilization of the political situation. It is on the verge
of signing a Stabilization and Association Agreement
with the European Union (EU) and is moving towards
NATO membership. The Council will have seen much
of the detail in my most recent report (8/2008/300). In
addition, in February, the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board reached consensus on a set of
clear conditions for transition from the Office of the
High Representative to a European Union special
representative.

It is all too easy to get lost in the microcosm of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's ethnically dominated
politics. However, we must keep our eyes on the bigger
picture. I hope that my update will give the Council a
clear understanding of the overall situation.

For the sake of clarity, I would like to divide my
speech into three parts. First of all, I will update the
Council on developments and what has been achieved
since my last report. I will then set out where we are
now. Finally, I want to outline the future challenges we
will face in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The first task in the reporting period was to
resolve the political crisis of last November. At the end
of November, my negotiations with party leaders
08-34548
resulted in an agreement to improve the efficiency of
the voting procedures in Bosnia and Herzegovina's
parliament and Council of Ministers. My second
priority was to help Bosnia and Herzegovina to make
progress in order to sign the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union.
Following the resolution of the November crisis, I
facilitated talks between the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's six governing parties on the key EU
condition: police reform. The six party leaders reached
an agreement on police reform that became known as
the Mostar Declaration and Action Plan. The EU
welcomed that long-awaited agreement by initialling
the Stabilization and Association Agreement on
4 December, with the full signature of the Agreement
remaining conditional on parliament's adoption of the
two police reform laws.

Despite the subsequent rejection of the Mostar
agreement by one of the leading Bosniak parties, the
parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina finally passed
those two laws on 16 April. With the legislation in
place and progress on all the other conditions required
for the signing of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement, EU Commissioner Olli Rehn
recommended to EU member States to proceed with
the signing of the Agreement. The signing ceremony
will take place on 16 June at the meeting of EU foreign
ministers in Luxembourg. That was a hard-fought
victory that required constant involvement by the
international community and lobbying to negotiate the
Agreement.

In February, the international community took a
major step forward in defining its strategy for
transition from the Office of the High Representative.
The Peace Implementation Council Steering Board met
to discuss a wide range of issues but focused on
defining a conditions-based strategy for transition from
the Office of the High Representative to the EU
Special Representative. The Peace Implementation
Council reached unanimous agreement on a strategy
based on five objectives and two conditions that have
to be delivered by the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina before the transition can take place.

The five objectives that will need to be delivered
by the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina are, first,
an acceptable and sustainable resolution of the issue of
State property; secondly, an acceptable and sustainable
resolution of the question of defence property; thirdly,
the completion of the Brcko Final Award; fourthly,
08-34548
fiscal sustainability; and, fifthly, the entrenchment of
the rule oflaw.

In addition to those objectives, the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board agreed that
two conditions needed to be met: the signing of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement, and a
positive assessment of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina by the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board.

One of the conditions of the rule of law
benchmark - the adoption of the law on the stay of
aliens and asylum - was adopted at the beginning of
April. An agreement was signed at the end of March
between the State and entities on movable defence
property. That contributed to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
securing intensified dialogue with NATO at the
Bucharest summit, thereby allowing the country to take
another important step towards NATO membership.
There has also been progress on other issues, and we
are expecting further results over the summer.

Although all of those priority reform areas were
established a long time ago and all were previously
recognized by the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as obligations, achieving those objectives
will not be easy. Following Kosovo's declaration of
independence, some analysts expected that to there
would be increased political tensions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. However, public reaction was relatively
muted. Public order was maintained, and there was
certainly no official support for the more extreme
manifestations of Serb anger over Kosovo's
declaration.

Public demonstrations against Kosovo's
independence in Republika Srpska were relatively
small-scale and were easily contained by the police of
Republika Srpska. However, the leadership of
Republika Srpska officially linked the future status of
that entity with the status of Kosovo. At the end of
January, Republika Srpska's ruling party, the Alliance
of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD), called for
the transformation of Bosnia and Herzegovina into an
asymmetric federation or confederation and claimed
that Republika Srpska had the right - supposedly
based on the Charter of the United Nations - to self-
determination, up to and including secession. The
National Assembly of Republika Srpska raised the
stakes in February when it passed a resolution stating
that Republika Srpska could have the right to establish
3
its future legal status by means of a referendum. The
resolution claimed that that right would be triggered
should a majority of EU member States recognize the
independence of Kosovo. That was the first time that
such a claim had been officially made by an institution
of Republika Srpska. I reacted to this in a public
statement and stressed that Bosnia and Herzegovina is
an internationally recognized State, whose sovereignty
and territorial integrity is guaranteed by the Dayton
Peace Agreement. The entities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina have no right to secede from Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Equally, no one has the right to call for
or seek abolition of the entities.

The position of the Peace Implementation
Council's Steering Board was also explicitly clear
when, in the declaration annexed to the report before
the Council it unanimously expressed "deep concern
with regard to official calls for secession", adding that
it "strongly emphasizes that under the Dayton Peace
Agreement an entity has no right to secede from
Bosnia and Herzegovina".

More generally, both entities continue to pursue
their own agendas at the expense of the State. There
have been numerous rhetorical attacks on State
institutions, including the State judiciary and State
public broadcasting service, from both sides.

Republika Srpska has signed, without the consent
of the State, an agreement with the Republic of Serbia
allowing the Serbian Government to build a bridge
over the Sava river. Republika Srpska has also illegally
adopted legislation that confers on it the right to issue
financial bonds - again, a clear State competency.

The Federation Government, on the other hand,
kept increasing payments to war veterans and other
social transfers, despite repeated warnings from the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank that,
in the medium term, neither entity nor State
governments have the necessary funding. The
Federation Finance Minister has already warned that
the Federation is close to bankruptcy and is unable to
meet those obligations. It is of additional concern that
the Bosniak parties outvoted their Croat counterparts,
both in the Government and in the parliament, to
approve the increase in payments to veterans. That
decision increased political tensions between the two
ethnic groups and is indicative of broader concerns
about the position of the Croats in the Federation.
I should also mention that recent calls by three
senior Bosniak politicians for Srebrenica to secede
from Republika Srpska were clear anti-Dayton
statements and only served to increase tensions with
the Serbs.

Regarding cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), it
is the assessment of both the ICTY and the European
Commission that the cooperation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the Tribunal is satisfactory. I share
that View, but remain ready to assist the ICTY in
fulfilling its mandate, should it request it.

In April, our attention was once again focused on
Srebrenica, where there have been concerns about
participation in forthcoming municipal elections by
Bosniaks who have not yet returned to Srebrenica.
Playing a facilitating role, together with some members
of the international community, two weeks ago we
assisted the local authorities in changing the election
law of Bosnia and Herzegovina, enabling all those who
lived in Srebrenica before the war to register to vote in
that municipality regardless of where they live now.
That was a significant development in terms of
substance, but also in terms of the fact that there was
full agreement on such a sensitive issue. That is the
sort of political maturity we need to see much more of,
not only on Srebrenica, but on all political challenges
the country will face.

This is where we currently stand. As I noted, the
main recognition of the country's progress is the fact
that in a few weeks it will sign its first concrete step in
the EU integration process. That has enormous
significance for the country. The question now is not if
further European Union integration is desirable; it is
how and when it is to be achieved. Progress will not
come on its own. Hard work and difficult compromises
mark the way ahead. I know from the experience of my
own country that the challenges of EU membership are
not to be underestimated. Ultimately, a country and its
political class must have a vision of themselves as a
member of the EU that has earned the right to stand
shoulder to shoulder with the other members of the
Union.

We as the international community also have a
role to play and must play it professionally. The EU
integration agenda and the perspective of Euro-Atlantic
integration is our only positive leverage to encourage
the political elite to overcome their differences, reach
consensus and make progress.

However, we must be aware that in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the EU agenda has competition.
Nationalism remains strong, and the forthcoming
campaign for municipal elections will lead to a rise in
inflammatory rhetoric. Unfortunately, we must not be
in any doubt that that is not just a short-term
phenomenon. Nationalist politics is ever-present,
constantly exerting an undertow away from the
positive dynamic of European integration. The simple
arithmetic is: nationalism means votes, and it has been
a successful recipe for winning elections. The fact of
the matter is that, until recently, EU integration had
become collateral damage to that calculation.

To avoid further disputes, what is required is a
strategic agreement on the distribution of competencies
between the State and the entities, so that Bosnia and
Herzegovina can focus on its EU integration process.
That is, after all, what the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina want. They wholeheartedly wish to join
the European Union. They are every inch Europeans,
and we need to help them get there.

Clearly, much remains to be done. My priority for
the coming period is to assist the local authorities to
deliver further progress on the five objectives and two
conditions for closure of the Office of the High
Representative. With regard to the transition from the
Office of the High Representative to the European
Union Special Representative, the June meeting of the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board is likely
to be a good opportunity to assess progress since
February, but it will probably be too early for a clear
view on progress on all the objectives.

My Office is fully engaged with the local
politicians and officials to achieve the maximum
progress possible. With progress in several fields
ongoing, we are looking to transfer as much
responsibility as possible ahead of a decision on
complete transition. The Peace Implementation
Council will then meet again in October, and it will
most likely provide a comprehensive review of the
objectives and conditions required for transition.

Finally, I want to turn to consideration of the
challenges for Bosnia and Herzegovina in the coming
six months. The overarching political challenge
remains the same: how to deliver political agreements
and agreement on reforms in a political system where

the three communities have conflicting visions of the
future of the country. Those conflicts play themselves
out on a daily basis in the form of opposite views on
almost every single issue on the agenda of the
Government. I am sure that the Chairman of the
Council of Ministers, who is present here, will confirm
that observation.

It is in that context that I will seek to assist the
authorities to deliver the five objectives and two
conditions for closure of the Office of the High
Representative. It will clearly not be easy, but it must
be completed so as to re-orient the engagement of the
international community and to transfer as much
responsibility as possible to local institutions.

At some point, the parties will have to come
together to address these issues through constitutional
reform. In early February, political leaders decided to
postpone discussion on constitutional reform until after
the Stabilization and Association Agreement signing.
At present, their proposals are at such wide variance
that the issue runs the risk of becoming a renewed
political battleground before serious discussions have
even begun.

There is a limited window of opportunity in the
period after the municipal elections and before the
2010 general elections. However, we cannot afford a
setback of the kind we had after the April 2006
amendments were rejected. Even when the parties
demonstrate readiness for compromise, it will still be
necessary for the international community to facilitate
the process.

Let me be clear: important progress has been
made, but the international community's job in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is not completed. It is foreseen that
the European Union will take the lead international
community role in Bosnia and Herzegovina, following
the transition from the Office of the High
Representative to the EU Special Representative. Now
is the time to begin planning for the future leading role
of the European Union, not only in terms of its own
policy and capacities, but also in terms of how it will
cooperate with other international community actors on
the ground.

As always, developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will require careful handling. Our
immediate task will be to ensure that political tensions
during the municipal elections do not cause a serious
deterioration in the political atmosphere.

An important challenge for the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities will be the implementation of
the Stabilization and Association Agreement, which
contains not only benefits, but also obligations. The
signing of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
means that everyone now has to deal with the future.
Problems often develop as Bosnia and Herzegovina's
leaders frequently remain stuck in the past. That will
need to be reflected in the EU's future overall
engagement in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as in
the engagement of the United Nations with Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We have come a long way. The prospect of EU
integration - the only positive alternative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina's future - is advancing. We need to
ensure that the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina
make the most of that opportunity. The citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina deserve a European future.
They must have full confidence that we are here to
help.

