Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Mr. President, let
me begin by commending you for convening this
important debate on the situation in Timor-Leste and at
the same time congratulating you on your very able
stewardship of the Council during the month of
February. I wish also to join previous speakers in
welcoming President J ose Ramos-Horta of Timor-Leste
to this body and thanking him for his important
statement today.

We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2009/72) and for his
important statement. Of course, we wish to express our
appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Atul Khare, for his important
work.

We wish to associate ourselves with the statement
to be made by the representative of Thailand on behalf
of the member countries of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).

As its closest neighbour, we are following closely
the developments in Timor-Leste and are heartened to
note a number of positive developments in the country
during the Secretary-General's reporting period. As
stated in the Secretary-General's report, the security
situation in the country remains calm. The people and
leaders of Timor-Leste have made remarkable progress
in overcoming the most visible reminders of the 2006
crisis, including the issues of the internally displaced
persons and the so-called petitioners. The Government's
five-pillar National Recovery Strategy for dealing with
the consequences of the crisis has proved to be
effective and fruitful.

As the resilience of Timor-Leste State institutions
has proved, in particular as exemplified in dealing with
the consequences of the incidents of 11 February 2008,
and due to the progress made in addressing the issues
related to the 2006 crisis, public confidence in these
institutions is growing and welcome.

There has been important progress in
reconciliation and democracy as well. All the political
parties continue to work constructively in Parliament.
Dialogue among the stakeholders continues to be
pursued to promote broad consensus in dealing with
the important challenges confronting the country. It is
worth noting that, as mentioned in the report, President
Ramos-Horta has made laudable efforts to create
opportunities for the opposition to make contributions
to issues of national interest. Indeed, those positive
developments reflect the progress in the implementation
of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

We encourage UNMIT to help maintain this
conducive environment and to support, to the best of
its ability, the Government of Timor-Leste in making

further progress in tackling the challenges it currently
faces. In particular, we encourage UNMIT to devote
more attention to mobilizing support among
development partners to address poverty and
unemployment in Timor-Leste. In the past, these two
issues manifestly contributed to the 2006 crisis, and
addressing them will also contribute to the long-term
stability of the country in the future.

We appreciate UNMIT's continued efforts to
assist the Government in the promotion of security
sector reform. We are of the view that long-term
security and stability in the country will depend on the
capacity of Timor-Leste security institutions to
function in an accountable, impartial, responsible and
effective manner.

With regard to UNMIT's mandate to assist in the
promotion of democratic governance, it is crucial that
the Mission continue to assist Timor-Leste in its
institution-building efforts and in further ensuring that
State institutions function properly. We encourage
UNMIT to support Government endeavours to increase
opportunities for the people of Timor-Leste to take on
judicial line functions. We support the Government's
efforts to achieve early and effective Timorization of
the justice system, as described in the Secretary-
General's report.

We note with interest the proposed medium-term
strategy developed by the Secretary-General as an
annex to his report. We believe that the strategy should
be developed on the basis of the national priorities of
Timor-Leste and place emphasis on the ownership and
leadership of the Government of Timor-Leste in their
implementation. We believe that the implementation of
the medium-term strategy should lead to the gradual
ownership by Timor-Leste of tasks currently being
performed by UNMIT.

We continue to support UNMIT in implementing
its mandate with a view to assisting the people and the
Government of Timor-Leste in achieving self-
sufficiency. We recognize the need to ensure the
sustainability of the international community's support
to Timor-Leste's efforts on its path to security and
prosperity. In this regard, we welcome the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that the
Council renew UNMIT's mandate for another 12
months.

As a final note, we are pleased to inform the
Council that Indonesia and Timor-Leste continue to
enjoy an excellent level of bilateral relations. We
continue to move forward in deepening and expanding
our bilateral cooperation in various areas. We
recognize that Timor-Leste has become a much-valued
partner in the region. It is the firm commitment of
Indonesia to continue to support Timor-Leste in its
efforts to achieve a stable, prosperous and democratic
country.

