Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, allow me to thank
the Japanese presidency for convening this important
debate, as well as the Secretary-General for his briefing.
We also appreciate the visit to Pyongyang last week
by Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman, and we
support the United Nations efforts to establish a channel
of communication with the authorities of North Korea
aimed at reducing the risk of unintentional escalation.

There can be no ambiguity in our analysis of the
current scenario. The deterioration seen over the past
year is a direct consequence of the North Korean
regime's illegal and destabilizing activities. The threat
is immediate and global in scope. We once again express
our full solidarity with the citizens of Japan and South
Korea, and we cannot forget the plight of the people of

North Korea as their Government diverts energy and
resources towards the development of illegal weapons
of mass destruction.

We have repeatedly seen how the regime's
unprecedented provocations in the form of developing
nuclear arms and missile capabilities have caused
tensions to flare up in the Korean peninsula and
beyond, which, in our View, constitutes one of the
gravest threats to international peace and security that
we face today. We strongly condemn those activities
and call on North Korea to abide by its international
obligations. We also call on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to abandon its chemical-weapons
programme and immediately adhere to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction, as called for in resolution 2371 (2017).

It is clear that a conflict on the Korean peninsula
would be catastrophic for the region and for the world.
Therefore, the Council's response this year has had to
be forceful and effective. Three new resolutions were
adopted providing for the most comprehensive set of
sanctions in a generation. We have also taken significant
additional measures in the European Union and at the
national level. For instance, Italy recently suspended the
accreditation procedure for the designated Ambassador
ofthe Democratic People's Republic of Korea to Rome.

The sanctions are designed to achieve three main
goals: first, to make the North Korean regime realize
that further provocation will lead only to greater
isolation; secondly, to stop the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea from exploiting the interconnected
nature of the global economy in order to fund its illegal
weapons programme; and, thirdly, to provide the
necessary leverage in order to bring about a verifiable
change in that regime's policies, thereby opening the
way towards a political solution based on complete,
verifiable and irreversible denuclearization. I wish to
emphasize that that strategy will work fully only if two
conditions are met: first, the full and comprehensive
implementation of the sanctions by the entire United
Nations membership; and, secondly, continued unity in
the Council on the issue.

As Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), Italy
has worked to improve the implementation of sanctions
throughout this year, but many challenges remain. Such
an articulated and broad sanctions regime requires
constant interaction with Member States so as to bridge
information gaps. Furthermore, many countries face
capacity challenges. There is also an issue relating
to timing. The delay in turning sanctions provisions
into national legislation may create opportunities for
evading them. That is why it is crucial to submit national
implementation reports on time. While we have seen a
steady increase in that regard over the past year, there is
room for improvement. Let me underline the importance
and urgency of the submission of implementation
reports by all Member States with regard to all of
the sanctions resolutions on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

Lastly, I wish to reiterate that sanctions are not
meant to have unintended negative consequences on the
humanitarian situation in the country, which continues
to be a matter of serious concern. Of course, we must
bear in mind that it is the regime of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea that bears the primary
responsibility for improving the livelihood of its people.
We continue to engage with all the relevant stakeholders
on that issue. Last week I chaired a productive meeting
of the Sanctions Committee aimed at addressing the
humanitarian situation. In that context, we renew our
appeal to humanitarian actors to make full use of
the relevant existing exemptions provided for in the
various Security Council resolutions. We also believe
that more timely and systematic interaction between
United Nations agencies and the Sanctions Committee
could go a long way to averting unnecessary obstacles
in providing humanitarian assistance to the North
Korean people.

