Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): In
addition to the information presented in the joint
briefing that was presented by our colleague from
Austria, I am pleased, in my capacity as Chairman of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), to summarize the main developments in the
work of the Committee since the last joint briefing on
11 May 2010 (see S/PV.6310).

I would like to update the Security Council on the
recent activities of the Committee, highlighting the
growing cooperation between the Committee and
various international organizations, and the
standardization of our work practices in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), as well as in
increased assistance and transparency.

Building on the 2010 final document of the
comprehensive review and the Committee's current
programme of work, I have held consultations with the
heads of intergovernmental organizations in order to
explore ways to further deepen and strengthen
cooperation among these organizations and the
Committee. These included meetings with the Director-
General of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, Ambassador Uziimcii; with the
Director General the International Atomic Energy
Agency, Ambassador Amano; and with representatives
of the European Union. In addition, on 21 October, in
my capacity as Chairman of the 1540 Committee and at
their invitation, I addressed the Group of Eight
Non-Proliferation Directors Group in Vancouver,
Canada.

Furthermore, I carried out consultations in Paris,
London, Beijing and Moscow in March, and consulted
other Member States in New York to explore, among
other topics, their views on the extension of the 1540
Committee mandate beyond 25 April 2011. In addition,
following a meeting with European Union
representatives in Brussels, the 1540 Committee was
briefed by Ms. Annalisa Giannella, the European Union
Personal Representative on non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD). As listed in the
document that has been circulated in the Chamber,
there were other meetings and consultations held by
the 1540 Group of Experts during this period.

The 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts
continued to participate in outreach events at the
international, regional or subregional levels to facilitate
States' implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
These events included two regional workshops
organized by the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, which focused on border control
and exported materials. The first workshop, for South-
East European States, took place from 14 to 17 June in
Split and was hosted by the Government of Croatia.
The second, for South-East Asian States, took place
from 28 September to 1 October in Hanoi and was
hosted by the Government of Viet Nam. Both
workshops enjoyed the support of the European Union
and of the Governments of the United States and of
Norway and, in the case of the Hanoi workshop, the
Government of New Zealand aw well. The other
activities in which the 1540 Group of Experts
participated are listed in the document circulated in the
Chamber.

As for the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), during the past six months, the Committee
received a first report from Togo on its
implementation. At the same time, I also continued to
meet with representatives of States that have not yet
submitted their first reports. For example, recently I
met with the representatives of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and Ethiopia, among
others, with whom we exchanged points of View, and I
reminded them of their obligation to present such
reports.

The Committee also received additional
information from Brazil, Canada, Ireland, Pakistan,
Portugal, and Uganda. In the case of Canada, it
included a voluntary action plan in its submission.
Using this and other information, the Committee is
reviewing 75 matrices and anticipates engaging in the
review of another 117 before the end of 2010. The
information in these matrices forms the basis of the
data that will appear in the 1540 Committee's report to
the Security Council, due in April 2011.

In terms of assistance, the Committee has also
consolidated a database on assistance requests and
adopted new procedures for handling formal requests
for assistance. The Committee received new requests
for assistance from Iraq, Uganda and the Central
American Integration System. The Governments of
Canada, the United States and Poland notified the 1540
Committee of their offers of assistance.

With regard to transparency, the Committee
adopted new procedures for publishing reports from
Member States, as well as for its matrices and
assistance requests. On its webpage, the Committee
also added a "Frequently Asked Questions" section and
a calendar of upcoming events, and began developing a
"What's New" section.

In addition to the activities described earlier
relating to the enhancement of cooperation with other
international organizations, the Government of Austria
has informed the Committee that it is hosting a meeting
for international, regional and subregional
organizations in Vienna on 15 and 16 December to
promote cooperation on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

It is my intention to participate in that meeting
and in a regional workshop organized by the
Government of Saudi Arabia for 11 and 12 December.
Similarly, as the 1540 Committee looks forward to
preparing its 2011 report to the Security Council, the
Committee and its Group of Experts will continue to
participate in international conferences and in regional
and subregional outreach activities so as to gather more
information on assistance and on measures adopted
towards the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

I would now like to make a few personal
comments based on my experience as Chairman of the
1540 Committee, especially in the light of the mandate
that is to be renewed next April.

As I mentioned earlier, the chairmanship has
carried out a series of consultations in capitals and in
New York with a view to be in a position to present an
assessment of elements that, in our opinion, should be
taken into account by the Council during its
deliberations on the renewal of the Committee's
mandate, before the conclusion of Mexico's
membership of the Council.

In my opinion, in the first years of its existence,
the Committee focused primarily on actions related to
increasing the awareness of Member States of their
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004), and in
assisting them in preparing legislative measures to
ensure compliance with the resolution. Speaking
generally, I could say that the Committee has
successfully completed this first stage. The challenge
now is to support and help States to take relevant
concrete measures to guarantee the compliance of their
legislative provisions.

More than six years after the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004), the renewal of its mandate is
an excellent opportunity to reflect on the best way to
adapt the Committee to respond to current proliferation
threats from non-State actors. I would like to point out
five areas upon which I believe we will need to reflect
in our discussions on renewing the mandate: first, areas
that warrant greater attention from the Committee;
secondly, the Committee's relationship with relevant
international bodies; thirdly, strengthening the
Committee as a platform for cooperation and
enhancing its ability to facilitate assistance to States;
fourthly, the structure of the Group of Experts; and
fifthly, the very relevant issue of the duration of the
Committee's mandate.

In its broad review, the Committee identified a
few areas in which States have taken relatively few
measures. Of the three categories of weapons of mass
destruction, the biological sector is the one where the
fewest measures have been identified. Likewise, vector
systems, control lists and the financing of banned
proliferation activities have been identified as areas
that warrant particular attention.

The 1540 Committee currently enjoys the support
of a Group of Experts consisting of eight individuals.
This contrasts significantly with the staff and resources
of such international bodies as the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons or the World Customs
Organization. These bodies have direct jurisdiction in
areas relevant to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). In this respect, I am convinced of the urgent
need to strengthen cooperation with these bodies, in
particular in the area of information exchange, with
full respect for their various mandates.

The universal nature of the obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004), on the one hand, and the high
degree of specialization within international bodies in
aspects related to the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), on the other, ensure that close
cooperation between both sides would be mutually
beneficial and strengthen compliance with the various
mandates.

The growing recognition on the part of the
international community of the value of the work of the
1540 Committee arises largely from the cooperative
approach taken by the Committee. During our
chairmanship, we have worked to strengthen the
Committee as a platform for cooperation. Nonetheless,
we must continue to strengthen its work in the areas of
cooperation and assistance.

The implementation of the provisions of
resolution 1540 (2004) depends not only on the
political will of States, but also on the Committee's
resources for the application of specific security
measures. In this respect, the Committee must continue
to play an active role to ensure the coordination of
requests for assistance with offers to assist.

The work of the Group of Experts is crucial to the
Committee's work. However, since it was established,
the Group of Experts has worked without a specific
structure or a clear division of functions. I therefore
believe it necessary to establish a structure to permit it
to function more effectively. That task should not be
too complex, and the appointment by the Committee or
the Secretary-General of a coordinator could be a first
step to that end.

Finally, and bearing in mind that, unfortunately,
we cannot predict whether threats related to the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction due to
actions by non-State actors will cease to exist in the
short or the medium term, the Committee's mandate
could be extended for a period longer than three years.
In my opinion, one option would be to renew the
Committee's mandate for 10 years, while planning a
review after five, similar to the review cycle of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
The Committee would thereby be in a position to better
plan its needs with greater certainty. The international
community urgently needs a long-term strategy for
addressing non-proliferation challenges through
cooperation with Member States.

Lastly, I would like to thank the members of the
Committee, the Group of Experts and the Secretariat
for their support of our work.

