Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
situation across the Middle East gives us all cause for
grave concern. Violence and humanitarian crises have
escalated and engulfed millions of innocent people in
the region. It is deeply tragic that so many have been
killed and injured in the current crisis in Gaza. We urge
both sides to do their utmost to de-escalate the situation
and avoid further injury and loss of innocent life. The
people of Israel have the right to live without constant
fear for their security, but the people of Gaza also have
the right to live safely in peace.

We condemn the rocket attacks on Israel targeting
civilians in contravention of all humanitarian law and
norms. We deplore Hamas's rejection of ceasefire
efforts to date. All those with influence over Hamas
must use it to get Hamas to agree to end rocket fire and
join an immediate ceasefire.

We fully support Israel's right to take proportionate
action to defend itself from indiscriminate rocket
attacks and attempts to infiltrate Israel through
tunnels, but it is vital that Gaza's civilian population
be protected. The number of civilian casualties is now
above 600. In particular, the military action in Shujaiya
on Sunday exacted a terrible human cost. Israel must
do everything it can to avoid civilian casualties, to
exercise restraint and to bring this situation to an end.

We welcome Egyptian efforts to secure a ceasefire
agreement. We encourage Egypt to persist with its
efforts, and others to work closely together with them.
We also applaud the Secretary-General's commitment
to helping to secure a ceasefire, including through his
visit to the region, and the United Nations efforts to
broker humanitarian pauses. We also welcome President
Abbas' support for an immediate ceasefire.

Hundreds of thousands of vulnerable civilians in
Gaza are suffering acutely in this crisis and bear no
responsibility for the rocket fire. At least 100,000
Gazans have been displaced by the conflict. Hundreds
of thousands are suffering shortages of water, sanitation
and electricity. The United Kingdom will provide
$3 million in new funding to help the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East supply immediate emergency assistance
for over 84,000 people who are seeking shelter in its
schools. We are also bringing forward over $4 million
in funding to the International Committee of the Red
Cross to provide emergency health care and to repair
water wells and pipelines damaged by the air strikes.

This situation is grimly familiar. It is the third
major military operation in Gaza in six years. The
priority must be to achieve a durable ceasefire that
ends this cycle of violence. A ceasefire agreement must
address the underlying causes of the crisis. It needs to
secure the full implementation of both resolution 1860
(2009) and the November 2012 ceasefire agreement.
There will need to be concerted action to get a grip on
the security situation and open up Gaza's economy. The
Palestinian Authority must return to Gaza. None ofthis
will be easy, but without it we are bound to see another
repeat of this crisis.

We cannot forget the appalling violence that
continues elsewhere in the Middle East. The Syrian
regime's relentless brutality has created an environment
where violent extremism is taking hold. What is
happening in Syria is not and has never been about
terrorism. It is about the legitimate demands of the
Syrian people and their desire for the basic rights of
freedom and dignity. But Al-Assad's regime responds
to demands with horrendous brutality. Now, Syria is
the number one destination for jihadists anywhere in
the world, and the violence is spreading beyond Syria's
borders. Let us be clear. Al-Assad is not the answer to
the terrorist threat; he is the cause of it. The advance
of such violent extremists in the region underscores
the need to support moderate groups in Syria. These
moderate groups are the only forces fighting extremists
and Al-Assad's tyranny.

The Council has taken a major step forward to help
alleviate some of the horrors facing ordinary Syrians.
With the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014), many
Syrians will soon receive the food and medical supplies
they desperately need. It is vital that the United Nations
rapidly deploy its monitoring mission so that aid can
begin to flow through the additional crossings. We
welcome assurances from the Syrian National Coalition
and the Free Syrian Army that they will implement
resolution 2165 (2014) in order to help aid reach those
in urgent need of assistance.

We know that a lasting solution to the Syrian
crisis will come from a political solution. We welcome
newly appointed United Nations Special Representative
Staffan de Mistura and urge all parties to work closely
towards a Syrian-led political transition. We commend
the Syrian National Coalition on the recent election
of its President, Mr. Hadi Al-Bahra. Along with our
partners, we will continue to provide practical technical
and political support to the Syrian National Coalition.

Syria will know a stable peace only when those
responsible for atrocities are held to account. In that
context, we welcome the recent resolution of the
Human Rights Council, and we will continue to work
ensure that victims receive justice, including at the
International Criminal Court.
Finally, we utterly condemn the reported atrocities
committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), which has advanced through western and
northern Iraq, displacing an estimated 650,000 people.
We note with grave concern the events in Mosul this
past weekend. ISIL's threats against the Christian
community in particular, which has been in Mosul
for nearly 2,000 years, are horrific. As the Secretary-
General has said, systematic attacks on civilians
because of their faith or religious beliefs may constitute
crimes against humanity. ISIL poses a grave threat
to the local population, to the security, stability and
territorial integrity of the State, and to the wider region.
The single most important factor that will determine
whether Iraq overcomes this challenge is political unity.
It is therefore vital that a new, inclusive Government be
formed as soon as possible.

I commend the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Iraq, Nikolay Mladenov,
and urge Iraq's politicians to ensure that a President
and Prime Minister are appointed as soon as possible.

