Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. I would like to express our thanks and
appreciation to His Excellency Lord Paddy Ashdown,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
to Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Coordinator of United
Nations Operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Mr. President, I will heed your call not to make a
statement from a prepared text, but I would like to
express my deep appreciation for the remarkable
efforts of Lord Ashdown and Mr. Klein to rehabilitate
Bosnia and Herzegovina after a six-year war, so as to
enable that country to stand on its own, to prepare it to
be like other countries in Central Europe and join the
European Union. In this regard, I must also pay tribute
to both of them for focusing on bringing about justice
and the rule of law and for creating the institutions to
ensure justice, such as the enactment of various laws
and the establishment of competent courts, and for
their appeal to the international community to provide
all assistance possible.

Of particular interest to us is the picture drawn by
both Mr. Klein and Lord Ashdown on the outcome of
the elections. Here I have a question. It is my
understanding from Mr. Klein's briefing that the young
did not participate at all in the elections. If I understand
this correctly, then my question is: how can you
explain the non-participation of the young, who are
considered a vital component of the policies and
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina?

Scholars examine cases of elections in any given
country and come up with a comparative analysis of
the outcome and the tallies obtained by parties. Here, a
word of thanks goes to both Lord Ashdown and Mr.
Klein for the transparency with which they have
analysed the results of the elections and the votes
obtained by various parties. From our perspective, we
see that these electoral results send out a message
different from the analysis they have projected,
although I had hoped that their reading of those results
was correct. Still, I think the election results, their
implications and the message they send require a more
accurate reading in the future.

The second question is: what are Lord Ashdown's
estimates regarding the efforts that have been made to
establish police and military institutions to which he
referred in his briefing? And what are the obstacles
facing both institutions, bearing in mind the limitations
of European assistance and the fact that the European
Union will assume police functions as of next January?

Additionally, I have five points that I would like
briefly to address. Achieving stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is very pressing after long years of war. I
wish to stress - indeed, to pay tribute to - the efforts
of both Lord Ashdown and Mr. Klein for the improved
security conditions and for improvement in the area of
immigration and curbing the flight of immigrants, for
this is another factor that must be examined in
comparison with the return of refugees. While efforts
are under way to ensure refugee return, similar efforts
should be made in order to diminish the flight of
nationals by strengthening security.

With regard to my other point, I should like to
stress the economic situation. It is well known that an
improvement in Bosnia and Herzegovina's economy
would contribute to the country's salvation, given the
generally fragile situation, because economic
conditions are closely tied to political and security
stability in the country. Here, I should like to join
previous speakers in appealing to the international
community to provide the necessary assistance. That,
in itself, would also curb the flight of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's nationals to the outside world.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is not an island, isolated
from the rest of the world, but its economy should be
developed within its regional context and through
development of better relations and mutual respect with
its neighbours. Here, the question arises: what is the
status of the relationship between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its neighbours in the region?

In conclusion, we join Lord Ashdown in
supporting the principle of the return of refugees, not
only in Bosnia and Herzegovina - which falls within
his mandate - but also throughout the world. Any
other region that suffers from the problem of refugees
must also be addressed, because that is an international
issue that must be dealt with.
