Mr. Gnaedinger (International Committee of the Red Cross): Let me first thank you, Mr. President, and
the other members of the Security Council for the
opportunity to address the Council on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. That issue is at the heart of
the mandate and the operational priorities of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).

The ICRC would like to congratulate the
Secretary-General on his report (S/2007/643), which
takes an incisive look at the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. He presents a sobering picture,
emphasizing the disparity between our collective
aspiration to protect civilians and the harsh realities.
The ICRC both shares his concerns and concurs with
the priorities that he establishes.

On the basis of what the ICRC observes in the
field, it must be stressed that, right now as we speak,
hundreds of thousands of civilians are being driven
from their homes. Many are killed at random or simply
disappear. Protecting and assisting displaced people
therefore constitutes the major part of ICRC field
operations today, including measures designed to
prevent displacement in the first place.

Despite recent initiatives, both at the operational
level and in the realm of international legal norms, the
world's response to scourges such as forced
displacement, forced disappearances and sexual
violence remains inadequate. The Secretary-General
rightly points to the collective failure to tackle the
issue of sexual violence, including in cases where rape
is deliberately used as a method of warfare. The plight
of rape victims still stands in stark contrast to the all-
too-frequent impunity for their aggressors.

Likewise, the ICRC joins the Secretary-General
in voicing humanitarian concern over the impact of
cluster munitions. Such weapons have severe
consequences for civilians both during conflict, owing
to the large areas affected by them, and as explosive
remnants of war long after the fighting has ended. The
ICRC calls on States to immediately end the use of
inaccurate and unreliable cluster munitions and to
negotiate a new treaty of international humanitarian
law to prohibit their use.
Private military and security companies are
increasingly involved in activities that bring them close
to the heart of military operations. We call on
Governments to ensure that such companies operate in
full compliance with international humanitarian law.

The ICRC would like to stress that today,
international humanitarian law is as relevant as ever in
armed conflicts. The main impediment to protecting
civilians remains the lack of political will to make sure
it is respected by all. Far too often, parties to conflicts
disregard humanitarian law and deliberately target
civilians. We are seeing a dangerous erosion of
distinction and proportionality as the cardinal
principles governing the conduct of hostilities. The
ICRC believes that the fundamental values underlying
these principles are timeless.

During the thirtieth International Conference of
the Red Cross and Red Crescent, which is to convene
in Geneva next week, the High Contracting Parties to
the Geneva Conventions will be called upon to reaffirm
the relevance and validity of those principles.
Achieving the broadest possible support for and
compliance with the law must be our priority. Article 1
common to the four Geneva Conventions clearly
stipulates that States have an obligation to both respect
and ensure respect for international humanitarian law
in all circumstances. By means of Article 89 of
Protocol I Additional to the Geneva Conventions, the
High Contracting Parties have also committed
themselves "to act jointly or individually, in
cooperation with the United Nations and in conformity
with the United Nations Charter", in the event of
serious violations of international humanitarian law.
States must employ all appropriate means, including
political, legal, economic and security measures, to
honour this commitment.

Security Council resolutions now indeed tend to
incorporate protection of the civilian population as a
standard aspect of peacekeeping operations. In this
respect, it should be kept in mind that protection of
civilians by United Nations peacekeepers implies a
military and security dimension, which must be clearly
distinguished from protection activities carried out by
humanitarian actors.
For its part, the ICRC has a mandate under
humanitarian law to remind all those using armed
force - be they Governments or non-State actors - of
their obligations under the law and to seek access to
people affected by armed conflict. The ICRC's specific
contribution to protecting civilians is thus
complementary to protection efforts by other actors, in
particular the many measures taken by the United
Nations.

In practice, ICRC protection activities are at the
core of a constant dialogue with all parties to conflict.
Every day, hundreds of ICRC staff have contact with
Government representatives, military officers and local
authorities, as well as with leaders of armed groups, in
order to preserve the life, health and dignity of
civilians and detainees. Their protection needs can best
be understood and addressed through direct contact and
presence in the field. Only strict adherence to the
fundamental principles of impartial, independent and
specifically neutral humanitarian action enables the
ICRC to maintain that dialogue and that access.

The ICRC is committed to being part of the
collective effort to protect civilians caught up in armed
conflict, a cause that unites us all. Our failure to act
would be intolerable.

