Mr. Lewicki (Poland): As this is the first public
meeting of the Security Council under new leadership,
let me congratulate China on assuming the presidency
of the Council for this month. We look forward to closely
working with you, Mr. President, in the upcoming
weeks and days.

Let me also take the opportunity to express our
deepest appreciation for Ms. Bensouda and her team
for their tireless efforts aimed at fighting impunity
and ensuring accountability. As Ms. Bensouda has just
said, there is a link betwen the work of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the mission of the Security
Council, which is the maintenance of international
peace and security, as there is no peace without justice.
So I once again thank Ms. Bensouda and assure her of
Poland's continued support for her work.

I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for
presenting the sixteenth report of the Prosecutor of the
ICC, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). The conclusion
of the report reads in part as follows:

"Accountability for crimes under the Rome
Statute and full respect for the rule of law are
integral to sustainable peace, stability and
development in Libya The appalling cycle of
violence, criminality and impunity cannot be
allowed to continue for the sake of the Libyan
people and the security and stability of the country
and the region."

We very much agree with those statements and
are grateful for the commitment of the Office of the
Prosecutor to investigating allegations of serious
criminal activity in Libya and to bringing justice to
the victims of atrocity crimes committed there. Poland
supports the call on all States, including those on the
Council, non-State actors, international organizations
and other stakeholders to work together towards
those goals. Such cooperation is vital in the light of
the reported and ongoing violence and violations of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law, on the ground.

We are deeply disturbed and gravely concerned
by the ongoing serious human rights violations and
abuses. Those include the killing of civilians, including
women and children, the repeated forced eviction and
displacement of hundreds of families, and restriction of
humanitarian access. Furthermore, the abduction and
prolonged detention of persons without trial or other
legal process, as well as crimes, including killings,
sexual violence and the torture of migrants transiting
through Libya, allegedly continue. We reiterate our
call for an end to all atrocities in Libya and for full
respect for international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law.

Poland recognizes that a crucial step in combatting
impunity for serious crimes in Libya is the arrest
and surrender to the ICC of the individuals named
in arrest warrants issued by the Court. We note that
Libya remains under an obligation and has the primary
responsibility in that respect. However, Poland also
supports the call of the Office of the Prosecutor on all
States to take all possible steps to execute the warrants
and surrender those named therein to the ICC, where
they will receive a fair, impartial and public hearing
of the allegations against them. We also emphasize the
need for cooperation with the Office on a wide range
of other activities, which include, inter alia, the seizure
of evidence, the interviewing of witnesses and the
freezing of assets.

Poland appreciates such cooperation, including of
the Office of the Prosecutor, with the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
the Libyan Prosecutor-General's office and several
States, organizations and civil society groups. And we
were very pleased to hear from Ms. Bensouda about
her good cooperation with the Libyan Prosecutor-
General's office, which it is very commendable and
encouraging. It could, among other things, advance the
investigative efforts, potentially deter further crimes
and contribute to improving the situation in Libya and
beyond. We encourage its further development and call
on all parties to support the political process and work
towards strengthening the rule of law and achieving
peace in Libya.

Poland remains committed to cooperating fully with
the Court and the Prosecutor, as requested in paragraph
5 of resolution 1970 (2011), referring the situation in
Libya to the International Criminal Court. We reiterate
the Security Council's call on all States and concerned
regional and other international organizations to do
the same in order to reinforce the pursuit of justice and
contribute to the maintenance of the international peace
and security because - let me reiterate - there is no
peace without justice. That is why Poland is so pleased
to continue supporting Ms. Bensouda's Office and was
happy to co-sponsor the Arria Formula meeting on
the link between the work of the ICC and the Security
Council in July.

