Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his briefing on the current situation in Kosovo. We
also thank Mr. Ivica Dacic', Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Hashim
Thaci for their statements.

Although the security situation in the region has
been said to be stable, we are seeing with concern violent
incidents such as those that took place in Kumanovo,
which could have destabilizing effects on reconciliation
and regional cooperation. It is imperative to safeguard
and expand elements for coexistence and to avoid acts
that may endanger people's lives and relations between
the different communities. We welcome the role played
by the European Union in facilitating technical and
high-level negotiations between Pristina and Belgrade,
which are contributing to fomenting trust between the
parties.

By way of our own long and painful experience, we
have learned that for the sake of society, but especially
for victims and their families, reconciliation genuinely
requires justice and reparations. The establishment of
a specialist court tasked with adjudicating the crimes
committed during the conflict represents a step in
that direction that will make it possible to apply the
fundamental principles of justice and accountability.
Likewise, knowing the whereabouts of persons who
disappeared during the conflict is necessary to making
progress towards justice and the truth. Moreover, it
is the right of the families and must be addressed by
the respective authorities. The designation of a new
Chair of the Working Group on Missing Persons will
be critical when the time comes to begin search efforts
and identify reparation measures

As we have done in the Council on other occasions,
we stress the central role that UNMIK continues to play
in promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights - a priority matter for moving forward in the
process of reconciliation among the communities. Only
in a context of respect for, and protection of, basic
human rights is it possible to aspire to reconciliation
and to a peaceful future.

With regard to the complaints of human rights
violations allegedly committed by UNMIK between
June 1999 and February 2008, the investigation
undertaken by the UNMIK Human Rights Advisory
Panel contributed to clarifying the facts. However,
paragraph 59 of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2015/579) makes clear that UNMIK did not act in
accordance with the European Convention on Human
Rights. It is vital to compensate the victims of those
violations for the moral damage they incurred.

With regard to the implementation of resolution
1325 (1999), we stress the actions that have been
taken to promote and protect the rights of women and
gender equality. However, we believe it is necessary
to continue to work on activities that will enhance
women's participation, on an equal footing with men,
with respect to access to property and education, among
other things. It is equally important to continue to adopt
measures to integrate young people by addressing
the socioeconomic factors that lead to an increase in
recruitment activities by extremist groups.

I would like to underscore that resolution 1244
(1999) remains in full force as the internationally
accepted legal basis for resolving the situation in
Kosovo, including strict respect for the principle of
territorial integrity.

Finally, we would like to express our gratitude for
the work of Mr. Zarif as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of UNMIK, including his
efforts to promote peace and stability in Kosovo and
the region throughout his tenure. We wish him every
success in his future endeavours.

