The President: I thank Ms. Blakemore for
her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.

I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
and Ms. Blakemore for their briefings and for their
commitment to United Nations peacekeeping reform.
In a speech to the General Assembly in 2003, President
George W. Bush pointed out something important that
the founding ideas of the United Nations and the United
States have in common. He said:

"Both recognize a moral law that stands above
men and nations, but which must be defended and
enforced by men and nations." (A/58/PV7, p. 12)

Of all the activities in which the United Nations
engages, peacekeeping best embodies this founding
ideal. We ask our peacekeepers to go into dangerous
situations and put themselves in between warring
parties. We ask them to be brave and impartial and,
above all, to protect some of the most vulnerable people
in the world. We ask this all in the name of peace. But
in the end, our peacekeepers are just men and women.
They are human beings, and, although our ideals
are perfect and eternal, human beings are imperfect
and fallen.

Our peacekeepers do much that is good. United
Nations peacekeepers were instrumental in Cote
d'Ivoire's transition from civil war to peace. Now
Cote d'Ivoire is paying it forward as an important new
peacekeeping force for others. In Sierra Leone, our
peacekeepers helped secure peace after a civil war of
unspeakable violence. In the Congo, peacekeepers from
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are enabling
a response to the Ebola outbreak and standing ready
to provide logistical support to elections in December.
And in South Sudan, thousands of civilians are alive
today because of protection-of-civilians sites created
and maintained by United Nations peacekeepers.

UnitedNationsMissioninSouthSudanpeacekeepers
recently partnered with humanitarian organizations
to relocate 3,500 internally displaced persons, mostly
women and children, from a protection-of-civilians site
in Juba to a site in the community where they could
reunite with their families.

But those success stories are sadly overshadowed
by other instances in which peacekeepers fail to live up
to the ideals of their mission. In some cases, they are
even destructive to our ideals. In instances when even a
minority ofpeacekeepers abuse and exploit the citizens
they are supposed to protect, that harm can overshadow
the good. We hear far too many stories of vulnerable
civilians who put their trust in peacekeepers, and our
peacekeepers fail to protect them. Just last week we were
reminded of the horrific events at the Terrain housing
compound in Juba in 2016. A South Sudanese courtjust
convicted soldiers loyal to President Kiir for raping
aid workers and killing a journalist. An American was
among the women raped. The attack lasted for hours,
and during that time the victims reportedly called the
United Nations peacekeepers' station just a mile away.
They begged for help, but no help came.

These convictions are a measure of accountability
for the men who committed those crimes, if not for the
officers who led them. But what about the peacekeepers
who failed to intervene? Where is the accountability
for them? Peacekeeping is based on trust between the
protected and the protectors. The United Nations puts
peacekeepers in this position of trust. We, the Security
Council, give them this power. We are responsible for
what they do with it, not just for the sake of the victims,
but for the sake of the mission, the United Nations and
peacekeeping itself. Once that critical trust is gone, no
matter how many resources a mission has or how strong
its leadership, the mission will fail.

Even worse than failures to protect are instances
in which civilians have been attacked, abused and
exploited by the peacekeepers who were supposed
to protect them. We have all heard the stories, some
of which Sarah has just described in haunting detail.
The Council has just heard about young girls and boys
grabbed off the streets; young girls forced to have sex
with soldiers for as little as an egg to eat; sexual assaults
so common that they are not reported; and young
girls and women left alone to care for their so-called
peacekeeping babies, after the rapists who fathered
them have left the country. A farmer and mother of
seven in the Central African Republic said it better than
I could when she told a reporter:

"We were told that the peacekeepers had come to
protect us. Instead, we see that it is the peacekeepers
who cause the rapes. It makes me sick".

It has been two years since the Security Council was
briefed on horrific allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse by peacekeepers in the Central African
Republic. The Security Council recognized the need to
take action in response to these violations and adopted
resolution 2272 (2016), the first resolution to address
the need to hold peacekeepers accountable for sexual
exploitation and abuse.

But two years later, we are still waiting for justice
for the victims in Dekoa. We supported the Secretary-
General in the repatriation of troops and police who
display a pattern of abusive behaviour. Some critical
steps have been taken and we applaud them, but we
have an obligation to ensure that more is done. The
United Nations own public reporting shows that several
peacekeeping units have faced repeated allegations
of sexual exploitation and abuse, but those same
allegations have remained pending for years. The
perpetrators have gone unpunished and, unbelievably,
some accused troops remain in United Nations missions,
able to continue the abuse and to wield the power that
they have - the power that we have given them. What
message does that give to other peacekeepers?

The United States acknowledges and appreciates
the step that the Secretary-General has taken to
address this crisis, and Member States have responded
to the Secretary-General's leadership by supporting
United Nations initiatives to prevent and report sexual
exploitation and abuse. The United States shares the
Secretary-General's commitment to peacekeeping
performance across the board. The ongoing struggle
to make progress in solving the problem has shown
the need for clear, objective standards of performance
and accountability. We need to create a culture of
performance in United Nations peacekeeping.

People such as the mother of seven I quoted earlier
deserve to know that when the Blue Helmets arrive,
they are not a threat but there to perform their duties
in service of peace and security. The United States
has introduced a new draft resolution to empower
the Secretariat and accelerate progress on improving
peacekeeping performance. Our draft advances three
simple but critical peacekeeper performance priorities.

First, it mandates a timely and transparent process
for reporting performance failures to the Security
Council and to the Member States concerned. We
cannot fix what we do not know. Better information
will help the Council, the Secretariat, troop- and
police-contributing countries and donors work together
to recruit, field and retain the most qualified and
capable peacekeepers.

Secondly, we create accountability measures
for failures of performance and concrete incentives
for stronger performance. Accountability is not a
dirty word. We must ensure that our peacekeepers
are capable, professional and willing to carry out the
critical mandates with which they have been tasked. At
the same time, we need to do a betterjob ofrecognizing,
rewarding and replicating good performance. This draft
resolution puts the force of the Security Council behind
that too.

And thirdly, our draft resolution recognizes the role
of data in improving troop performance by matching
the right troops and police to the right roles. Training
and operational readiness, not politics, should be our
criteria for deploying troop and police units. In the
days ahead, I urge my colleagues to work with us on
the draft resolution. They should bring their best ideas
of how to incentivize better performance and hold all
peacekeepers, in particular those in the positions of
leadership, to the highest possible standards. Of course,
we owe it to the victims of abuse and neglect, but we
also owe it to the peacekeepers themselves. Their safety
and security is directly linked to their performance.
The men and women we send into harm's way need
to know that they are always serving alongside other
peacekeepers who can be counted on to do their duty
and not abuse their power.

The people of the United States support the United
Nations when it lives up to the ideals of its founding
because we share those ideals. We ask Council members
to help us show that such support is not misplaced and
join us in the effort to ensure that the men and women
who represent the United Nations to the world have the
training, professionalism and character to match their
high mission. Many vulnerable people in the world
depend on us. They give us their trust. We owe them
our protection.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to Council members who
wish to make statements.

