Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): There
is a cliche' that says that the first victim in war is
the truth. Although that applies to wars of any kind,
it is particularly true of this war. We have States and
non-State actors participating. Some States seem to
have been internationalnvited to participate, while other
States seem not to have been invited but consider that
they have every right to interfere. There are terrorists,
both blatant and disguised. There are dozens of armed
groups that supposedly stand for something. Some
claim to have religious affiliation. That, of course,
complicates everything, because if in a war somebody
thinks that God is on their side, then it is difficult to
persuade them to lay down their arms without being
considered an apostate or a traitor. In the twenty-first
century there still seem to be people that believe that
God is to be found wielding the barrel ofa gun.
We voted in favour of the draft resolution because,
on the one hand, we firmly condemn the continued use
of chemical weapons in Syria. Secondly, the draft made
explicit the information required to conduct a broad-
ranging, thorough and independent investigation.

We need to find the truth. A group of members of
the Council sought, throughout last week and in the
beginning of this week, to try to find a balance between
the different positions around this table, in order to
enable a broad and thorough investigation that would
bring us closer to the truth. Unfortunately, events
have come together in such a way as to prevent that
from happening, and once again the Security Council
has embarked on a process that resembles the novel of
Garcia Marquez, "Chronicle of a Death Foretold".

The privileges that distinguish the various Council
members calls to mind an expression from the novel
of George Orwell, "Animal Farm", namely, that some
animals are more equal than others. That legal, but
dishonest, imbalance means that many members are in
a situation where they have to choose the lesser of two
evils in terms of the options before them.

We would like to reiterate our position and the
position of the 121 signatories to the Code of Conduct,
according to which those members in possession of
the right of veto must refrain from the use of such veto
when faced with war crimes, which the recent attack in
Khan Shaykhun clearly is.

