Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
As you conclude your duties as Permanent
Representative of your country to the United Nations,
on behalf of my delegation I, too, should like to pay
tribute to you, Sir, above all for the excellence with
which you presided over the Security Council for the
month of June, as well as for the quality of the human
relationships you have been able to form with each and
every one of us. I wish you every success for the
future.

Having said that, I would also like to thank
Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his briefing. I
also wish to thank our friend and colleague,
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for his statement.

The sharp increase in incidents in Afghanistan
remains a source of major concern, in particular in the
light of the upcoming presidential and provincial
elections scheduled for 20 August 2009. However, we
are somewhat reassured to see a net improvement in
the coordination of activities between the Afghan
National Security Forces and UNAMA, on the one
hand, and the Independent Directorate of Local
Governance and the International Security Assistance
Force on the other. They must take the necessary
measures to spare the civilian population from the
collateral effects of military operations.

The success of the mission in Afghanistan will
largely depend on the support of the civilian population
for the objectives sought by the international
community. In that context, we believe it appropriate to
establish a communication strategy to make Afghans
aware of the benefits of international assistance.

We also urge the international community to step
up its efforts towards Afghanistan, namely in the
priority fields, and we urge UNAMA to further
strengthen its presence in the country, as resolution
1868 (2009) requires.

In that regard, it is very reassuring to note the
strong currents of support shown by the international
community for Afghanistan through the organization of
recent meetings in Moscow, The Hague, Islamabad and
Tehran. We hope that that commitment and that
solidarity will greatly benefit the Afghan people.

Clearly, Afghanistan is at a crossroads, and we
must together act quickly and with resolve to address
the challenges on the horizon. We are pleased that there
are no longer controversies surrounding the elections,
namely concerning the date and the powers of the
President. UNAMA played a big part in reaching that
consensus, and we are grateful to it.

We urge the Afghan political class to renounce
violence, to accept the rules of democracy and to
favour political dialogue, which are indispensable
conditions for the success of the elections. In that
regard, we welcome the efforts of the Independent
Election Commission, which has respected the timeline
by launching the election campaign on 16 June.

We welcome the implementation of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy in other
sectors deemed priority, where, moreover, progress has
been made, in particular the decisions concerning the
new national agriculture strategy, police reform and
private-sector development.

However, donor coordination and aid
effectiveness remain crucial to tangible and lasting
improvements in the living conditions of the Afghan
population. That is why we welcome the mechanisms
set up to strengthen coordination, in particular the peer
review mechanism, which will help ensure a coherent
allocation of resources and oblige the donors to fulfil
their actions.

Similarly, the signing of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework by the Minister of
Economy and the United Nations Resident Coordinator
on 28 May constitutes a good policy framework for the
activities of the United Nations bodies in Afghanistan.

We also welcome the detailed plan produced by
the Afghan Government for the rapid and effective
deployment of civilian experts, the effective
implementation of which should expand the capacities
of the Government in the long term.

Furthermore, encouraging measures in the fight
against corruption bodes well for the true resolve of the
Government to tackle the threat to extinguish the
development efforts. In fact, UNAMA's cooperation
remains essential at all levels to fill the gaps.

During the period under consideration, the
humanitarian situation still suffers from the effects of
natural disasters, which could, if we are not careful,
cause public health problems or exacerbate the food
crisis. Even if those disasters are managed swiftly
thanks to good coordination among the different
partners, support measures are needed to reduce the
suffering of the people.

Lastly, the indispensable asset of regional
cooperation in Afghanistan in both the political and
economic spheres must also be underscored. From that
point of view, several conferences have reaffirmed the
commitment of the countries of the region to support
economic projects and to combat terrorism, drug-
trafficking and organized crime.

Finally, we hope that all actions undertaken by
the United Nations and the international community
will receive the consent and support of the Afghans so
as to foster their ownership for a better future in
Afghanistan.

