Mr. Seger (Switzerland): I take the floor today
wearing not only my traditional bowtie, but also two
hats - one as the speaker on behalf of the Human
Security Network and the other as the representative of
Switzerland, speaking in my national capacity.

Let me start by speaking on behalf of the Human
Security Network, which is an informal group of States
that advocates a people-centred, holistic approach
to security, complementing the more traditional
understanding of national and international security.
Its membership includes Austria, Chile, Costa Rica,
Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama,
Slovenia, Thailand, with South Africa participating as
an observer, and my own country, Switzerland.

Let me take this opportunity to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important open debate,
which is on one of the priority issues for the Human
Security Network since its inception. Let me also take
this opportunity to thank former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Radhika Coomaraswamy
for her tireless efforts to protect children from the
devastating effects of armed conflict. We appreciate
the results of the process over the last six years under
the former Special Representative, including the
signing of numerous action plans, the freeing of 10,000
child soldiers and the abolition of child soldiering by
almost all national authorities, and we look forward
to the further development and strengthening of the
monitoring and reporting mechanisms. I would also
like to take this opportunity to warmly welcome the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui.
We congratulate her on her recent appointment and
wish her courage, strength and perseverance for the
important work that lies ahead. In the Network's View,
the contributions of the Special Representative to the
work of the Security Council are fundamental to the
Council's work. We thus encourage the Council to invite
her to regular briefings in order to promote substantive
and interactive discussion.

The Human Security Network welcomes the
submission of the Secretary-General's recent annual
report (S/2012/261), including the listing ofperpetrators
and the highlighting of persistent perpetrators. The
monitoring and reporting mechanisms, the dialogues
and resulting action plans, the work of UNICEF, the
task forces and the recognized partners are all part of
the well-established international framework for the
protection of children in armed conflict.

The Human Security Network is also pleased with
the work undertaken by the Security Council. It has
resulted in a strengthened protection framework for
children in armed conflict, as last seen by the inclusion
of attacks against schools and hospitals as a trigger in
the monitoring and reporting mechanism last summer
(see resolution 1998 (2011)).

Yet, sadly, the issue of persistent perpetrators
of grave Violations against children remains of deep
concern. As of today, 32 of the 52 parties listed for
grave violations against children qualify as persistent
perpetrators. We encourage the Security Council to
consider options for increasing pressure on persistent
perpetrators, as outlined in the Secretary-General's
report, and look forward to a rich discussion on how to
further develop those ideas.

We also call for more efforts to address impunity
and to investigate, prosecute and punish all those who
commit grave violations against children. The verdicts
of the International Criminal Court and the Special
Court for Sierra Leone against Thomas Lubanga
and Charles Taylor are positive steps in that regard.
The convictions warn perpetrators and would-be
perpetrators of unlawful child soldier recruitment that
their crimes will not go unpunished.

Last but not least, the Human Security Network
encourages the Council to enhance its efforts to
approach the protection of civilians in armed conflict
in a systematic and coordinated manner that recognizes
the particular vulnerability of children and women. We
encourage Council members to hold further discussions
on the issue on an open and inclusive basis.

(spoke in French)

Allow me now to speak briefly in my national
capacity.

Further to what I have just said on behalf of the
Human Security Network, it is encouraging to note
the rapid progress. Since last September, for example,
five parties to conflict in the Central African Republic,
South Sudan, Somalia and Myanmar have signed action
plans with the United Nations for the protection of
children. To date, those action plans have been signed
by five of the 10 Government forces listed.

However, the position of children affected by
armed conflict remains of concern at the global level.
Children have been killed, mutilated and recruited by
armed groups, have been Victims of sexual Violence
and are denied humanitarian aid. In order to strengthen
the protection mechanism for children affected by
armed conflict, two more types of serious violation
should be included: abduction and denial of access to
humanitarian aid. Furthermore, Switzerland calls on
States that have not yet ratified the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict to do so.
We should increase pressure on perpetrators of
violations that persist in their acts. To that end, as
my colleague from Luxembourg has just said, it is
essential that close cooperation be established between
the Security Council and national and international
courts striving to put an end to serious Violations of
international humanitarian law.

Moreover, even more effective steps with regard to
non-State armed actors should be taken. For example,
as the Secretary-General underscores in his report, the
Government of Myanmar refused to negotiate an action
plan between two non-State armed actors and the United
Nations. However, in that regard, the Geneva Call made
possible the signing of the Deed of Commitment under
Geneva Call for the Protection of Children from the
Effects of Armed Conflict by those same non-State
actors. Thus, as that case shows, there are alternatives
and they should be promoted in situations where States
impede cooperation between non-State armed actors
and the United Nations. Switzerland would therefore
like to pay tribute to the outstanding work of Geneva
Call.

In conclusion, Switzerland therefore calls on all
parties to support complementary activities by States,
international organizations and civil society in the
interests of Children who are victims on the ground.

