Mr. Guehenno: Thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Council on Darfur. As the
Council may be aware, I travelled to the region from
21 to 31 January in order to Visit, among other
missions, the African Union/United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in the weeks
following the transfer of authority and to hold
consultations with officials from the Government of
the Sudan on the outstanding issues related to the
deployment of the Hybrid Operation. My visit to the
region was sobering, yet extremely informative, and I
would like to provide the Council with some
observations from my trip. Before doing so, allow me
to provide a brief update on the current security and
humanitarian situation in Darfur.

The recent hostilities between the Government of
the Sudan and the Justice and Equality Movement
(JEM) and its leader, Khalil Ibrahim, in West Darfur
and the continued build-up of their forces in the area
remains one of our principal security concerns in
Darfur. As a result of that situation, the majority of the
state of West Darfur remains inaccessible to
humanitarian organizations. The situation has been
exacerbated by the violence in Chad over the past
several days. The potentially destabilizing regional
implications of the crisis have been highlighted by
numerous media reports of Chadian rebel movements
receiving support in the Sudan, on the one hand, and
Sudanese rebel movements that have acted in support
of the Chadian Government, on the other. Continuing
accusations by both Governments of their support for
rebel movements on each side of the border increase
the climate of mistrust, fuel tensions between the two
countries and once again demonstrate the potential for
a conflict of international dimensions in the area.

Meanwhile, other disturbing trends are emerging,
including the large-scale mobilization and shifting
alliances of Arab militia in South Darfur, which has
coincided with an increase in direct conflict between
rebel movements and pro-Government militia. In
addition, the appointment of Musa Hilal to the position
of Advisor to the Ministry of Federal Affairs is being
viewed by many as an extremely disappointing
development, particularly since the Security Council
itself has recognized his past involvement in violence
in Darfur.

The ongoing violence in Darfur and the border
area also poses a significant threat to civilians as the
humanitarian community endeavours to provide them
with the assistance they require. Continuing
displacement, compounded by decreasing humanitarian
access and impending crop failures in many areas of
Darfur due to late rains, pests and neglect of farms,
threatens to create a humanitarian situation that the
international community simply does not have the
capacity to address. The humanitarian situation will
improve only if we see a decrease in hostilities and
cooperation on behalf of the armed groups in the area.

(spoke in French)

I would like to now share with the Council some
observations from my trip to Darfur. During my visit to
the three states that make up Darfur, it became clear
that UNAMID is severely under-resourced for the tasks
that it was mandated to perform. The number of troops
and police and their enabling capabilities currently in
the mission area are clearly not sufficient to provide
protection for the civilian population in Darfur in the
current hostile environment.

Nevertheless, UNAMID is exploring ways in
which to bring about tangible improvement in the
situation with the limited human and material resources
at its disposal. For example, the Mission is doing its
utmost to adopt a more proactive posture through
increased presence, especially in internally displaced
persons camps. To that end, the UNAMID Police
Commissioner has dramatically increased the number
of police patrols, which now take place from 8 am. to
6 p.m., and is constructing a number of police posts in
those areas with a view to maintaining a 24-hour
presence. The Force Commander is also exploring
options for increasing the presence of forces in key
areas.

It is important to stress that despite those efforts,
the Mission will not be able to meet the high
expectations of Darfur's civilians. That is particularly
worrying since we risk losing their confidence if we
are not able to meet those expectations. Experience in
United Nations peacekeeping has shown that the loss
of the local population's confidence can deal a severe
blow to our efforts.
The Assistant Secretary-General in charge of the
Department of Field Support, Ms. Lute, also visited the
Mission in the days prior to my trip. Ms. Lute noted a
number of significant challenges with respect to
bringing UNAMID up to United Nations standards.
Among the priorities in that respect is the improvement
of UNAMID camps, particularly camp services, and
security and force protection measures in order to
avoid a repetition of the events of Haskanita. That will
be essential for improving troop morale and security, in
addition to the Mission's operational effectiveness.

At the time of Ms. Lute's visit, a total of 1,256
staff, or 23 per cent of the authorized UNAMID posts,
had been deployed to Darfur. The challenges faced by
UNAMID staff are many and range from poor living
conditions to high staff turn-over due to security
concerns.

(spoke in English)

Following my visit to Darfur, I travelled to Addis
Ababa on 27 January, where African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Mr. Said
Djinnit, and I met with Mr. Mutrif Siddiq, the
Chairman of the Government of the Sudan's technical
committee for the implementation of UNAMID. We
had the opportunity to discuss a number of outstanding
matters related to the deployment of the operation,
including the issues of UNAMID accoutrements, force
composition and the finalization of the status-of-forces
agreement. The meeting was constructive, with all
sides emphasizing the need to build on recent progress,
especially with respect to status-of-forces agreement
negotiations. Mr. Siddiq, however, noted that he would
be required to further consult with his Government,
and we were not able to reach any definitive
conclusions on the issues that we discussed.

As the Council is aware, the Secretary-General
had the opportunity to meet with President Bashir on
the margins of the African Union summit in Addis
Ababa some days later. There they further discussed a
number of outstanding issues, on which the Secretary-
General briefed the Council this Tuesday. One of the
principal issues that they discussed was force
composition, which, as the Secretary-General noted,
resulted in some progress with regard to the
deployment of key units. In that regard, the Secretary-
General indicated to the President that the United
Nations would prioritize the rapid deployment of
Ethiopian troops to UNAMID on the understanding
that the Thai and Nepalese units would be deployed
simultaneously. I should recall that the Thai and
Nepalese contingents were ready to deploy on short
notice, and the early addition of new contingents
remains a desperate need for UNAMID.

The issue of force composition is one of the
lynchpins to UNAMID's success, and we urgently
require a definitive decision from the Government on
the inclusion of the Thai and Nepalese units. If we are
to deploy those units alongside the Ethiopian troops,
we must inform Thailand and Nepal immediately so
that urgent pre-deployment preparations can be
finalized. Ethiopia has indicated that it would be ready
to initiate the deployment of its battalion to Darfur
within the month of February, and we anticipate that
the deployment of the advance party of the Egyptian
battalion will begin within the month of March.

In light of the continuing discussions that we
have had with the Government on the issue of force
composition, it is worth recalling that Security Council
resolution 1769 (2007) indicates that the force should
be "predominantly African in character". To have a
force that is exclusively African in character is another
matter. There are a number of important reasons why a
broader mix of troops is necessary. To obtain the
required capabilities will necessitate seeking troop and
police contributors from non-African countries for
certain capabilities.

If we are to reconfigure UNAMID into a robust,
credible and proactive peacekeeping presence, there
are a number of issues which must be confronted as a
matter of the utmost priority. We are now at a critical
moment in the life of the Hybrid Operation, and
additional delay in resolving those issues would have a
severely negative impact on the mission. As already
mentioned, it is essential that we expeditiously
conclude all necessary arrangements to allow for the
early deployment of the Thai and Nepalese units. We
have already expressed our willingness to prioritize
deployment of Ethiopian and Egyptian troops with the
understanding that those Asian units would deploy in a
timely fashion. It is important also that UNAMID's
force composition should draw upon a broad range of
countries, since due consideration must be given to the
geographical balance of the force in order to have an
operation that is perceived as impartial by the parties.
On a more positive note, we very much welcome
the progress that we have made with the Government

in our consultations on the status-of-forces agreement,
which we hope to sign soon. The spirit in which those
negotiations have taken place should set the tone for
the resolution of all outstanding issues regarding the
deployment of UNAMID. In that regard, we must still
resolve a number of matters, including full freedom of
movement for UNAMID. As we have said previously,
peacekeeping is a round-the-clock job, and the force
must have the ability to patrol both on the ground and
in the air at all hours. We also require the
Government's cooperation in extending visas to the
contractors currently providing services to UNAMID
troops in Darfur until a new contractor is in place. The
bidding process is under way, and we expect to finalize
that issue within the shortest possible time frame.

In the meantime, UNAMID troop and police
contributors must do everything possible to expedite
their pre-deployment preparations and arrive at the
mission with the required capabilities as swiftly as
possible. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
stands ready to provide whatever additional assistance
UNAMID troop and police contributors may require in
that regard.

However, as the Council is aware, UNAMID still
lacks critical military aviation and ground
transportation assets, which must be urgently
generated. We appreciate the United Kingdom's efforts
in that regard; however, we still lack the majority of
military helicopter units which are required, and some
ground transportation units. The Council must be
aware that, should offers for those critical capabilities
not be forthcoming, additional troops will not be a
sufficient substitute. Darfur is a vast area, and we must
have the ability to quickly move troops to strategic
points. The Secretariat will continue to pursue all
avenues to generate those assets, and will consider all
credible possibilities.

The continued hostilities in Darfur serve as a stark
reminder that some parties to the conflict are still not
prepared to lay down their weapons and commit to the
path of dialogue. In addition to prolonging the suffering
of millions of civilians in the region and complicating
the peace process, continued hostilities will have very
negative consequences for the deployment of UNAMID
and will distract the mission from implementing its
mandate. In that regard, the Council must be prepared
for the eventuality that UNAMID may be forced to
operate in an environment of continued hostilities,
which could significantly complicate our collective

efforts to support the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1769 (2007) and a future peace
agreement in Darfur.

