Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome Germany's initiative in convening today's
meeting. Ithank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zerrougui, Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
and UNICEF Executive Director Anthony Lake for
their respective briefings. I also listened carefully to
the statement made by Mr. Tolbert.

China attaches great importance to the issue of
the protection of children in armed conflict. China
condemns violations against children in situations of
armed conflict and rejects the recruitment and use of
child soldiers. China supports the continued efforts
of various United Nations agencies to promote the
protection children in armed conflict, in accordance
with their mandates and bringing into full play their
respective expertise and strengths. In that connection I
would like to emphasize the following four points.

First, in accordance with the provisions of the
United Nations Charter and the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council, the Council should address the
issue of the protection children in armed conflict as a
priority. The protection of children is an integral part
of its overall efforts to prevent and settle conflicts. The
problems and the root causes of the abuse of children
in conflict must be addressed, by tackling the root
causes of conflict and increasing preventive diplomacy.
The Security Council should encourage and support
the peaceful settlement of disputes by such means as
good offices, mediation and negotiation. Only actions
to prevent and reduce armed conflicts and to promote
post-conflict reconstruction, including comprehensive
measures to ensure the reintegration of children into
society, will help create a favourable social and security
environment.

Secondly, Security Council resolutions on the
protection children in armed conflict must be strictly
implemented. All parties to a conflict have the
obligation to respect and protect the rights of children.
An objective andjust approach should be adopted on the
question of the protection of children, so as to prevent
the politicization of the issue and the application of
different standards for different conflict situations.
Arbitrary interpretation of Security Council mandates
and actions, beyond the authorization of the Council,
will be nothing but detrimental to the common efforts
of the international community to protect children.

Thirdly, countries in armed conflict bear the
primary responsibility to protect their children. The
sovereignty of countries in conflict should be respected.
The key to the implementation of relevant resolutions
and the effective implementation of various initiatives to
protect children lies in support, cooperation and action
on the part of the countries concerned. Strengthening
capacities of countries in armed conflict should receive
sufficient attention. Sanctions should remain as the last
resort available to the Council to address situations that
pose a threat to international peace and security. China
has always advocated caution in adopting sanction
measures.

Fourthly, the Secretary-General's report on the
question of children and armed conflict (S/2012/261)
sets out important principles for actions by the Council.
Safeguarding the authority of the report will facilitate
the implementation of Council resolutions and
strengthen cooperation among Member States on the
issue. In drafting such reports attention should be paid
to communication with the Governments concerned and
the information provided by the countries concerned.
In considering the Secretary-General's reports, the
Security Council should listen fully to the opinions
of all parties and in particular those of the parties
concerned.

