The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Angola and Portugal in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Coelho Da Cruz
(Angola) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Monteiro
(Portugal) took the seat reserved for him at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General (S/ 1999/49) of 17 January 1999 on
the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA).

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1999/521, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Canada, Portugal, the Russian
Federation and the United States of America.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to documents S/1999/147 and S/1999/509,
which contain the text of letters dated 12 February 1999
and 4 May 1999, respectively, from the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 864 (1993) concerning the
situation in Angola addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to vote on the draft resolution (S/ 1999/521) before
it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Malaysia, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Slovenia, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America


The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1237 (1999).

I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.


