Mr. Amil (Pakistan): I would first like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
Council's presidency and to wish you success in your
work.

We welcome the opportunity to participate in this
debate on United Nations peacekeeping operations, the
third in a series of important discussions that the
Council has held since January, in addition to the
meetings of the Council's Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, to which the Pakistan
delegation has also contributed. It is right that the
Council devotes time and attention to this dialogue and
interaction aimed at making peacekeeping work better.
After all, peacekeeping is today the flagship activity of
the United Nations and one of the key instruments in
the hands of the Council to carry out its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

The challenges of effective planning and
management of peacekeeping operations are quite well
known to the policymakers and practitioners. There
also seems to be a fairly good idea of the kind of
responses and actions, backed with adequate
mechanisms, capacity and resources, that are required
to address those challenges. What is generally lacking
is the implementation part. And it is here that this
process, and the draft presidential statement that is
before the Council, could add value.

Let me say that implementation will become
easier if the relevant actors and stakeholders are
operating, not in a piecemeal or fragmented manner,
but with unity of purpose and a common strategic
vision of peacekeeping. To ensure continued success, it
is essential to preserve the identity of United Nations
peacekeeping. What gives strength to the strategic
vision is the strict observance of the Charter and the
basic principles of United Nations peacekeeping, as
also stressed by the representative of Morocco on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, whose statement
my delegation fully supports.

Implementation will also be enhanced if the
mandates for peacekeeping operations are clear,
credible and achievable, and if they are matched by
appropriate resources. We are glad that the Council is
committed to doing just that. Realities on the ground,
not political expediencies, should guide the Council's
decisions. Maintenance of international peace and
security should be the objective and the main
benchmark. When lives are at risk, that objective, not
cost considerations, should drive peacekeeping.
Overstretch of resources also results in implementation
lag and overstretch of a mission's duration, which
ultimately increases costs.

Effective implementation also requires more
meaningful and tangible partnership with the troop-
contributing countries (TCCs), and we hope to see that
happen as a result of this exercise. This partnership
means not only enhanced dialogue and consultation but
also adequate representation of the major TCCs at the
leadership level in the field and, particularly, at
Headquarters. That is the best way of ensuring
coherence between those who design mandates and
those who implement them. We would have liked to
see this aspect properly reflected in the presidential
statement.

Collective burden-sharing requires greater
participation by Member States in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. I believe we should seriously
pursue the two-way process of broadening the
contributors' base with more developed countries and
broadening the decision makers' base with more
developing countries. Everyone should be fully in the
loop. Without that, predictable capacities and credible
actions cannot be ensured. Some cannot just
monopolize the design, management, review and
monitoring role, while the others are consigned to the
implementation role. If we share the strategic vision of
United Nations peacekeeping, we should also be
willing to share the burden for its implementation. And
we should be able to better explain why some of us,
who have the capacity, are not willing to participate in
United Nations peacekeeping operations but are there
to advise how the job should be done.

It is understandable that the Council reviews
certain aspects of peacekeeping and opens up to other
stakeholders with regard to its decision-making
processes. That also makes sense in the context of
improvement of the Council's working methods.
However, such reviews cannot be Council-centric. The
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations has the
mandate for the comprehensive review of the whole
question of peacekeeping operations and is the right
forum with the right expertise for that purpose. It must
be fully utilized. More attention needs to be given to
core issues, including the surge in demand and rapid
deployment.

The Council, for its part, should do what it can do
best, that is, to evolve larger political consensus in
support of peacekeeping, to promote political processes
and to pursue comprehensive approaches for conflict
prevention and resolution. It should accord priority to
resolving inter-State conflicts alongside intra-State

situations - which, by the way, consume most of the
peacekeeping resources at present. And for the latter,
there should be a fuller interface of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities through early engagement of
the Peacebuilding Commission when the peacekeepers
are on ground.

Lastly, for better implementation, we require
continuity and coherence in the various reform
proposals and other processes currently under way. As
the leading troop contributor, Pakistan will carefully
consider the recommendations of this debate and the
Secretariat's non-paper entitled "A New Partnership
Agenda: Charting a New Horizon for United Nations
Peacekeeping", on which a fuller discussion may be
desirable in the context of the wider reform process.

Let me conclude by reaffirming Pakistan's
continued support and strong commitment to the
success of our collective peacekeeping efforts in the
interest of world peace and security.

