Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to wish you,
Mr. President, and your team every success in presiding
over the Security Council. You can count on our full
support. Iwould also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Francois Lounceny Fall for
his briefing and substantial work, as reflected in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2019/430).

The work of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA) and its biannual reports
are of an undeniable value because of their regional
and thematic focus. The Council is regularly informed
about the region or some of its member countries, but
our biannual debates, such as today's, allow us to better
understand the major developments and trends affecting
the region as a whole, be it in terms of human rights
or the humanitarian situation, the growing problem of
transhumance management or the scourge of the illegal
exploitation of natural resources.

The report also shows the extent to which certain
security challenges and threats, because of their cross-
border nature, make regional analysis not only desirable
but also necessary. Issues initially perceived as local or
national often require regional or subregional solutions,
either to prevent and deal with armed groups, such as
the Lord's Resistance Army or Boko Haram, which
continue to operate in some countries in the region, or
to consolidate and safeguard early gains, such as the
recent Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic.

Another issue that needs to be addressed is the
situation in Cameroon. We share the Secretary-
General's concerns regarding the humanitarian,
security and human rights situation, whose negative
impact on the region is well known. We also endorse
the solutions recommended in the report. Dialogue
must prevail, humanitarian access must be guaranteed
and international humanitarian law must be respected
by all parties to the conflict. Given the comprehensive
nature of the crisis, we all must respond to it at the level
of the subregion, the region and the United Nations, as
well as at the level of Member States and humanitarian,
faith-based and civil society actors.

The United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa is a key instrument for conflict prevention and
early warning. That function guides the good offices of
the Special Representative. In that regard, the Office
supports inclusive, transparent and credible elections
as essential factors for regional stability.

In a few weeks' time, the Council will discuss a
strategic review of UNOCA. The challenge will be
to maximize the role of the Office in prevention, as I
mentioned, while minimizing overlap with other United
Nations activities in the region. We see that strategic
review as a unique opportunity for the United Nations
and the Council to deepen our means of action in early
warning and response mechanisms.

