At the outset, allow me to express my gratitude to the Security Council for allowing me to address it and to share my views on the situation in Mali and within the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). I have been Force Commander of MINUSMA for almost two years, and I am proud of what the Mission has accomplished during my time there. The Secretary-General's report on the situation in Mali (S/2020/476) for the period up to 2 June has just been issued. It should be clear that many challenges prevail. However, there are also several positive achievements in the area of security. The deployment of the reconstituted army, with soldiers integrated from the compliant armed groups into the Malian Defence and Security Forces, represents a vital step towards State representation in northern Mali and the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The first echelon, comprising a core of three battalions and one company, has been deployed. In Gao and Timbuktu, MINUSMA handed over the so-called Operational Coordination Mechanism sites to the Malian armed forces, and the reconstituted units are engaged in patrolling and basic security operations. However, the symbolically important deployment of the last element to Kidal was halted earlier due to disagreements. With the ongoing negotiations led by MINUSMA in the Technical Commission on Security, we are ready to escort this unit to Kidal, although no decision has yet been taken. The continued disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process is scheduled to restart on 5 June following an agreement at a meeting of the Technical Commission last week. This agreement now allows for postings of compliant armed groups, including both factions of the Platform coalition, and for the implementation of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic measures at the Operational Coordination Mechanism sites. On 17 May a company-sized unit of the Malian armed forces redeployed to Labezanga. This was a major milestone in providing security to the local population and re-establishing State authority in the tri-border area. The redeployment has significant symbolic value, as that was one of the three camps from which the Malian armed forces withdrew late last year. Since then, MINUSMA has been providing security in the area. Within a Mission-wide effort, our main effort is devoted to the protection of civilians. The force has responded to several of the attacks, as well as to threat warnings, by sending ground quick-reaction forces and armed and reconnaissance helicopters and, while not preventing all casualties, it has likely prevented further carnage. Extensive analysis shows a clear pattern - violence is reduced in areas where we conduct at least bimonthly patrols. However, due to the distances, difficult terrain and the number of attacks, it is evident that the current posture and configuration are not fit for purpose. Concerning the COVID-19 situation, MINUSMA has been in close coordination with the Government of Mali to provide support and ensure conformity with its regulations. We realize the importance of maintaining health and security during this pandemic, not only for the benefit of the Mission's peacekeepers but also for MINUSMA's reputation as an entity that assists, and in no way harms, the population. MINUSMA's leadership is dedicated to adopting the appropriate countermeasures during this time, and both the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and I have personally issued guidance to unit commanders to increase their efforts to counter the effects and spread of COVID-19. The sectors are diligently working to implement these measures throughout their units. The force has put in place a variety of preventive measures to stop the spread of the virus, such as enforcing a strict quarantine policy, strict prioritizations of air operations and specific instructions for patrols to limit interactions with the population. Notwithstanding these measures, I have made it clear that this is not the time for the force to take a step back. While acting prudently and mitigating risks, we will continue to strive to fulfil our mandate. The force will continue its operations, albeit on a more limited scale. We will continue to focus on the core priorities of the mandate and, at the same time, set conditions for adaptation. The adaptation is crucial, and it has already started. It is a whole-of-mission undertaking, involving all pillars, which is essential for the Mission to adapt not only to its current mandate and the evolving situation in Mali, but also to our efforts to enhance performance. To that end, the Special Representative of the Secretary- General describes the force adaptation as the locomotive for change. In order to adapt, the focus is on finding a proper balance among ends, ways and means. The ends, or objectives, are the mandate provided by the Security Council, including its two strategic priorities. For its ways, or how we operate, the force continues to adapt to a proactive posture, characterized by mobility, flexibility and agility. Infantry units are continuously deployed and present at key areas by employing temporary operating bases. Units typically conduct operations for a month before returning to their camp. Also, we conduct temporary reinforcements through its force projection operations by utilizing helicopters to quickly and decisively transport specialized manoeuvre forces to remote locations where the Malian armed forces and the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel are camped, thereby reassuring them and providing protection to the local populace. We are building on these operations and are currently conducting Operation Mongoose, where the force employs utility helicopters to insert a special forces unit in the centre to build confidence and enhance security. These operations must have the means, or capabilities, for their proper execution, such as aircraft and specialized units. The recent force generation conference was a milestone, and I wish to express my gratitude to the troop-contributing countries for the pledges. However, to fully realize the adaptation concept, MINUSMA still requires additional utility and armed helicopter units. A successful adaptation requires the commitment of all stakeholders to maintaining the scope and pace of the implementation. To that end, it is essential that the Mission receive the resources required to allow infrastructural changes and additional air operations. In line with A4P, procedures for casualty evacuation (CASEVAC), intelligence-sharing and boards of inquiry have been streamlined and authorities delegated. The mindset of our peacekeepers must also continue to adapt. We must be self-confident and proactive and respond immediately and robustly, anywhere. The force is not, and will never be, a counter-terrorism unit. However, we will be able to protect civilians immediately and decisively, regardless of who the perpetrator is. The adaptation provides a two-tier approach that can both continue the day- to-day activities and the more traditional peacekeeping, while also being able to rapidly deploy to protect the population and repel any violence in a resolute manner by employing a mobile task force. The mobile task force will comprise intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance air assets, long-range patrol units, special forces, rotary-wing capabilities, air-mobile infantry units and quick-reaction force units, distributed across all four sectors, with the ability to quickly assemble these capabilities to form an ad hoc task group. An important part of being a Force Commander is the responsibility for the safety of my peacekeepers. We are continuously being targeted and attacked, primarily by improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and indirect fire. It is evident that we must make every effort to limit both the number of attacks against peacekeepers and their effects. We are the most vulnerable in and around camps and during logistical convoys. The common denominator is predictability. The aggressor can benefit from the element of surprise, as the time and location of the attacks can be prepared in detail. Even though we marked the end of this past month with the International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers, we sadly lost six of our fellow peacekeepers last month. Most recently, two of our peacekeepers succumbed to the effects of COVID-19. Earlier in May, a scorpion stung a peacekeeper, causing his death. In addition, a MINUSMA patrol was attacked by IEDs, resulting in three peacekeepers killed in action and four wounded in action. Despite the recent attacks that MINUSMA has regrettably experienced, the Mission has made a great deal of improvement in the area of providing its peacekeepers with safety and security. More proactive patrolling, including night patrols and air operations around the camps, as well as support operations to combat convoy missions, have been implemented. To further address our weaknesses, we have improved camp infrastructure and maintenance of equipment - armoured personnel carriers and mine-protected vehicles - and enhanced the integration of force multipliers, such as explosive ordnance disposal, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance and counter-rocket, artillery and mortar systems. So far this year, there have been far fewer peacekeeper fatalities as a result of hostile attacks than last year. Currently, we are focusing on improving our counter-IED (CIED) capability. Later this month, we are introducing a new concept called the convoy CIED toolbox, comprised of methods of improved decision cycles, methods, equipment and training. In addition, sufficient CASEVAC coverage remains a key factor for operations. In just the past two months, MINUSMA has executed 12 CASEVAC missions, using air assets, of which half were in support of the Malian armed forces. Despite the casualties, I have great confidence in the steps we are taking and the goals we seek to achieve, and I am also grateful for the Security Council's continuous support in this endeavour. Let me also reassure the Council of our determination to continue our efforts. When I speak to commanders and colleagues of fallen peacekeepers, they unequivocally show determination to carry on and fulfil the mission. In the dire situation in which we find ourselves, I have recently issued my guidance and priorities for the coming months. On account of the security situation and the mission with which we have been entrusted, we must relentlessly strive for the achievement of our mandate. We continue operations, while adhering to the Mission's COVID-19 preventive measures. Our main efforts are to implement the peace agreement, protect civilians in endangered areas and population centres, enabling partners to improve the security situation, and augment our posture so as to meet the longer-term objectives, but, at the same time, retain flexibility to respond to contingencies in the near term.
