Mr. Mukerji (India): Thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing today's debate. We thank today's briefers for
their comprehensive briefings on this important topic.
We very much appreciate your circulating a very useful
concept note (S/2015/678) in that context.

The situation in the Middle East region continues to
remain fragile and unpredictable, with unprecedented
changes in several countries in the region. The ongoing
conflict in Syria, the buildup of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and new flash points, such
as in Yemen, are examples of that. Besides having
implications for peace and stability, those conflicts also
impose serious economic costs for the region and the
whole world, which will have a major impact on the
prospects for implementing the development objectives
ongenda 2030, which our leaders unanimously adopted
just last week (see General Assembly resolution 70/1).

The concept note correctly emphasizes the need
for politically negotiated solutions to conflicts. It
clearly delineates three important measures that all
of us in the international community should take in
order to counter terrorism, overcome interreligious and
sectarian discord, and extend humanitarian assistance.
All conflicts result in the uprooting of the lives and
aspirations of ordinary people, and we therefore expect
the Council to invest more in political efforts to resolve
them.

We are deeply concerned at the ongoing violence in
Syria and the loss of human lives. India has consistently
called for a comprehensive and peaceful resolution of
the crisis by bringing all parties to the conflict to the
negotiating table. It has to be a Syrian-led process,
taking into account the legitimate aspirations of the
people of Syria. There can be no military solution. We
welcome all initiatives in that direction, including the
efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy for Syria,
Staffan de Mistura, for restarting the political talks.

Our position on the Middle-East Peace Process is
also very clear. India supports a negotiated solution
resulting in a sovereign, independent, viable and united
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living within secure and recognized borders, side by
side and at peace with Israel, as endorsed in the Quartet
Road Map and relevant Security Council resolutions.
India has always played a proactive role in garnering
support for the Palestinian cause in multilateral forums.
We supported the recent vote in the General Assembly
on raising the flags of Palestine today (General Assembly resolution 69/320).

We are deeply alarmed at the ongoing Violence
and intensified militia warfare in Libya. We call for
continued political negotiations. The situation in Iraq is
also a matter of concern for the entire comity of nations.
We are particularly concerned at the spillover effects of
the instability in Iraq resulting from increased terrorist
activities in the region. We strongly support the Iraqi
people and Government in their efforts to overcome
the crisis, uphold national sovereignty and preserve
territorial integrity.

India remains deeply concerned about the
worsening political and security situation in Yemen.
We have been urging all concerned parties in Yemen to
amicably resolve their differences, and we hope that the

United Nations mediation efforts will assist the people
of Yemen in finding a consensus-based solution.

It is our View that the prerogative of national
authorities to resolve internal crises should be
respected as a cardinal principle. We are convinced that
the interventionist trend, using humanitarian concerns
as a pretext, runs the danger of exacerbating conflict
between and within countries.

India is committed to combating terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations. India believes in a
comprehensive approach to countering the threat posed
by ISIL and other terrorist groups and individuals.
The Council should be more transparent and
uncompromising when considering and adopting its
decisions on countering terrorism. India stands ready
to extend full cooperation to the Council in countering
terrorism.

The concept note asks what needs to be done to
see that the Council's resolutions are implemented. The
ineffectiveness ofthe Council is rooted in the nature and
working procedures of this body. We must implement
the mandate of our leaders, given ten years ago, for
early reforms of the Council to make it more effective
and representative. That would impact not only the
conventional crises the Council is called upon to resolve,
but even more so the new and emerging Challenges to
international peace and security, especially those posed
by terrorism. We therefore hope that this debate will
endorse action by the United Nations during its ongoing
seventieth anniversary session to conclude negotiations
on reforming the Council, so that the Council can play
an important role in ensuring a strongly supportive
international environment for our collective efforts
to eradicate poverty within a generation while
implementing Agenda 2030.

