Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We, too, wish to congratulate the French
delegation on the assumption of its presidential
functions.

The Russian Federation voted in favour ofresolution
2206 (2015), guided by the importance of supporting the
Council's unity in the interest of settling the situation in
South Sudan. However, we continue to feel that today's
Security Council decision was hasty. No one should
have any illusion that we unconditionally support the
implementation of a sanctions regime against South
Sudan. Our principled position is well known. We have
never felt and do not feel that sanctions are an effective
means for achieving a political settlement to a conflict.
Today, as progress has been made in the negotiations
between the warring sides, South Sudan continues to
need understanding and unified support rather than
pressure and threats, which could lead to the opposite
result.

Moreover, we thinkthat the practical implementation
of the measures planned for by the sanctions regime
would be counter-productive, at least so long as there is
still hope to resolve the conflict through negotiations.
Backing protagonists into a corner will not achieve
anything. Restrictions can lead only to a hardening
of the positions and further complicate the search for
mutually acceptable solutions. In further considering
the South Sudan dossier, we will have to refrain from
rash decisions, especially because negotiations between
the South Sudanese sides in Addis Ababa are ongoing,
and any comprehensive measure taken by the Security
Council will have to take into account how the truce
plan, agreed upon with the African Union at the end of
January, is being implemented.

In addition, the Council's decision to implement
sanctions is being taken without a clear and
unambiguous signal of support from key African
players, first and foremost the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the African
Union. This breaks with the practice whereby primacy
in such matters is given to Africans themselves, as was
the case with Guinea Bissau and the Central African
Republic. In that regard, we recall that it has been
clearly stated in a number of previous Security Council
resolutions on South Sudan that possible sanctions
measures against that country had to be considered by
the Council in consultations with interested partners,
including IGAD and the African Union.

Given the lack of unified support for sanctions
against South Sudan by the African capitals, including
those of South Sudan's neighbours, the implementation
of a Council sanctions regime might be difficult,
which could have a negative impact on the Council's
credibility. The primary responsibility for such a
possible negative scenario would lie with those who
pushed for the adoption of today's resolution in spite of
our warnings.

