Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): We
strongly condemn the attacks by the Israeli occupation
forces on the sites and personnel of the United Nations
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. We particularly condemn the killing,
including the killing of one international civil servant,
Mr. Iain Hook, in the Jenin refugee camp. Mr. Hook
was responsible for reconstructing the refugee camp of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). We
also condemn the destruction, particularly the World
Food Programme warehouse in Beit Lahiya.

These acts clearly constitute war crimes under
international humanitarian law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention and its Additional Protocol I. The
international community should therefore undertake
necessary measures against those who perpetrated these
acts and should work to have them brought to justice.

The Council has already stated in a presidential
statement the need to protect civilians in times of war.
We express our deep concern with the fact that the
Sharon-Netanyahu Government did not take any
measures to put an end to the grave violations and
gross infractions by the Israeli occupation authorities,
including acts against United Nations and other
humanitarian organizations. Thus the Israeli
Government is directly responsible for these acts.

Furthermore, it has become clear that the attacks
against United Nations headquarters and against United
Nations personnel constitute a systematic approach and
a type of conduct that characterizes the behaviour of
the Israeli occupying forces. It reflects the Israeli
defiance, as the occupying force, of international law,
international humanitarian law, as well as all
international norms. Israel, regrettably, depends on the
automatic protection bestowed upon it by a permanent
member of the Security Council.

The Arab Group submitted a draft resolution that
deals with the events and aims at putting an end to the
acts by the Israeli occupying force, by stressing the
protection provided by international humanitarian law
to the sites, headquarters and personnel of the United
Nations and other humanitarian organizations. No one
would have thought that such a draft resolution would
face difficulties. No one would have thought it could
have been voted down or vetoed, although we note that
the United States is biased towards Israel. It seems that
this bias knows no limit, even if it is at the expense of
international humanitarian law and at the expense of
the lives of those who work in the humanitarian field
and the lives of the Palestinian people in their entirety.

If the cause of the difficulties that the draft
resolution - which was not adopted - faced was the
reference to the Fourth Geneva Convention, or if the
difficulties were due to the fact that Israel was
mentioned as an occupying Power, meaning that there
is an occupation, if either was the reason for the
difficulties of the draft resolution then I say there is yet
another major obstacle. If this is true it would mean
that the United States of America is about to cause a
historic new disaster to be inflicted on the Palestinian
people and on the region by opting to take positions
that would only lead to support of the extreme Israeli
right that aims at eroding the nature of the occupied
territories. Israel would therefore be an occupying
Power that would guarantee the expansionist scheme,
the continuation of settler colonialism and the building
of greater Israel. If this is true it would mean an end to
attempts to achieve peace in the Middle East on the
basis of the rule of the two States with the 1967
borders. Furthermore, this would be an end to the peace
process.

The Palestinian people and the Palestinian
leadership will not accept, neither today nor in the
future, bargaining over our land and over the nature of
these lands, as lands under occupation. We will not
accept to put the rights of the Palestinian civilians
under the Fourth Geneva Convention on the bargaining
table. I hope that what I have already said is not true. I
truly hope this will be the case. Otherwise, God help us
all for the disasters that are yet to come to the Middle
East region.

What Israel does against the United Nations, its
staff and against the international humanitarian
organizations including ambulances and even hospitals,
is only part and parcel of the criminal acts perpetrated
against the Palestinian people by Israel. Frankly, I just
jotted down some examples of such criminal acts. One
could simply refer to the letters that your august
Council receives on this subject, given the lateness of
the hour.

I would only say that this tragedy should come to
an end, but for this tragedy to end, the international
community should play its role, and the Security
Council should play its natural role and assume its
responsibilities under the United Nations Charter. This
Council should not stop at putting an end to Israeli
criminal acts - Israel being the occupying Power -
but should aim at setting a clear definition of the basis
of a building block for peace, two states based upon the
1967 borders, with Jerusalem as the capital of the two
States, with a fair solution to the problem of the
Palestinian refugees. This way we will be able to arrive
at a peaceful solution, and the roadmap, any roadmap,
will succeed, including the roadmap that was deferred
today and which probably will not be confirmed before
Mr. Sharon is able to add everything he wants to it.

We are about to celebrate Christmas, a New Year,
the holiday seasons. However, our people, the
Palestinian people will not be able to celebrate the
holidays. Not even the Israeli people can joyfully
celebrate the holidays. Suffice it to mention the
presence of the occupying forces, the occupying tanks,
not merely in Bethlehem but in the Nativity Square
itself, the birthplace of Jesus Christ in the manger. Let
us just recall that President Arafat has been under siege
for over a year. He was prevented from going to
Bethlehem to celebrate the holidays with the believers,
the faithful Christians and Muslims. However, this is
the Sharon-Netanyahu Israel. Perhaps we see
something different. Perhaps we will see a different
Israel next year.

I wish you all a joyous holiday season.

