Mr. De Mistura: You are quite right,
Mr. President. It is an emotional moment for me, so
please forgive me if I say a few more words than I
would normally, in view of the fact that it is my last
opportunity to address the Security Council in my
current capacity as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq.

Eighteen months after starting my fourth
assignment in Iraq and my sixteenth United Nations
mission in the field, I am departing, somewhat proud of
what that Mission has achieved in a short period of
time and of our joint success with the Iraqis in
overcoming what sometimes have appeared to be
difficult challenges. Together we have helped to turn
the page on how the Iraqis View the United Nations and
the international community. Together, we have
contributed to the evolution of Iraq, which can soon
assume a new standing among the world community as
an increasingly stable and sovereign nation.

Every so often the United Nations is given, if
lucky, the chance and the right mandate, political
support and resources to deliver. Every so often the
09-37304

timing, the team, the mission objective and the drive
come together to make it work. I, for one, feel
privileged to have been associated with the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) during
two of its most critical and formative years and to have
seen remarkable and unforeseen shifts in the political
and humanitarian landscape in Iraq.

Three dynamics have shaped the course of our
action in Iraq during that period. First, I called for an
expanded mandate with a stronger new resolution,
which came from the members the Security Council.

Secondly, I called for an expanded presence, and
it has been provided with the help of the Iraqi
authorities and all Security Council members.

Thirdly, I called for a new approach, with a
reinforced team as well as a clear directive from the
Secretary-General to be proactive and results-oriented.
That was the first message the Secretary-General gave
me when I took up my assignment. The result is that
we have been proactive in Iraq, particularly in view of
the situation. Our approach has been matched by an
Iraqi Government and a Prime Minister open to
increased United Nations engagement, in consultation
with the Iraqi authorities, and an international
community that is changing its outlook towards Iraq
and even letting the Organization assume, at some
moments and in some areas, a centre-stage role.

More than ever before, the international
community has been working towards common
objectives in Iraq. That has made our lives and our
work much easier. Resolution 1770 (2007) set
parameters broad enough to give us considerable
scope. One of the lessons we learned is that we need a
very strong, broad resolution. The Secretary-General
set the tone, giving us enough flexibility to act on the
ground; the international community and the members
Security Council in particular provided the support for
an enlarged United Nations role; and the Iraqis set the
agenda.

In seeking to combine strategic thinking and
operational solutions, we chose, with the Council's
blessing, time-sensitive entry points in areas that were
gaining momentum. We could not do everything at the
same time, in spite of the broad scope given us by the
Security Council. We chose those areas in which the
United Nations could make a difference, and not just a
point, and be allowed to act as an honest broker
whenever possible. We sought to be selective and
3
incremental in identifying quick wins to build our
credibility, on behalf of the international community,
by trying to demonstrate that we can deliver and by
proving that we can be creative and reliable in the use
of our main asset - international legitimacy.

UNAMI's strategic priorities were determined,
first, by the need for immediate reaction to emergency
situations, such as returnees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs); and secondly, by anticipation of
impending deadlines that, if not met, could potentially
cause friction. A classic example was the referendum
over Kirkuk and the debate of the timeliness of holding
provincial elections. Our priorities also arose from the
International Compact with Iraq, which has been led
very actively and effectively by Ambassador Gambari,
and from the regional dialogue, human rights and
constitutional support issues.

Together, I believe, we have often turned
challenges and crises into opportunities, thanks to the
energy and stamina of the Iraqis. In an unusual
combination for any integrated mission in such an
operationally challenging environment, UNAMI has at
the same time been acting in emergency mode, with its
political arm working mainly on conflict prevention -
on the Arab-Kurdish file, for instance - while the rest
of the Mission was already working an post-conflict
issues and peacebuilding.

The past two years have seen the Iraqis
progressively fatigued by civil strife, slowly shedding
sectarian divisions, seeking to reconcile after the
horrible and terrible fallout from Samarra, bringing
their differences into the legislative arena, and turning
up in the polls to declare their preference for the
country's return to normality. The Government and the
Prime Minister have increasingly exercised their
sovereignty, administering a State that enjoys broad
support, as shown in the recent provincial elections.
The Iraqi State is consistently building credible and
independent institutions. The cabinet is functioning,
Parliament is becoming increasingly reliable with a
very active new Speaker, the Independent High
Electoral Commission has gained experience in several
elections and will conduct others in the future, and the
Iraqi Security Forces are increasingly capable.

I need not remind the Permanent Representative
of Iraq, who is an example to us all, that the Iraqi
people have shown remarkable resilience. Iraqis are
now more than ever able to determine the course of
events in their own country, in spite of spikes of
violent attacks against innocent civilians, which have
recently been on the rise. These should be Viewed as
attempts by isolated elements or groups to produce a
feeling of insecurity, but in my modest opinion they are
not capable of destabilizing the country.

Now more than ever, Iraqis should be helped to
focus on forging a political consensus. They are agreed
that they should keep political dialogue open. The
United Nations initiatives will continue to assist Iraq in
securing those political advances and making sustainable
security and socio-economic gains.

Our first initiative arose in the context of
subsiding sectarian violence, when UNAMI acted
promptly to prevent a new conflict between Arabs and
Kurds, as will be recalled, and to contribute to national
reconciliation by placing the highly controversial issue
of a referendum in Kirkuk in the framework of a
political process rather than as a hostile referendum.
We proposed technical assistance in setting up the
process, and a potential crisis over the impending
expiration of the constitutional article was averted. But
tensions have continued to exist between the two sides.

That is why UNAMI has kept the door of
dialogue open and indicated possible options. It is
indeed encouraging that the parties have now agreed to
come to the table to commence discussions on a future
process based on the elements provided by UNAMI's
analyses of the disputed areas, set out in a 502-page
document. A high-level task force, which was
established as a follow-up and brought together
Government and Kurdistan regional representatives,
has been launched under United Nations auspices. I am
glad to report that it met on 10 and 16 June. The time is
ripe, and these beginnings of a high-level dialogue
represent a critical step in the right direction. I believe
that UNAMI will continue to contribute to that end.

As to the second initiative, 2009 has been a defining
period as Iraq looks to possible future electoral events, a
census and a series of referendums. Elections have been
the flagship programme of the Mission. With the
provincial elections in January 2009 - notable for their
remarkable absence of violence and the credibility of the
process - UNAMI has worked with Iraqis to produce
four major electoral events since 2005, and will continue
to do so in the upcoming elections.

The United Nations will continue to provide
support for capacity-building in these areas. We shall
09-37304
remain diligent in not forcing premature or ill-prepared
events. There are three basic requirements for
referendums and elections: appropriate and complete
legal framework, sufficient funding, and an operational
election commission with the capacity to conduct the
event.

The third initiative was launched when the United
Nations stood poised early to assist with the voluntary
returns of refugees and IDPs, which remains a major
priority for us. The exact number of internally
displaced Iraqis is still not fully determined. Much is
also speculated about returns ahead of parliamentary
elections. To date, 70 per cent of all returns have come
not from abroad, but from within the same governorate
or from within Iraq. The hoped-for return of displaced
populations will depend largely on improved quality of
life, security and opportunities in Iraq. Security is only
one of the many drivers of return in Iraq.

IDPs and refugees are mostly a political rather
than a purely humanitarian challenge. As such, the
problem cannot be solved by large-scale humanitarian
funding directed purely to IDPs and refugees. Iraq is
not in a humanitarian crisis, but has pockets of dire
humanitarian need and displacement, which does not
necessarily or automatically equate with vulnerability.
There are many other vulnerable people in Iraq; that is
why economic support is important. Funding for the
displaced should therefore be packaged within broader
programmes to revitalize jobs and services in conflict-
affected communities. The United Nations, and in
particular the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, will work to ensure that
conditions are in place for voluntary, dignified and
sustainable returns, but should also make special
efforts on displacement-specific issues such as housing
and related legal protections.

As to regional and international partnerships, in
the context of its partnership and engagement with the
international community Iraq would like to shed what
it considers to be externally imposed obligations
related to its future. A new approach is required in the
regional environment.

While the ad hoc mechanism did not gain
sufficient momentum, it had its own purpose for a
period. After a while, however, it seems not to have
gained enough momentum. We have witnessed
constructive engagement and consistent improvement
in bilateral relations with some of Iraq's neighbours,
09-37304

and that occurred in the context of the regional
environment. A major shift has taken place in a very
constructive way in the strategic partnership between
Turkey, for instance, and Iraq, and other recent
examples we see include Syria's resuming diplomatic
relations and nominating an ambassador, as many
others have done. Jordan has found new common
ground on refugees and Iran has been indicating to us
that it is ready to discuss cross-border issues with Iraq,
including de-mining.

Additional facilitation is needed, however, to
further increase understanding and trust between Iraq
and its neighbours. I particularly wish to single out
Iraq's relations with Kuwait. I firmly believe we are at
a critical juncture, in this moment, to be able to
contribute to a significant improvement of the climate
of cooperation, taking into account the concerns of
both countries. With respect to outstanding Chapter VII
mandates, the Iraqi Government feels rightly that the
time to turn the page is long overdue. Kuwait, for its
part, also has rightful claims regarding its sovereignty
and territorial integrity. The Iraqi Government has
shown positive signs of increasing cooperation by
inviting, for instance, just in the past few days, a
Kuwaiti delegation to Iraq to pursue the issue of
missing Kuwaitis and by speeding up the deployment
of an Iraqi ambassador to Kuwait. We, for our part, as
UNAMI and as the Security Council, should now exert
every effort in building on the current momentum.
There are various creative options being floated that I
hope will be discussed and elaborated upon by the
Security Council in the near future in this regard.

What is next? The priorities are self-evident:
delivery of basic services; dialogue between the
Kurdistan Regional Government and the Government
of Iraq, leading to a defusing of tensions in Kirkuk and
other disputed areas; preparation for the next elections;
pre-positioning to assist refugees and internally
displaced persons, should they decide to return; the
reintroduction of certain elements into the economy -
for instance, helping the Awakening Councils, or
Al-Sahwa Councils, to reintegrate themselves more
totally into the economy; technical assistance to ensure
that a census is conducted in compliance with
international standards; tackling unemployment by
revitalizing the private sector; providing expertise in
ensuring the passage of a long-overdue hydrocarbon
law as an essential step to increasing oil production
5
and revenue; and helping Iraq to rebuild its agriculture
and diversify its heavily oil-dependent budget.

The key word, from the Iraqi point of view and
from the United Nations point of View, is capacity-
building. Iraq is rich in resources, in people and in
water. They need and they are asking for capacity-
building. Iraq, despite the fall of oil prices, is rich in
human resources and natural wealth. The Iraqi people
seek decent schools, hospitals and jobs, safe water and
reliable electricity. Provincial elections were run and
won on this platform, and this is likely again to be a
driving factor in future elections. We need to help the
Iraqi Government through capacity-building.

I am confident that, in its own national
development strategy, Iraq will lay out a clear and
inclusive vision for socio-economic revival. This step
is urgent, not just to tackle recent suffering but also to
undo the damage of nearly three decades of conflict
and sanctions.

Capacity-building is also critical in the area of
human rights and the rule of law. While reporting
human rights violations is important, and we will
continue to do so, the United Nations could contribute
more and plans to do more by developing new
mechanisms for human rights protection and
supporting those already in place. We stand ready, for
instance, to offer support to the establishment of a
human rights commission. At the same time, we plan to
provide more technical assistance projects aimed at
monitoring prisons, courts and detention centres.

As we move into this next phase, international
coordination will still be very important. I want
therefore to take this opportunity to thank sincerely all
the donors around this table and elsewhere who have
contributed to the International Reconstruction Fund
Facility for Iraq, which closes its own contributions in
one month.

UNAMI has, in Iraq, a team deeply dedicated to
achieving a more present, visible and mobile United
Nations, working alongside Iraq's Government. What
we have achieved, we have achieved as a team, thanks
to the support of the Secretary-General, the Iraqi
Government and members of the Security Council.
Here, allow me to thank my team in Iraq for their
personal sacrifices, drive, resolve, integrity and
exemplary commitment to work united under strenuous
circumstances. They are united, a whole country team,

with no separations, no differences and no competition.
I thank in particular my two excellent deputies.

My personal respect goes out to our national
staff, the Iraqi United Nations colleagues, who have
seen many authorities come and go, have been the
backbone of our presence over the years and have
worked tirelessly to restore and rebuild Iraqi
communities. At the same time, we constantly had the
feeling that the international community in Iraq was
not only behind us, but, as members have been proving
and showing all the time, beside us in fact each step of
the way, speaking in one voice and taking a united
approach to the Iraqis' needs. That has been one of the
strengths of the Mission.

I believe that we as a mission managed to build
our credibility on, first, our presence. We now have
many United Nations agencies, including the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
UNICEF, the World Health Organization, UN-Habitat,
the United Nations Office for Project Services, UNDP
and the World Food Programme, present in Baghdad.

Secondly, our credibility is built on our access,
our ability to talk to all sides, reach out to every
community throughout Iraq and nurture relationships at
the highest level of spiritual and political leadership.

Thirdly, we have our legitimacy, thanks to the
Security Council. We have facilitated solutions that
require mutual concessions by offering both credibility
and international legitimacy.

Fourthly, we have our expertise, what expertise
we have and when we can offer it, building up the
capabilities of national institutions.

In conclusion, the future looks moderately bright,
and there is growing hope for Iraq in the world and
inside Iraq. If the Iraqis can avoid or defuse
tensions - and they are doing so - and if they are
capable of seeing changes in their daily lives through
sustainable security gains, which are taking place,
through the delivery of basic services and through
more political inclusiveness - and we see movement
in that direction - all of these being realistic goals,
then Iraq will flourish.

This afternoon, a movie will be shown here in
this building, a film dedicated to a friend and colleague
of mine, Sergio Vieira de Mello. My colleagues in Iraq
and myself feel that the presentation of this report
coinciding with the fact that we will see this movie
today has a special relevance to us. I must say frankly
that, when, a year or maybe more ago, in the middle of
blistering heat, sandstorms, 20 rockets a day and,
oftentimes, a lack of movement in the environment, we
would ask ourselves "what on earth are we doing
here?" What helped us to keep going and move
forward was exactly that: seeing the resilience of our
Iraqi friends going forward. We wanted to prove that
all those who died in Iraq, for Iraq, including Sergio,
the many others from many other countries and many
Iraqis, did not die in vain.

