Mr. Seenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): The almost interminable conflict in Afghanistan
is once again a cause of outrage and concern for all of us.
The disillusionment and frustration that resound from time

 

to time in international forums and meetings have taken on
new meaning today. That is why my delegation would like
take this opportunity to state the following.

It is inconceivable that small armed bands have
plunged this country and the vast majority of its population
into an abject state of near-barbarism and that they
persecute the population for ethnic or religious reasons.

It is unacceptable for the intolerance of a faction to
have brought about the suffering of almost 2.5 million
refugees and a similar number of internally displaced
persons.

It is intolerable as well for the Taliban faction to
Violate the human rights of the population - in particular
the rights of women and girls - and that they attempt to
justify this with the argument of cultural and traditional
mores.

It is equally unacceptable for the work of international
humanitarian organizations to be thwarted, which condemns
the civilian population to greater suffering.

It is deeply alarming that there are still more than
10,000 undetonated anti-personnel mines, which place the
lives and safety of the majority of the population at great
risk.
It is also unacceptable that international illegal
narcotics trafficking is used and promoted to finance the
armed struggle and to bring suffering to the people, and
that the historical and cultural heritage of the Afghan
people is being destroyed to enrich small groups of
traffickers.

We are alarmed by that groups of extremists have
forced the innocent population to live in degrading
conditions and that, in this context, one fourth of the
children die before the age of five.

It is unforgivable for women and girls to be denied
access to minimal health and education services.

It is intolerable for fundamental principles of
international humanitarian law to be violated, that minimal
protection is not provided to civilians and non-combatants
and that people are forcibly displaced for ethnic or religious
reasons.

Furthermore, it is intolerable under any circumstances
for United Nations officials to be murdered in cold blood
and for the lives and security of United Nations staff and
the diplomatic and consular corps to be endangered.

It is alarming that neighbouring countries and
countries with influence on the parties are contributing to
the conflict rather than seeking a peaceful solution and
that there are clear signs of foreign military intervention
in the country, in conspicuous violation of that country's
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

It is unacceptable for the parties to refuse to
negotiate a peaceful resolution of the conflict and to
attempt to create delays or set conditions on these
negotiations. This situation, which is so clearly in
violation of the basic principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, would automatically call for the
application of Article 6 of the Charter if it were brought
about by a recognized Government.

Costa Rica will be fully prepared to consider the
necessary measures to encourage the parties to the Afghan
conflict, in particular the Taliban, to respect the minimum
standards of human rights and humanitarian international
law and to motivate them to find a peaceful resolution of
the conflict, as is set out in the draft resolution before us.

For all of these reasons, my delegation has co-
sponsored the draft resolution we are considering today
and will vote in favour of it. We share the international
community's justified distress and concern over the
situation prevailing in Afghanistan. We hope that once
and for all the Afghan factions will now be rational and
sensible and will pursue a civilized dialogue to settle the
conflict that is tearing Afghanistan apart.

