At the outset, I would like to thank Special Adviser Karim Khan for his report (see S/2020/1107) and, once again, enlightening briefing to the Security Council. I will address three points today: the need to bring justice to the victims of atrocious crimes during the reconstruction and reconciliation process in Iraq; the contribution of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD); and, lastly, the support for efforts to comply with United Nations policies and best practices and international law. First, Belgium commends Mr. Khan and the Team for the considerable progress made in the implementation of their mandate. Thanks in particular to the exchanges it has had with all segments of Iraqi society, the Investigation Team has broadened and diversified its avenues of investigation by ensuring an interest in the various communities that fell victim to Da'esh crimes - whether Christians, Sunnis, women or members of the burgeoning LGBTI community. Moreover, an increasing number of its investigative priorities have entered the phase of evidentiary consolidation and legal analysis. All of that, combined with its work to rigorously structure its investigative outputs to support prosecutions, will finally enable UNITAD to pave the way for numerous criminal proceedings to begin. In doing so, that transitional justice mechanism will contribute to the reconstruction and reconciliation among the various communities in Iraq. The fight against impunity for all the crimes committed there must indeed constitute an essential component of the process. The Iraqi authorities' strengthened cooperation with the Investigation Team is in that regard a very encouraging sign, which Belgium welcomes. Secondly, my country notes with satisfaction that the Investigation Team has strengthened its support for the national authorities of third States in response to their requests for assistance. That support is essential for two reasons. On the one hand, many procedures are under way in those countries, particularly in Europe. On the other hand, the resulting cooperation between the Iraqi judicial authorities and those of third countries will most certainly contribute in the longer term to the opening of specific cases in Iraq. That brings me to my third and last point. In accordance with resolution 2379 (2017), which established the Investigation Team, the Iraqi authorities must remain the primary beneficiary of the evidence gathered by UNITAD. To that end, Mr. Khan and the Team have developed several cooperation activities with Iraq. Belgium particularly commends the support of the Investigation Team for the legislative work aimed at enabling the prosecution of war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide, as well as the assistance provided to Iraqi investigative judges so that they can build case files to make it possible to initiate such prosecutions. My country also welcomes the continued collaboration with the Iraqi authorities to define modalities for the sharing of evidence, while taking into account United Nations policies and best practices, UNITAD's mandate and terms of reference and international law in general. That involves procedural safeguards, the protection of victims and witnesses and the non-application of the death penalty. Moreover, I also recall the importance that Belgium attaches to the prosecution of the perpetrators of the most serious crimes, regardless of their affiliation. In conclusion, I stress that, after ending its term on the Security Council, my country will remain fully committed to supporting UNITAD. Belgium will continue to support a mechanism that is essential for bringing justice to the victims of the most serious crimes committed in Iraq. W27
