Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
join others in vigorously condemning attacks such as
those that took place yesterday, especially the one
launched against the office of the International
Committee of the Red Cross. As the Secretary-General
rightly said, that attack was a crime against humanity. I
also associate myself with the condolences expressed
by the President and by others to the International
Committee of the Red Cross.

I would first like to thank Mr. Benon Sevan for
his briefing and for the written report distributed to
delegations. We also wish to pay tribute to all of his
colleagues in New York, Amman and Iraq, who have
spared no effort in preparing for the end of the
programme. Our shared goal is that the transition
process to end the oil-for-food programme be
successful, and that the programme's disappearance
from the stage not lead to an interruption of supplies,
humanitarian assistance or equipment essential to the
reconstruction of vital sectors in the country.

As the Secretary-General stated at the opening of
the Madrid Conference, the stakes are high. Over 60
per cent of the Iraqi people continue to depend upon
the programme directly for their survival. A successful
transition presupposes that a maximum number of
existing contracts will be chosen to meet the urgent
needs of the Iraqi people. Success will depend also
upon continuity in the execution of prioritized
contracts and upon the delivery of merchandise and
equipment after 21 November. All of that also
presupposes that, above and beyond reassuring
speeches about the efforts of the United Nations and
the Coalition Provisional Authority, concrete replies
must be provided without delay to outstanding
questions pertaining to how the period after 21
November will be organized.

In that regard, I fully agree with what
Ambassador Pleuger has proposed. There are, however,
five points that are of particular concern to us.

First, it is important that the selection of
prioritized contracts continue up until 21 November. I
would recall that, currently, only 81 per cent of
approved and financed contracts have been selected.
The programme is a tool, and it is in the common
interest that it be used as much as possible -
particularly within the current context, when the
private sector appears reluctant to become involved in
reconstruction, which itself is late in getting started.
That tool is all the more important because the
concerns about Iraq's capacity to absorb investment -
concerns expressed, inter alia, by the World Bank and
the United Nations Development Programme - are
increasingly proving to be justified.

Our main concern here has to do with
transparency. Non-priority contracts must not appear as
a mere residual category at the bottom of the list of
contracts selected as priority contracts. Paragraph 16 (b)
of resolution 1483 (2003) refers to non-priority contracts
as contracts that may be determined to be of
questionable utility. Contracts that have not been
selected as priorities should therefore, in accordance
with resolution 1483 (2003), be subjected to careful
review and sound decision-making. Generally speaking,
we believe it essential for the list of contracts that have
not been retained because they have been deemed to be
of relatively low utility to be made public before 21
November. A clear statement setting out the reason for
non-selection of those contracts should also be made,
and suppliers should be contacted and informed.

Secondly, the process of renegotiating and
amending priority contracts prior to the transfer of
responsibilities from the United Nations to the
Authority is an essential component in ensuring the
effective execution of priority contracts after 21
November. The current pace must be maintained, and
we urge agencies to do their utmost to amend as many
contracts as possible by between 21 November, without
setting any artificial internal deadline prior to that date.
However, the current pace - and I would remind the
Council that 52 per cent of contracts have been
renegotiated - does not lead one to conclude that all
priority contracts will be renegotiated by 21 November,
a date on which there will likely be a backlog of
unamended contracts. It is essential to ensure
continuity in the process beyond 21 November;
otherwise those contracts cannot be executed, which
will entail a cost to the Iraqi people and its economy.

It is a matter of concern to us that the Coalition
Provisional Authority does not yet seem to have
provisions in place for the period after 21 November.
In that regard, decisions must be taken on an urgent
basis, and efforts must be made to inform suppliers. It
seems to us that in order to minimize breakdown and
uncertainty for suppliers and to ensure that the
Authority does not have to establish an entirely new
mechanism, there is a practical solution suitable for all:
with the agreement of the Authority and the relevant
Iraqi authorities, United Nations agencies could
continue the process for a few weeks more. Such an
arrangement would in no way constitute an extension
of the programme; it would be simply a technical
arrangement between the Coalition Provisional
Authority and the agencies that would not contradict
the terms of resolution 1483 (2003).

Thirdly, I would like to underscore the urgency of
immediately knowing how the contracts are to be
carried out after 21 November, with respect to the
delivery of goods, their authentication and payment to
suppliers. The continuity of deliveries in the weeks
immediately following 21 November would presuppose
that the suppliers have a minimum amount of visibility
at this time in order to be able to plan their deliveries
in Iraq. If the Coalition Provisional Authority does not
say today how this group of questions are to be dealt
with, it will become vulnerable to dysfunction and
breakdowns in the supply chain, which will have an
immediate impact on the Iraqi population.

The fourth point I wish to underscore concerns
the financing of contracts, which must be carried out
with the greatest transparency. We welcome the
statements made by the United Nations Treasury and
the United States delegation during the meetings of the
661 Committee, according to which the priority
contracts will continue to be paid after 21 November,
from the United Nations escrow account, on the basis
of current rigorous and transparent methods. The
corollary is, of course, that it is indispensable that the
funds covering the priority contracts be maintained in
the United Nations escrow account, whatever their
status in the amendment process and whatever the
status of their letters of credit. Non-discrimination
among suppliers must be the rule. All priority contract
holders must be paid in accordance with the same
procedures. Moreover, with respect to the transfer of
funds from the escrow account to the Development
Fund for Iraq, it seems to us to be normal that such
transfers be made only if there is sufficient
transparency with respect to the use of resources placed
in the Development Fund for Iraq. So far, that has not
been the case, which is a matter of concern, given, in
particular, the transfer last spring of $1 billion from the
escrow account to the Development Fund for Iraq.

We hope that the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board put in place last week - which we
welcome - would rapidly carry out an audit of
spending incurred. In brief, it seems essential that there
be complete and accurate information, in the form of a
written report, on the schedule of the volume of funds
transfers to be made from the escrow account to the
Development Fund for Iraq.

With respect to the last point, I wish to point to
the interest of France and a great number of other
members of the international community in knowing
the machinery the Coalition Provisional Authority
plans to put in place to replace the oil-for-food
programme, in particular with respect to the delicate
question of food security for the Iraqi population. That
applies in particular to the delivery of humanitarian
goods warehoused outside Iraq.

To conclude, I wish to convey our concern over
the absence at this stage of concrete responses to what
will take place after 21 November - we are now less
than four weeks from the end of the programme -
which gives us reasons for concern in anticipation of
humanitarian and logistical difficulties. We believe that
it would be particularly useful for ensuring general
confidence in any machinery to be established if the
661 Committee could prepare a written document
containing questions and answers for the practical use
of all delegations.

