Mr. Larrain (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
We wish to express our gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his very precise and comprehensive report covering all
aspects of the United Nations Preventive Deployment
Force (UNPREDEP) in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, submitted pursuant to the provisions of
Security Council resolution 1046 (1996).

Likewise, we would highlight and welcome the
remarkably positive work that UNPREDEP has been
doing since 1992. That preventive deployment force
represents a very useful example and model that we
should perhaps apply much more frequently in the United
Nations, in order to prevent crisis situations from
deteriorating and becoming more serious problems, more
costly in human and material terms and therefore much
more difficult to resolve. UNPREDEP has not limited
itself to monitoring the situation on the border zone with
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Albania, but,
through confidence-building measures, good offices and
facilitation of dialogue, it has had, and continues to have,
a calming and stabilizing influence throughout the region.

At the same time, we note with great satisfaction and
welcome the considerable progress achieved in improving
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia's relations
with its neighbours. Accordingly, the Interim Accord
signed with Greece last September and the Agreement on

 

the Regulation of Relations and the Promotion of
Cooperation with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
signed in April, deserve the highest praise. Similarly, we
would express our appreciation for the internal progress
pursued by the Government of Skopje, which has resulted
in the consolidation of democratic, pluralistic institutions,
as indicated by the Secretary-General in his recent report.

Nevertheless, we should not fail to note the elements
of internal and regional instability that unfortunately still
persist. Inter-ethnic tensions, aggravated by the still
precarious economic situation of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, still constitute a threat to the social
structure of the country as well as to its integration and
stability over the longer term. The lack of demarcation of
its borders with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
unresolved issues with Greece, and the country's inadequate
defence capacity are objective factors that we should not
discount.

In addition, beyond the internal aspects I have
mentioned, we believe it is necessary to analyse the
situation in a broader regional context. The implementation
of the Dayton Agreement has thus far brought about
significant progress, but we must recognize that perhaps the
most sensitive stages of the process lie ahead of us,
particularly with respect to concretizing provisions of a
political and social nature, and in particular the forthcoming
holding of elections in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

My delegation therefore fully supports the draft
resolution before us and thus the extension of the mandate
of UNPREDEP, with its present composition, for a period
of six months. It would seem to us risky and premature to
act otherwise today. If we hasten to bring an early end to
the most successful preventive diplomacy operation of the
United Nations, it might have consequences that all of us
might later regret. This Organization's presence should
continue, with its calming and stabilizing effect in the
region, especially in the critical months to come. However,
in our judgement, that does not mean prolonging this
mission indefinitely. Accordingly, we find quite appropriate
the request to the Secretary-General in operative
paragraph 4 of the draft to review the composition, strength
and mandate of the Force before 30 September 1996.

Finally, we wish to express our appreciation and
support to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Sokalski, as well as to the military and
civilian personnel of UNPREDEP for the very positive
work they are doing.

