Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the convening of this open debate
on the working methods of the Security Council, as well
as for the concept paper (S/2013/6l3, annex) that was
circulated to that end. We hope that our deliberations
today will help renew the commitment to make
progress in improving the efficiency, transparency and
interactivity of the Security Council.

Similarly, I would like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Argentina, Mrs. Maria Cristina
Perceval, for her presentation and her outstanding
work as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
In recent years, the working methods of the Security
Council have evolved in a positive direction thanks
to several factors, including the contributions and
proposals that have been made both by the members of
the Council as well as those outside it. While sometimes
the rhythm of those changes is not at the pace many
of us want, they continue to demonstrate the primary
importance that Member States attribute to the matter.

First, we acknowledge the progress made in
improving some practices and measures, which are
reflected in note S/2010/507 and the successive notes
of the presidency. In that regard, the progress that has
been achieved in the Informal Working Group this year
and the measures taken to improve the internal aspects
of the Council's work are commendable.

Secondly, we note that the access to information
by delegations of Member States that do not belong
to the Council has been improving over time. That is
due, in part, to the growing call for member countries
to inform their counterparts on all matters that, for
obvious reasons, do not deserve confidentiality owing
to their sensitivity. I must say that our delegation has
contributed to that practice.

In the same vein, the improvements to the Council's
website, which contains abundant and valuable
information, have been moving in a positive direction.
It is also worth mentioning the work undertaken by
some non-governmental organizations seeking to give
greater access to the Council's work to delegations,
academics and even the general public. Among those,
Security Council Report deserves special mention.

However, Guatemala believes there is still room for
progress in certain areas. In that regard, we would like
to highlight some of the practices that can be improved
or implemented systematically.

First, we believe it is important to maintain the
Council's trend of holding public meetings with some
regularity. Including the entire membership when
it comes to issues affecting international peace and
security undoubtedly contributes to achieving an
understanding of the seriousness of conflict situations.

Secondly, we believe it is essential to further
promote interaction between the Security Council and
troop- and police-contributing countries. Guatemala
believes that strengthening the flow of information can
broaden the base of countries that participate in that
important work of the Organization. We also recall the
importance of maintaining the interaction between the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and troop-
and police-contributing countries. We commend, in
this regard, the work done this year by the delegation
of Pakistan as Chair of the informal working group on
the issue.

Thirdly, we would give priority to continuing
to improve interaction between the chairs of the
subsidiary bodies with all Member States. For example,
the briefings in which all Council members participate
have proved very useful and facilitate the exchange of
information on the work of the subsidiary bodies. In the
same vein, we highlight the importance of continuing
to consider the question of the selection criteria for
experts of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council,
in accordance with the note by the President contained
in document S/2006/997.

Fourthly, we believe that closer cooperation
between the Council and regional and subregional
organizations is necessary for crisis management
in armed conflict, and that, among other things, the
number of consultations between the Security Council
and regional and subregional organizations that play
an active role in crisis resolution and the resolution of
armed conflicts should be increased.

Fifthly, we have found that the practice of holding
wrap-up meetings - a practice that has been resumed
this year - to be useful, as are the briefings on the
work of the Council held at the end of each presidency,
as mechanisms to increase the transparency ofits work.

In conclusion, we believe that we must continue
to innovate and adopt other measures to improve the
working methods of the Security Council, and that,
with the political will of Member States, particularly
the permanent members, this can be achieved.
Transparency, accountability and coherence are key
elements that the Security Council should observe in
all its activities, approaches and procedures.

