Mr. Al-Musawi (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to express my country's appreciation
for the section on Iraq contained in the report of the
Secretary-General to the Security Council on children
and armed conflict (S/2009/158). We very much
appreciate the significant role played in that regard by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict.

My delegation would like to make the following
comments about the report's section on Iraq. First, the
report covers the year 2008, and we all know that the
situation in Iraq has generally improved since then.
Indeed, the last few months of 2008 and the first few
months of 2009 witnessed a number of positive
developments, including clear improvements in the
security situation and their overall positive impact on
citizens and on the performance of the Government,
whose ability to meet the people's security and safety
needs has obviously improved. In paragraph 43 of his
most recent report on the activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (S/2009/102),
covering the period December 2008 to February 2009,
the Secretary-General states:

"In recent months, Iraq witnessed gradual
stabilization and further improvements in security
conditions, with a lower number of violent, high-
visibility, mass-casualty attacks by militias,
insurgents and criminal gangs."

Secondly, the ability of terrorist organizations,
including Al-Qaida, to carry out attacks has declined,
and a number of terrorist leaders have been killed or

have left Iraq. Moreover, Al-Qaida has lost some of its
field commanders. Other leaders have left or have been
arrested, which confirms that the organization has lost
its capacity to control the situation on the ground and
to recruit. This is the truth of the matter, as pointed out
by the Secretary-General in paragraph 50 of his report
(S/2009/102):

"That the majority of these threats were not
realized could be interpreted as a further sign that
militia and insurgent leaders are losing influence,
or that their capability and resources are being
depleted."

Clearly, this organization is a foreign body, a
cancer eating away at Iraqi society, and we expect that
it will soon be eradicated.

The Iraqi Government has made painstaking
efforts in a number of areas to ensure that all citizens,
including children, will be able to enjoy their human
rights, as noted in paragraph 41 of the report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (S/2009/ 102).

However, the report does not mention the positive
effect of the cooperation between the Government and
the Mission, and does not fully or accurately portray
the situation on the ground. The reference in the report
to the presence of cases of child recruitment by militias
should have been submitted to the Iraqi Government so
that we could, together with the Mission, express
ourselves on these points, before the inclusion of
various pieces of information in the report of the
Secretary-General. To this extent, the report lacks
credibility, and is based on exaggerations and a lack of
specificity. It is incompatible with the most recent
reports submitted by the Mission on the situation in
Iraq. We would hope that, in the future, in cooperation
with the Mission, the Office of the Special
Representative will be able to submit more specific and
updated information to reflect the reality of the
situation.

Additionally, in terms of strengthening and
protecting the rights, safety and security of children,
various measures have been taken. We have developed
a law to protect Iraqi children under the principles of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two
Optional Protocols. We are finalizing a draft piece of
legislation on the establishment of a children's
parliament in Iraq. We have conducted a study to
ensure the rights of orphans. We have taken measures
along the border to stop the trafficking of children. We
are endeavouring to reduce the phenomenon of the use
of children in armed conflict. A number of programmes
have been established in collaboration and
coordination with UNICEF, such as one to protect
children in situations of hardship, such as displaced
children. We have established programmes to help
children suffering from psychological traumas, with
follow-up and inspection units for these children. We
have promulgated a law prohibiting the use of child
labour under the age of 15 or until such time as they
have completed their primary education. We have also
worked to include the culture of the rights of the child
in school curricula, taking measures to prohibit all
forms of violence against children. We have tried to
ensure the protection of children from threats related to
armed conflict, working in close cooperation with
UNICEF and establishing specialized centres in
residential neighbourhoods to monitor ongoing
violations. The first centre for children traumatized by
war was established with the help of the Ministry of
Health, the Ministry of Social Affairs and civil society.
We have also rehabilitated and rebuilt schools
destroyed by conflict and war. We ratified the two
Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child in 2008.

In conclusion, we would like to warmly thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. We want to emphasize
that it is our intention to continue to cooperate with
United Nations agencies to ensure the protection of
human rights and the rights of children, which is a
priority for my Government.

