Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to offer you, Sir, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Singapore, the greetings of my delegation
and to tell you how pleased we are to see you presiding
over this meeting. I would like to highlight the
importance of this open debate, as well as the approach
of hearing first from the troop-contributing countries
and then from the members of the Security Council.

Earlier today we heard several delegations'
statements on this topic. In this statement we propose
to refer to some of the ideas that were raised. We
would like to express thanks for the words of welcome
that several representatives and meeting participants
addressed to those of us who are new Council
members.

In most cases the member countries of the
Security Council and the troop-contributing countries
are not the same. This is why it is necessary, first, that
the Security Council establish permanent, appropriate
and relevant mechanisms for involving troop-
contributing countries. Secondly, those countries
should take proper advantage of these mechanisms.
This morning one delegation referred to a lack of
active participation on the part of the troop-
contributing countries during the regular consultations.

Each mission authorized by the Security Council
should develop its own mechanisms for cooperation
and consultation with the troop-contributing countries.
In some cases, a routine meeting would suffice. In
other, more complex situations, it would be necessary
to resort to more sophisticated consultation
mechanisms, which could be developed and fine-tuned
with experience.

We would like to reiterate what was stated by
several delegations this morning: that consultations
should be convened with enough lead time and should
be announced in the Journal, so that the decisions
taken by the Council could benefit from the viewpoints
expressed by countries prepared to provide troops to
peacekeeping operations. We would therefore
recommend that every report of the Secretary-General
to the Security Council on developments affecting
missions in the field include his assessment of
consultations being held with the troop-contributing
countries, be they actual or potential contributors.

We would like also to express our support for
reviving the Military Staff Committee, with a
broadened mandate that would reflect the concerns
voiced this morning, failing which we should establish
a standing institutional mechanism for consultation and
cooperation with the troop-contributing countries.

I should now like to touch on the importance of
promoting closer cooperation between the Security
Council and countries that are potential troop
contributors. I believe that the Council should ask itself
whether it is doing everything to motivate Members of
the United Nations to become troop contributors. It
goes without saying that consultations with potential
contributors would have to be different from those held
with countries that are already contributing troops. In
the former case, it is a matter of presenting a potential
contributor with enough information to motivate it to
participate. Clearly, the work of the Security Council
should be more proactive.

Why do some countries not contribute troops? In
some cases, internal security issues constrain
contribution, and clearly there is little that the Security
Council can do to counteract such a sovereign decision.
However, there are other cases in which internal
political pressures prevent a State from becoming a
contributor, and there may even be cases in which such
a decision is not taken because of a lack of
information.

In the latter cases, the Security Council, in
coordination with the Secretariat, could have a positive
influence if it were to be more active. It could, for
instance, circulate information on the proposed
mission, the means available to achieve its aims, and
the risks and benefits involved in participating in its
implementation. National Governments should have
the necessary information to be able to justify publicly
their decision to contribute troops, observers or
equipment. To this end, the Secretariat could work
more actively with the missions to ensure that
information is properly channelled to capitals.

In conclusion, I should like to stress the
timeliness of consultations, a matter referred to by
several delegations this morning. Troop-contributing
countries must be consulted at the beginning of a
mission, when there are proposed changes to its
mandate, when new components are introduced into it,
and whenever it becomes necessary to modify the rules
of engagement.

We feel that these circumstances should define a
minimum level of consultation for streamlined
management of the peacekeeping operations authorized
by the Security Council. The Council should cultivate a
relationship of mutual trust with troop-contributing
countries, which will help to prevent the taking of
unilateral decisions by troops and bring about greater
cohesion among the forces deployed in the field.

