Mr. Cabral (Portugal): At the outset, I wish to
welcome the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, to the Council
today and thank her for her report on the situation in
Darfur, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). The cases
of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes
taken up by the Court provide examples of the worst
incidents that have taken place in Darfur. Reports, such
as the one presented to us today by the ICC Prosecutor,
give the Council the opportunity to regularly assess the
progress made by the Court in fighting impunity, as well
as the obstacles and difficulties it has encountered. It is
also an opportunity to look into recent developments
on the ground in terms of observing persistent patterns
of violence that may fall under the category of the
aforementioned grave crimes.

Unfortunately, many of the concerns expressed by
the Council at the end of July persist today. Continuing
violence, attacks on civilians, peacekeepers and
humanitarian personnel; obstacles to the activities of
humanitarian organizations and to humanitarian access
in Darfur; as well as the continuing lack of cooperation
of the Government of the Sudan with the Court, all
stressed by resolution 2063 (2012), are again central
aspects of today's report of the Prosecutor. Indeed, we
continue to see with real concern that arrest warrants
issued by the Court have still not been executed, and
that the Sudanese authorities continue not to cooperate
with the Court in that regard. We take note, however, of
the developments in the Banda and Jerbo case reported
by the Prosecutor; although it is proceeding at a slow
pace, we welcome its progress towards the trial phase.

But the most troubling aspect is the reiterated
reporting by the Prosecutor on the continuation of aerial
bombardments targeting civilians and the persistence
of ground attacks targeting civilians perpetrated by
both Government and rebel forces in populated areas
and camps of internally displaced persons. As the
Prosecutor refers, such attacks may constitute further
war crimes or crimes against humanity under the Rome
Statute.

Moreover, we reiterate our concern about the
continuing sexual violence perpetrated in Darfur.
We are troubled by the reported persecution and
intimidation of victims and of those who try to defend
them in an effort to silence that criminal behavior. In
the same vein, we are gravely troubled by the attacks
against civil society and human rights defenders, as well
by the increasing number of attacks on humanitarian
aid workers and United Nations personnel. We also
reiterate the concerns expressed by the Council and
shared by the Prosecutor regarding the obstacles placed
by the Sudanese authorities on the ability of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur to
fully implement its mandate, by deliberately delaying
visas or blocking other United Nations aid activities on
the ground. Such obstacles may seriously impact the
living conditions of many civilians.

We encourage the Office of the Prosecutor to
continue closely monitoring those and other incidents
that may fall under the Court's purview, in accordance
with its mandate under resolution 1593 (2005).

By virtue of its judicial independence, the ICC
remains unique as a conflict prevention tool that can
ensure both justice and peace in the region. To that
end, the international community, on behalf of which
the Security Council referred the case to the ICC, has
a strong interest in ensuring that the Court fully play
its role. Cooperation is therefore essential. Without
the cooperation of all Member States the Court cannot
fulfil its function.

We are concerned, however, by the continuous lack
of cooperation displayed by the Sudanese authorities
regarding the outstanding arrest warrants. We again
stress the need for all States to strengthen cooperation
with the Court to enforce them.

Finally, we would like to thank Prosecutor
Bensouda for her efforts and contribution during her
initial months as head of the Prosecution Office to
strengthen the Court and the role it may play in the
maintenance of peace and security.

