Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to begin by welcoming Mr. Holkeri, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), to the Security Council.
I am grateful for his comprehensive briefing which will
help us greatly in our appreciation of the latest
developments in the situation in Kosovo.

We are pleased to note that, with the help of
UNMIK and the other relevant participants, progress
has been made in the building of institutions, refugee
returns, economic improvements and the fight against
organized crime.

Particularly noteworthy is that on 14 October
2003, the direct dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade finally began. With respect to the issues of
energy, missing persons, refugee return, transportation
and communications, four working groups of experts
were established. That is a step in the right direction,
which we welcome, towards the final and proper
settlement of the question of Kosovo.

We appreciate the efforts of the authorities of
Serbia and Montenegro to advocate, throughout this
period, the settlement of differences through dialogue.
We sincerely hope that the leadership of both sides will
seize the moment to take part constructively in the
dialogue and the follow-up to the work of the working
groups, so that a specific outcome of the dialogue can
be achieved at an early date. The final settlement of the
question of Kosovo hinges upon the overall progress in
the political, economic and social areas of Kosovo.

The benchmarks established by UNMIK remain
important criteria by which to measure the progress in
various areas in Kosovo. These benchmarks should be
more detailed in nature so they can become more
operational. We have noticed that UNMIK is now
working out an implementation plan and trying to
establish specific standards and time frames for the
achievement of these benchmarks and we hope its
efforts will facilitate the early fulfilment of the
benchmarks.

It is our hope that UNMIK, KFOR and the
Kosovo Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, as
well as other parties concerned, would intensify their
efforts to improve the security situation in Kosovo,
especially to guarantee the security and freedom of
movement for Serbian and other minorities and to
create favourable conditions for the return of
minorities. The parties concerned should continue their
efforts to establish a multi-ethnic society in Kosovo
and to adopt specific measures to promote national
reconciliation and create favourable conditions in order
for all the ethnic communities to live together in
harmony. In addition, the Kosovo Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government should continue efforts
to improve the economic environment and to promote
economic progress.
Finally, I should like to reiterate the Chinese
delegation's firm support for Mr. Holkeri and the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. We hope that the efforts of all the parties
concerned will contribute to settling the issue of
Kosovo as soon as possible.

