Mr. Duale (Somalia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for allowing me to participate in this meeting and to
make a brief statement.

First of all, I welcome the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/590) and support the statement by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah. We also support the
efforts by the International Maritime Organization in
the implementation of the Djibouti Code of Conduct,
with which we agree fully.

Before I go any further, allow me, on behalf of
my Government and my Mission, to voice our grave
concern and convey our sincere and heartfelt sympathy
for all the crew and the two British citizens who are
still at the mercy of pirates. We hope that they will
soon be released.

As has been stated here by all Council members
and mentioned in the Secretary-General's report, and as
you, Sir, said in a nutshell, the piracy problem is a
symptom of the major problems that have been
bedevilling Somalia for a long time - nearly two
decades. As many have stated here, that requires a
concerted, coordinated effort at the international,
regional and local, country level.

Towards that end I am pleased to state that
Somalia has created a coast guard body and has already
trained 1,000 coast guard personnel. The plan is to
train and deploy up to 10,000. However, as has been
mentioned, further training, equipment and other
assistance is required to make them effective and so

that they can be deployed in areas where they are most
needed, in north-eastern Somalia. The coast guard will
be able to exert greater control if it is enabled not only
to fight piracy at the local level, but also to control the
illegal fishing, the dumping of toxic waste and the
smuggling of arms and drugs, for which Somalia can
be used as a conduit for smuggling to all neighbouring
and regional countries.

Finally, I hope that the Security Council will
renew the mandate, as the Transitional Federal
Government has already requested. In that connection,
our Government once again conveys its sincere
appreciation and gratitude to Council members and the
regional and international organizations assisting in the
challenge of combating the scourge of piracy off the
coast of Somalia. It has requested that the Council
renew its approval contained in resolution 1846 (2008)
and welcomes the renewal, for a period of twelve
months, of the authority provided in paragraph 6 of
resolution 1851 (2008) to those combating the scourge
of piracy on the high seas off the coast of Somalia.

We are also grateful for the support we have so
far received from our regional groups: the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
African Union Mission in Somalia, without which, I
believe, the Transitional Federal Government would
have been in a much worse situation.

I also fully subscribe to the statements by Council
members, particularly when you, Sir, summarized the
point regarding support for the Somali Transitional
Federal Government to enable it to control Somali
ports against piracy and also to better control any
illegal fishing or dumping of toxic waste, which are
what the pirates now claim to be acting against.

