Mr. Al-Hadidi (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my pleasure at the outset, Mr. President, to extend our
congratulations to you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I am
confident that your wisdom, expertise and thorough
knowledge will lead us to the desired success. I should
also like to take this opportunity to express our sincere
appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador
Ben Mustapha, the Permanent Representative of
Tunisia, for the marked efficiency with which he
conducted the work of the Security Council during his
presidency.

It gives me pleasure also to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this emergency meeting at
the request of the Arab Group.

My delegation remains gravely concerned due to
the deteriorating situation in the occupied Arab
territories resulting from the continued Israeli
aggression against the Palestinian people and Israel's
unjustified use of force that has assumed serious
dimensions recently, thus threatening the stability and
security of the region and the future of the peace
process in its entirety.

My delegation reiterates its call to the
international community to carry out its responsibilities
vis-a-vis the suffering of the Palestinian people. We
wish also to reiterate the necessity for concerted
international action to halt acts of aggression against
the Palestinians and to provide international protection
to them through despatching an international observer
force to the occupied territories under the auspices of
the United Nations in accordance with the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 and with a view to
preventing the recurrence of such aggression in the
future.

In spite of the receding intensity of violence, the
situation in the occupied territories is still extremely
grave and tensions continue to rise. Israel must halt its
use of force against the Palestinians and must lift the
stifling economic blockade against Palestinian cities
and villages. It must stop digging trenches around
Palestinian cities and allow for normal communications
between them, pay the financial entitlements of the
Palestinian Authority without delay and return to the
negotiating table with a view to implementing all
agreements that have been concluded, including Sharm
el-Sheikh, to put an end to this conflict.

The recent developments prove once again the
urgent need for the Middle East to reach
comprehensive and lasting peace and for Arab rights to
be restored in their entirety, a matter that will not be
realized without the application of the resolutions of
international legitimacy.

In conclusion, we would like to reassert the need
to focus on the revitalization of dialogue between the
Israeli and the Palestinian parties and to bring the
peace process back to its natural path with a view to
realizing the desired objective, namely the
establishment of a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the region.

His Majesty the King of Jordan, the Jordanian
Government and the Jordanian people reassert their
solidarity with and support for their brotherly
Palestinian people in its endeavour to regain its
legitimate rights and to establish its own independent
State on its territory, with Al-Quds al-Sharif as its
capital. I should also like to express our heartfelt
condolences to the Palestinian people and leadership
for their fallen martyrs.

