Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to express the deep appreciation
of the Government of Yemen for the tireless efforts
of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in following the
developments in the crisis in Yemen. I also express
our thanks to his Special Envoy for Yemen, Mr. Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, who is working continuously in
coordination with the Government to find a solution
to the catastrophic situation in Yemen due to the coup
d'etat carried out by Houthi militias and followers of
deposed President Saleh, which has led the country into
a dark tunnel after having been a model for peaceful
political transition.

I should also like to take this opportunity to express
my country's appreciation for the efforts of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, under
the leadership of Mr. Stephen O'Brien, to alleviate
the suffering of our people under the unjust siege and
barbaric warfare waged by the perpetrators of the coup
and their allies against the stoical Yemeni people.
We also welcome Mr. O'Brien's impending visit on
9 August.

The liberation of Aden, the temporary capital of
Yemen, is an important step towards the restoration of
the Government and the resumption of its duties, and in
continuing to put pressure on the perpetrators of the coup
and their destructive project. We express our thanks and
appreciation for the medical and humanitarian assistance
that we have received to date. We worked tirelessly
with the United Nations to achieve the humanitarian
ceasefire that was deliberately and flagrantly violated
by the militias. However, the President of the Republic
upheld his historic responsibility to the Yemeni people.
Having consulted the leaders of the coalition forces, on
26 July he declared a humanitarian ceasefire, which
was violated by the Houthis in an attempt to terrorize
our courageous people. This morning, we sent a report
to the Security Council concerning the violations

committed by the Houthis and their allies on Monday
night.

With respect to humanitarian assistance, we thank
those who have provided such important help and
worked continually to alleviate the suffering of our
people. The visit of Mr. Johannes van der Klaauw, the
Humanitarian Coordinator for Yemen, to the city of
Aden over the past two days has given him first-hand
experience of the catastrophic situation caused by the
perpetrators of the coup.

My country appeals to all States members of
the Security Council to bring greater pressure to
bear on the perpetrators of the coup to accept the
implementation of resolution 2216 (2015), and thanks
them all for their united and firm position vis-a-vis the
dangerous situation that has prevailed in Yemen ever
since the coup of September 2014. The ongoing unity of
the Security Council will undoubtedly cause the coup
to fail and the relaunch the political process under the
auspices of the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
its Implementation Mechanism. The way out of this
dark tunnel requires resolve on the part of all members
of the Council to compel the perpetrators of the coup
to cede control of the State institutions to the Yemeni
Government and end the crisis.

