Mr. Annabi: Mr. President, at the outset I wish to
join the Secretary-General in welcoming President-
elect Xanana Gusmao and the Chief Minister of the
East Timorese Government, Mari Alkatiri, who are
here with us today to participate in this important
meeting.
The Secretary-General has highlighted some of
the achievements of the last two and a half years and
the requirement for a United Nations role post-
independence to the ensure the security and stability of
the young Timorese Administration. I would like to
elaborate further on the development and objectives of
the plan for the successor mission that is presented in
the Secretary-General's report dated 17 April 2002,
which Council members have before them.

As Council members may recall, United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
administration of East Timor started with an almost
exclusively international staff in October 1999.
UNTAET then progressively transitioned into a shared
international East Timorese Cabinet and
Administration during the first Transitional
Government. The Government of East Timor has been
run for the past eight months by an all-Timorese
Council of Ministers. The executive, legislative and
judicial branches of Government are beginning to
function, and East Timorese civil servants and line
managers are now serving in all sectors. East Timorese
police officers continue to be trained and to serve side
by side with their United Nations counterparts.
In short, there are now in East Timor the basic
elements - although they are still fragile - of State
and public administration.

To implement UNTAET's mandate, the United
Nations had to adjust its way of doing business. We are
grateful, in particular, for the flexibility that the
General Assembly and its Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions have shown
in allowing for the provision of central support services
for government, such as information technology,
telecommunications and district services.

Our procedures for recruiting international staff
had to be changed in order to obtain personnel with the
technical expertise and experience required to run a
public administration. This has not been easy. There
were initial shortcomings. Recruitment authority was
eventually delegated to UNTAET, which allowed for
direct consultations with senior Government officials
on the recruitment of appropriate international staff.

Notwithstanding the significant progress made,
certain elements set out in UNTAET's mandate have
not yet been fully achieved. Government structures are
not yet fully functional or financially sustainable.
Significant benefits from the Timor Sea are projected
to flow into the economy, but not until about three
years from now. Until then, it is imperative that the
international community continue to provide budgetary
support to the young Timorese public Administration.

The plan for an integrated peacekeeping mission
post-independence, to be known as the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET), was
developed over the past 12 months and draws on
lessons learned from UNTAET and other missions. The
most fundamental lesson is that, in order to have a
lasting impact which makes the best use of limited
resources, there must be a comprehensive benchmark-
based strategy that must be implemented in a coherent
manner and with a close partnership among the United
Nations, Member States and our Timorese colleagues.
With this in mind, UNTAET, together with the East
Timorese, identified the requirements for 100 core
functions to support the Government after
independence, defined an exit strategy and took
measures to enable recruitment against these functions
by independence. Similarly, with respect to the police,
we identified the requirements to develop a police
structure based on the law enforcement needs and
budgetary realities of East Timor, and we agreed with
the Timorese leadership on a development plan that is
linked to specific benchmarks and provides for a
progressive reduction of United Nations police
personnel.

As members of the Council are aware, President-
elect Xanana Gusmao and Chief Minister Alkatiri
recently wrote to you, Mr. President, requesting the
establishment ofa follow-on mission in East Timor and
expressing their concurrence with the plan presented by
the Secretary-General in his report.

As the Secretary-General has noted, the follow-on
mission would support three areas that are critical for
the stability and viability of an independent East
Timor, namely public administration, law and order,
and external security. The follow-on mission would be
gradually withdrawn as East Timorese institutions
develop the capability to carry the burden alone. The
details of how this support is to be provided are
included in the implementation plan presented in the
report.

In the area of public administration, the mission
would support critical Government functions through
the provision of 100 international experts under the
assessed budget. It is foreseen that the mission would
phase out this assistance in essential services and to the
legal system by November 2003 and in financial and
central services, as well as internal systems, by May
2004.

Continued civilian assistance will also be
provided to bring to justice the perpetrators of serious
crimes committed in 1999. Investigations into the
priority cases are expected to be concluded by the end
of the year, and the number of international
investigators will be downsized accordingly.
Prosecutors, however, will need to continue to be
available as these cases proceed through the judicial
system.

Regarding law and order, progress in the
development of the East Timor Police Service has been
impressive, and a total of 1,800 Timorese police
officers have received basic training and are now
working alongside their United Nations counterparts.
Another 1,030 police officers are to be trained to reach
the target strength of 2,830.

As requested by the East Timorese leadership, the
United Nations police will continue to provide
executive policing and to support the development of
the East Timor Police Service. At independence, the
United Nations plans to enter into a formal agreement
with the Government on the operational arrangements
for the police forces. These arrangements, which are
currently being discussed with the Transitional
Government, provide for the gradual handover of day-
to-day policing responsibilities in the districts -
subject, of course, to clearly defined criteria.

The first handover is scheduled to take place on
Independence Day, on 20 May 2002, when an East
Timorese district commander will assume
responsibility for Aileu district. The final handover is
expected to occur in January 2004, when the
headquarters structure will be fully commanded by the
East Timor Police Service. Until all 13 districts are
handed over, all police officers, including East
Timorese commanders at the district and unit level,
will operate as a joint service under the command of
the United Nations Police Commissioner, who will
report to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. This will ensure a coherent police service,
combining East Timorese and international police
working side by side, that is able to operate smoothly
and to discharge effectively its responsibilities for the
maintenance of law and order.

The third area in which support will continue to
be needed after independence is external security. The
East Timor Defence Force is still in its early stages of
development and subject to sustained bilateral support,
it is not expected to attain full operational capability
until January 2004. In the meantime, as requested by
the East Timorese leadership, the United Nations will
continue to be responsible for the maintenance of the
external security and territorial integrity of East Timor.
An agreement specifying the modalities for
coordination between the United Nations peacekeeping
forces and the East Timor Defence Force (ETDF) is in
preparation and is also expected to be signed by the
Government and the United Nations at the time of
independence. As the East Timor Defence Force
develops its operational capability, it will gradually
take on responsibility for external security. However, it
is expected that in the meantime United Nations and
East Timorese military forces will operate under
separate chains of command and areas of operation.

The Secretary-General's report provides a
detailed plan to downsize the peacekeeping force in
four phases, over a period of two years. Annex IV of
the report shows the projected timeline according to
which each phase will occur, subject to the attainment
of certain predetermined benchmarks. In that regard,
the timely conclusion of an agreement on the border
between East Timor and Indonesia will be critical.
Should such an agreement be reached, as we hope it
will, before the end of 2002, it may even become
possible to accelerate the downsizing of the force in the
border area, as well as to accelerate the reduction of its
overall strength.

However, I cannot emphasize enough that the
material and financial support of bilateral donors for
the full establishment of the East Timorese police and
military are essential, and that they require urgent
action. While training and governance mechanisms will
be put in place with the support of the Mission, there
Will be a need to ensure that the police and military
institutions of East Timor are adequately equipped and
resourced through generous bilateral contributions. It
must be understood that the timely implementation of
the hand-over to the East Timorese police is linked to
the logistical capabilities of the Timorese police and
that increased donor support could allow the reduction
to occur at a more rapid pace. The same logic of course
applies to the ETDF.

In addition to assistance to police and military
forces, there is a need for continued bilateral support to
East Timor to strengthen the institutions and structures
of Government and to put into effect the programme
for the medium- and long-term development of the
country. While the proposed Mission will focus its
efforts on consolidating a stable environment in East
Timor, there will be a continuing need for other United
Nations entities, as well as bilateral and other donors,
to assist the people of East Timor in developing a
sustainable economy. The commitments made by
Member States at the next donor conference, which is
to be held in Dili on 14 and 15 May, will be essential to
sustain and develop the existing basic administrative
structures. We urge Member States to channel their
assistance to support the 200 priority posts for social
and economic development and poverty reduction,
which will rely on voluntary contributions.

Considerable emphasis has been placed on
coordinating the activities of the wider United Nations
system, bilateral donors, civil society and the national
development plan of the East Timor Government itself.
As indicated in the Secretary-General's report, the
implementation plan for UNMISET provides for close
coordination of the United Nations family, including
the Bretton Woods institutions, as well as bilateral
donors, non-governmental organizations and the
private sector. To facilitate this coordination, it is
envisaged that the Resident Coordinator will be
appointed Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General - as has been done with some
success elsewhere, such as in Sierra Leone, for
example. That will ensure that the international
community can maximize the benefits of its collective
resources and will enable the United Nations gradually
to transition from UNMISET into a role of traditional
development assistance, over the two-year period
proposed in the report.

In closing, and with the permission of the
Secretary-General, I would like to pay tribute to all
those who have been instrumental in allowing us to
make the progress that has been achieved so far.
Foremost in our minds, of course, are the East
Timorese and their unflagging commitment and
cooperation. In particular, I should recognize the
extremely able leadership of President-elect Xanana
Gusmao and Chief Minister Mari Alkatiri and their
colleagues in the Government and Constituent
Assembly. Our deep gratitude also goes to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, for his admirable leadership of
UNTAET and for his dedication and hard work
alongside the East Timorese people during the past two
and a half years. Finally, last but not least, I would like
to pay special tribute to all the staff of UNTAET and its
partner organizations for their outstanding contribution
in helping East Timor to overcome its tragic past and
enabling it to join the community of nations and, soon,
the United Nations Organization as a full member.

