Mrs. Von Steiger Weber (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the holding of this debate and
particularly appreciates the current attention that is
being devoted to the peacebuilding architecture.

In 2015, the United Nations had to confront a great
number of crises and conflicts, and what is more, it had
to do so within the context of budgetary constraints.
At the same time, the review of the peacebuilding
architecture, the peace operations review, the review
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and the successful negotiations on the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) provided an opportunity to scrutinize
activities aimed at sustaining peace and to recalibrate
the operational methods of the United Nations.
One of the most pervasive insights resulting from
those processes is that a fragmented approach is not
sustainable. The United Nations must extend its vision
beyond the existing silos and strengthen the coherence
of its actions, both substantively and structurally and
with regard to external partners. The same rationale
played an important role in the establishment of the
peacebuilding architecture in 2005. Ten years later,
why is it then so difficult for us to adopt a coherent
approach to maintaining peace? Our conclusion is that
first, the United Nations has yet to tap its full potential
with regard to peacebuilding and that, secondly, the
peacebuilding architecture and its mandate are more
relevant than ever.

Switzerland welcomes the draft resolution on the
peacebuilding review that is currently being discussed
by Member States. The text reflects the findings of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture and the inputs from
Member States, which have been collected in inclusive
consultations before and during the negotiation
process. Furthermore, building on the experience that
the peacebuilding architecture has acquired over the
past 10 years, the draft resolution constitutes a strong
vision for the future. Some aspects of that vision are
hardly new, such as the call for increased coherence,
which is to be realized not only through shared analysis
and planning but also through joint programming. With
regard to programming, there are valuable examples
from which we can learn, such as the concerted efforts
of the United Nations Development Programme and the

Department of Political Affairs, or those of the global
focal point for the police, justice and corrections.

Other aspects of that vision for the peacebuilding
architecture embody an evolution. In our view, the
most important aspects in that evolution are the
notions of sustaining peace over the long term and the
architecture's preventive potential. We are convinced
that the peacebuilding architecture can contribute to
preventing the occurrence and recurrence of armed
conflicts, and we fully support references thereto
in the draft resolution. Furthermore, strengthening
partnerships - particular those with the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund - the importance
of inclusive national ownership, respect for human
rights, the meaningful involvement of women at all
stages of peace processes, transitional justice, training
and capacity-building should be prominently reflected
in the draft resolution. We also believe that the text
of the draft resolution should clearly refer to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and underscore the
importance of being better able to predict the funding
required for peacebuilding. A comprehensive and
substantive resolution would provide the peacebuilding
architecture with the necessary tools to implement
its mandate with renewed vigour. We therefore fully
support the thrust of the draft resolution.

A reinforced peacebuilding architecture would not
infringe upon the unique role of the Security Council as
outlined in the Charter of the United Nations. Rather,
the impetus given by the draft resolution, once adopted,
will enable the peacebuilding architecture, and in
particular the Peacebuilding Commission, to better
assume its advisory role vis-a-vis the Security Council
and its accompanying role in assisting conflict-affected
countries. The Peacebuilding Commission can,
moreover, represent added value in situations in which
the United Nations takes a light footprint approach. It
can broaden the spectrum of substantive considerations
by highlighting in particular issues inextricably tied
to socioeconomic development and human rights
and their links to peace and security. It can also help
maintain a time horizon that goes beyond a single
form of engagement and contribute to enhancing
the circle of both internal and external stakeholders
who collaborate in a specific situation. We are fully
committed to enabling the Peacebuilding Commission
and its specific country-configurations the means with
which to provide the Security Council that added value.

