Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Amos,
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy and Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovie for their valuable
remarks today.

Let me begin by commending the work of the
United Nations and the brave local and international
United Nations staff, from peacekeepers to
humanitarian workers, who risk their lives to help
protect civilians in harm's way. We should not
underestimate the challenges they face. All too many
regimes are still willing to use ruthless and
indiscriminate force in populated areas, and some
deliberately target civilians, humanitarian workers and
journalists.

Last November the Council debated how to
promote and improve methods to protect civilians (see S/PV.6427). Just weeks later, the world witnessed the
extraordinary and ongoing courage of people in nations
across North Africa and the Middle East who found
their voices and were demanding to be heard. Many
have taken to the streets to exercise their rights of
expression despite, in some cases, brutal attempts at
repression.

On 17 March, the Council acted decisively to
protect innocent civilians in Libya (see S/PV.6498).
Responding to the Libyan people and the Arab League,
the Security Council authorized the use of all necessary
measures to protect civilians and civilian areas targeted
by Colonel Al-Qadhafi, his intelligence and security
forces and his mercenaries. That new resolution
(resolution 1973 (2011)) followed up on the unanimous
Council vote on resolution 1970 (2011) to refer the
situation in Libya to the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court. Resolution 1970 (2011) underscored
the importance that the international community
attaches to assuring that those responsible for
widespread, systematic attacks against the Libyan
people are held accountable.

The international community must remain united
in the commitment to protecting civilians and civilian-
populated areas under threat of attack, to ending
violence against the Libyan people and to defending
the universal rights we all share. The NATO coalition
operates within the mandate of resolution 1973 (2011)
to enforce the arms embargo and the no-fly zone and to
conduct a civilian protection mission. NATO makes
every effort to avoid civilian casualties.

In Syria we are concerned about the continued
reports of gratuitous violence against unarmed
demonstrators. We therefore welcome the mission by
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights to investigate alleged violations of international
human rights law. We call on the Syrian Government to
allow journalists and human rights monitors to
independently verify events on the ground, including
reports of indiscriminate attacks on populated areas by
Syrian forces.

We have seen real progress in efforts to protect
civilians, but in Darfur and elsewhere we still face
serious challenges. Let me highlight three key areas
where the Council plays a crucial role: improving
peacekeeping missions, assuring humanitarian access
in armed conflict and ensuring accountability.

First, on the role of peacekeeping, consider the
recent crisis in Cote d'Ivoire. The Security Council
consistently responded to escalating violence there by
urging the United Nations peacekeeping force to fully
implement its mandate to protect civilians under threat
of attack, culminating in resolution 1975 (2011). The
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire responded
robustly to neutralize the threat of heavy weapons. We
know that those actions saved many lives, based on the
substantial weapons caches discovered in and around
Abidjan.

We have seen progress, led by Member States in
concert with the Secretariat, to improve the tools,
guidance and resources to help United Nations
missions identify and address the threats to populations
in conflict zones. We must continue to learn from
experience and provide better support to missions,
including doing more to address sexual and gender-
based violence. In difficult environments such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
has developed mission-wide protection strategies,
including establishing community liaison assistance
and joint protection teams to better protect civilians.
We welcome those efforts.

Secondly, we must continue to facilitate
humanitarian access into areas of armed conflict.

Humanitarian personnel around the world all too often
work in insecure conditions and lack access to
vulnerable populations. There are increasing reports of
attempts to intimidate humanitarian workers, impede
their movement and even target them directly. In
Darfur, the humanitarian community's efforts to gain
regular access to those in need are being stifled by
Government restrictions on movement, particularly in
areas where the Sudanese Armed Forces are engaged in
hostilities or aerial bombardment. We must redouble
our efforts to end such obstructions to humanitarian
access and hold those responsible for these
obstructions accountable.

Finally, accountability remains essential to
ensuring an effective, transparent process of
reconciliation after the guns have gone silent. The
recent report from the Panel of Experts created to
advise the Secretary-General on Sri Lanka alleges
several violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law in the final stages of the conflict,
which may have resulted in the deaths of up to 40,000
civilians. We urge the Sri Lankan Government to
respond constructively to the report. Accountability
and reconciliation are inextricably linked. It is in Sri
Lanka's interest to take concrete steps to promote
justice, accountability, human rights and reconciliation.

We have a window of opportunity to translate
recent Security Council cooperation on civilian
protection into lasting improvements in our response to
crises. We must seize it for all of our sakes, and for the
sake of the innocent men, women and children who
rely on our collective action to defend them.

