I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer, Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Rambang Tai for their briefings. South Sudan is looking towards a better future, the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan constitutes an important first step. In this regard, we welcome that President Kiir and Vice-President Machar reached an agreement on the sharing of gubernatorial and state positions, ending the impasse on state allocations. However, these political arrangements are indivisible from the security issues. Although the ceasefire has mainly held, the increased intercommunal violence continues to have devastating consequences on communities and pose a threat to peace. In this regard, it is highly concerning that women and children continue to be disproportionately affected by the indirect effects of conflict, particularly in cases of sexual violence reported in the context of intercommunal violence. We therefore urge the parties to work harder to ensure that the guns are silenced and to ensure accountability for cases of sexual violence, including compliance with the provisions prohibiting sexual violence by all parties. We urge the Government to establish a specialized court for crimes of sexual and gender-based and to advance the work of the hybrid and mobile courts. We welcome the initiative of President Kiir to address this spike in violence by launching a dialogue with communities affected and appointing a high-level committee to investigate such incidents and engaging community stakeholders to contain them. On another positive note, we are encouraged by recent court decisions sentencing members of the security forces to terms of imprisonment for serious crimes, including sexual violence. The cycle of intercommunal violence, combined with the threat of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the seasonal floods, has further exacerbated humanitarian needs in South Sudan. According to reports, hunger affected over 6 million people and millions of people are experiencing acute food insecurity. With regard to the COVID-19 response, we are concerned that health facilities are already overwhelmed by common cases such as malaria. In this sense, we appreciate the critical role played by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and regional partners supporting the challenges that South Sudan faces during this pandemic. We also call for respect to the right to health of all people and access to medical treatment to those affected. With regard to humanitarian efforts, we strongly condemn the attack and killing of a humanitarian worker in a marked ambulance, as well as the killing of two aid workers in Pajut town. We urge the parties to the conflict to end such violence and remove access restrictions placed on UNMISS and humanitarian partners. Although the Revitalized Agreement requires 35 per cent participation of women in all institutions of governance, only one woman has been appointed as a governor. On this issue, the Dominican Republic adds its voice to that of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Sudan, Beatrice Khamisa Wani-Noah, in urging women to participate more in every area of governance, and urging the parties to comply with the gender quota. Likewise, during the open debate held in April under the presidency of the Dominican Republic on accelerating implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda (S/2020/346), the Security Council had the privilege to hear from to Gatwal, a young South Sudanese peacebuilder, who continues to contribute to a peaceful future in the country. As Gatwal reminded the Council, young people in South Sudan shaped the peace process through their participation in the High-level Revitalization Forum, increasing youth participation in broader governance structures, the naming of a first Minister of Youth Affairs and the creation of a youth-led civil society coalition. However, despite those achievements, young South Sudanese people continue to face structural barriers to political, social and economic processes and already-restricted civic spaces for youth participation are shrinking even more amid COVID-19. In this regard, we echo Gatwal's remarks and call on the Government to ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation of young people in decision-making at all levels, including political processes and democratic practices. After two years, we must insist on the full implementation of the Revitalized Agreement. People want to live in peace and the leaders are the ones that must strive for it.
