Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Italian
presidency for convening this very important open
debate in the Security Council and for initiating
the adoption of today's resolution 2388 (2017) on
this extremely vital issue. My delegation takes this
opportunity to express its sincere gratitude to Secretary-
General Guterres, Under-Secretary-General Fedotov,
Mr. Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security
of the African Union, as well as Ms. Giammarinaro,
Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children.

Trafficking in persons in conflict situations remains
an important matter for the international community.
We therefore welcome the latest report of the Secretary-
General's on this problem (S/2017/939), and urge that
serious attention be paid to his recommendations. With
the alarming proportions this problem has assumed,
we need to take urgent measures such as harmonizing
legislation across countries, enacting new stricter
legislation, bringing perpetrators to justice, ending
all impunity, exercising more vigilant cross-border
controls and intelligence sharing. It is important to
freeze and block assets, as well as work closely with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
and INTERPOL and their regional affiliates. While
conforming to regional and international norms, we
need to offer protection and appropriate assistance to
persons affected by this brutal crime.

We commend the tireless efforts and the application
of best practices by the UNODC and other relevant
United Nations system organizations in countering
human trafficking. We also value the UNODC's able
coordination of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group
against Trafficking in Persons and the United Nations
Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children. We support
strengthened coordination between the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons and
Member States so as to enhance the effectiveness of our
response to the current challenges of human trafficking,
at the global, national and regional levels.

Comprehensive strict measures must be taken
to ensure that trafficking in conflict situations does
not lead to sexual slavery of women and girls, forced
marriage or the most appalling human rights violations.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko Haram,
Al-Shabaab and other terrorist organizations are using
trafficking and sexual violence as a weapon and tactic
of terror, and we need to enhance our capabilities to
fight them.

Human trafficking is one of the most shocking
challenges facing the international community. It
affects all regions of the world, without exception, since
every country is, or could become, an origin, transit or
destination country for victims of that threat. We must
be quite vigilant in ensuring that refugees, displaced
persons and immigrants - particularly women and
girls - are not recruited for human trafficking in
armed conflicts.

Combating trafficking in persons demands that
we first look to the root causes, namely, poverty,
underdevelopment, unemployment and the lack of
socioeconomic opportunities and security, especially
in conflict situations. We need to consider normative,
financial and technological advantages to address
this problem. It is also essential to mobilize funding
for poverty eradication, education and employment
in countries affected by conflict, by mobilizing
international as well as the domestic resources of such
States. Peace and development are a solid foundation
for a stable society and the rule of law.

We see a need for strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the
African Union, the League of Arab State and other
regional organizations that have done significant work
in this area.

At the regional level, Kazakhstan effectively
interacts with the Commonwealth of Independent
States through its programme on cooperation against
human trafficking for the period 2014-2018, and with
the OSCE as part of its Alliance against Trafficking
in Persons. We have also initiated the Almaty process,
which serves as a platform for nine countries of the
region to annually step up their response and enhance
cooperation with the United Nations Office of the
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration.

It is important that our fight against this heinous
crime be human-rights-centred. Kazakhstan is
party to more than 60 multilateral treaties on human
rights, including 13 directly related to counteracting
contemporary forms of slavery. My country is
committed to an integrated approach to address the
scourge by taking full responsibility for implementation
and fulfilling all obligations envisaged.

Kazakhstan has taken decisive measures, including
legislative actions, to counteract various aspects of
human trafficking. They include establishing a national
referral mechanism, joining efforts to protect the rights
of trafficked persons, introducing social standards
to assist victims and regulating the procedures for
identifying victims of humantrafficking. Systematically,
we carry out the Stop the Traffick preventive campaign.
The relevant Government agencies regularly check the
activities of modelling, tourism and marriage agencies
that offer travel and employment services abroad, and
monitor mass media and the Internet to detect materials
related to trafficking in persons and child pornography.

We hope that today's dialogue will make a
significant contribution in unifying the efforts made
by States, international organizations and civil society,
while helping to strengthen international activities,
prosecute and punish criminals and protect victims of
human trafficking. Kazakhstan, as a member of the
Group of Friends United against Human Trafficking,
supports all international efforts to counteract this
form of modern slavery, and calls on all States to fully
and effectively implement the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons.

