Mr. Garcia (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish):
On behalf of my Government, I wish to express our sorrow
and convey our condolences to the Government and the
people of Japan on the tragedy that has befallen their
country as a result of the earthquake there this week.

First of all, I must emphasize our support for the
statement made yesterday by the Ambassador of Indonesia
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned States. My
delegation also wishes to thank the Secretary-General for
submitting his "Supplement to An Agenda for Peace:
position paper of the Secretary-General on the occasion of
the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations".

From an initial reading of this document we can see
that, in its preparation, account was taken of some of the
concerns expressed by various delegations, including that of
my country, during the discussions that followed the
submission of "An Agenda for Peace" in June 1992. This
is particularly true of the references for many aspects of
peace-keeping operations and the relationship between
development and peace, and the consideration of items of
the greatest importance, such as disarmament, and matters
relating to the objectives, implementation and consequences
of sanctions imposed under Article 41 of the Charter.

As has been said, greater emphasis is now being
placed on economic and social affairs as the foundations of
peace. Indeed, the existence of an international consensus
on the paramount importance of economic and social
development as the soundest basis for lasting peace is now
recognized. On this subject, we are deeply convinced that
the Organization must accord priority attention to economic
and social development. We agree that the fiftieth
anniversary offers an opportunity for the international
community to begin its preparatory work on what has been
called An Agenda for Development.

Chapter II of the paper, on quantitative and qualitative
changes in this period of transition for the international
system, contains a diagnosis that deserves serious
consideration, particularly with regard to the increase and
complexity of internal conflicts. In this connection, the
framework for the Organization's actions must be based
on the provisions of the Charter, especially paragraph 7
of Article 2. That is why my delegation agrees with the
assertion made in the document that the United Nations,
for eminently valid reasons, is reluctant to shoulder
responsibility for maintaining law and public order and to
impose new political structures or State institutions.

As has been indicated, one of the subjects about
which the Secretary-General's paper acknowledges the
many concerns that were raised when "An Agenda for
Peace" was issued is precisely peace-keeping operations.
In this regard, it rightly envisages the following as basic
principles: the consent of parties, impartiality, and non-
use of force except in the case of self-defence. It also
recognizes the need for making information more readily
available and communicating and coordinating with, those
countries that have contributed troops to such operations.
Attention should also be drawn here to the reference in
the paper to the success achieved in those operations that
had been established on the basis of a negotiated
agreement and designed to ensure implementation.

Although it is premature to refer in depth to the
analysis of the changes that have occurred in peace-
keeping operations, it is none the less appropriate to stress
the advisability of a broader discussion of and greater
clarity about the nature of multifunctional operations.
Furthermore, the formulation of the proposal for the
establishment of a rapid reaction force - about which my
delegation has some reservations - should be studied in
depth and with the greatest caution.

Despite the very relevant reference to the Charter
and in particular to paragraph 7 of Article 2, the ideas
expressed in the paper's Chapter III A, on preventive
diplomacy and peacemaking, and in Chapter III C, on
post-conflict peace-building, require further discussion and
analysis.

Although rather limited, the reference to nuclear
disarmament in Chapter III, on instruments for peace and
security, is very timely. The changes that have occurred
in the international system make it even more obvious
that nuclear arsenals must be eliminated. We are
optimistically preparing to participate in the discussions
at the Conference of the parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and we stress the

 

importance of strict compliance with the objectives defined
in article VI of that Treaty.

The Secretary-General's paper pays particular attention
to "micro-disarmament" within the context of existing
conflicts. Without doubt, the proliferation of automatic
assault weapons, anti-personnel mines and other, similar
weapons is an anomaly which encourages the outbreak and
deterioration of conflicts of all kinds, while obstructing the
processes of peace and reconstruction.

With regard to the proliferation of anti-personnel
mines, we agree that the international community has been
paying greater attention to this problem. Nevertheless, the
measures that have been adopted are clearly insufficient.
Even an effective moratorium on the production and export
of these mines would still leave us with the 110 million that
have already been laid.

The set of proposals made by the Secretary-General on
the question of sanctions merit more thorough study. We
emphasize the importance that we attach to defining "clear
objectives", to taking into account in advance of the lifting
of sanctions the possible effects this would have on third
States and the more vulnerable groups of the population,
and to assessing the criteria for and the results of such a
step.

In the light of the experience acquired over recent
years, we should give serious consideration to the
Secretary-General's suggestion that instruments be
established that would enable the United Nations fully to
develop and implement the provisions of Article 50 of the
Charter.

Finally, my delegation emphasizes the appropriateness,
timeliness and importance of the initiative that has made it
possible for us to engage in this consideration of the paper
submitted by the Secretary-General. We also wish to stress
your skilful leadership of this discussion, Mr. President. We
are sure that there will be broader and deeper discussions
of the paper in the General Assembly and in this Council,
in accordance with the Charter's mandate in such matters.
To this end, we agree that a working group of the General
Assembly should be established to study the Secretary-
General's document.

