Ms. Wensley (Australia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open meeting of the
Council.

Australia remains committed to the full
implementation of all Security Council resolutions on
Iraq. We support the two principles now guiding the
Security Council's approach to Iraq, as set out in
resolution 1352 (2001), namely to improve the flow of
goods and commodities to Iraq while ensuring that
military-related items are not exported to it.

Australia welcomes the constructive proposals
put forward in the United Kingdom draft resolution,
which is based on these two principles. We believe that
these proposals, if implemented, would make a
significant difference to the flow of civilian goods to
Iraq. If the draft resolution were adopted, we would go
from a situation in which all imports to Iraq are
prohibited unless specifically allowed, to one where all
imports are automatically allowed, unless they are on
the goods review list. And even items on this list could
be approved, depending on their end use.

Australia is of the firm view that for any region,
including our own, to achieve a positive security
environment, it is imperative for the States of that
region to meet their international obligations. This is
particularly true in respect of Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction obligations under Security Council
resolutions. Like others, we have been concerned that,
for over two years now, it has not been possible to
carry out the weapons verification and monitoring
work in Iraq as mandated by the United Nations.
This has had a destabilizing effect on the region
as a whole. The United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
has not been able to commence its inspection activities
in Iraq, in line with its United Nations mandate. This is
most discouraging. Likewise, the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) is still unable to resume its
verification and monitoring activities in Iraq, as
mandated by the Security Council. We call upon Iraq to
cooperate fully with UNMOVIC and the IAEA to
demonstrate its good faith and its willingness to work
with the international community. Full implementation
of these activities is essential to provide the assurances
required by the Security Council. It is our sincere hope
that the Iraqi leadership will now take the necessary
steps to fulfil its international obligations. These
obligations are clear. Iraq must comply fully with all
relevant Security Council resolutions.

The Australian Government is concerned at the
humanitarian situation in Iraq and is deeply
sympathetic to the plight of the Iraqi people. However,
United Nations sanctions are not aimed at the ordinary
Iraqi person. Every effort has been made by the United
Nations and the international community, including
Australia, to limit their impact on the Iraqi people. The
United Kingdom draft resolution would take us still
further in this direction.

Australia welcomes the improvements which
have been made in the implementation of the oil-for-
food programme since its inception, through the
passage of resolutions 1284 (1999), 1302 (2000) and
1330 (2000). These improvements include the lifting of
the ceiling which previously applied to Iraqi oil
exports; expedited approval procedures for many food,
agriculture, educational, housing and health items; and
increases in the money available to Iraq for expenditure
on its oil sector.

We welcome evidence that the oil-for-food
programme has arrested the decline in Iraqi living
standards, but equally we recognize the imperative of
further alleviating the predicament of the Iraqi civilian
population. We therefore urge the international
community to support the additional improvements to
the programme currently under consideration. We see
this latest effort as an important step forward which
will make a difference to the lives of ordinary Iraqi
citizens.

