Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me this
opportunity to address the Security Council as a
representative of a State Member of the United Nations
that is interested in participating with comments and
observations, as well as to underscore our national
position with regard to the subject matter before the
Council today.

It is important to make clear that I intend to do my
duty in this capacity before a major organ of the United
Nations, the Security Council, in accordance with the
imperatives of the national position of my country and
that of the African continent. That position is set out in
the relevant resolutions of the African Union, adopted
successively at the highest level since 2008 and until
2015, and in the synergetic positions of other political
entities to which the Sudan is party, issued in unison
and reflecting systematic aversion to the meddling and
false accusations of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). It is also consonant with our right under both
statutory and customary international law, particularly
the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of
1969, which emphasizes the sovereign right of every
country whether to be or not be a party to any treaty or
international agreement. Therefore, in exercising that
right, the Republic of the Sudan has opted not to be
party to the Rome Statute. As mentioned, the Sudan
is not bound by the ICC, as a non-party to the Rome
Statute.

I would like to avail myself of the opportunity to
extend to the Secretary-General, to the President and
to members of the Security Council and all countries
of the world at large my congratulations on the success
of the Paris negotiations on curbing global warming,
which threatens the Earth's very existence and the
survival of the human race. We are hopeful, in the Sudan
in particular, that that achievement will materialize
in the future, in the form of stopping desertification
in the Sahel region of West Africa, which was the
fundamental factor in the exacerbation of the internal
conflict in Darfur in 2003. We were pleased, in that
regard, to finally see the United Nations Environment
Programme state, in its famous 2007 report, that
the causes of conflict in Darfur are attributed to
environmental degradation and desertification.

I would like to reiterate what we have said
repeatedly - that the Sudan is committed, in
compliance with its constitutional, legal, moral and
cultural obligations, to prosecute the perpetrators
of all crimes and violations defined and agreed upon
under applicable provisions of international law. Such
provisions include, inter alia, the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
of 1948, the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
their first and second Protocols and the various human
rights conventions and treaties, in accordance with its
commitment to fight impunity.

As the Council is aware, Protocol II to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 stipulates, in article 3, paragraphl,
that:

"Nothing in this Protocol shall be invoked
for the purpose of affecting the sovereignty of a
State or the responsibility of the government, by
all legitimate means, to maintain or re-establish
law and order in the State or to defend the national
unity and territorial integrity of the State."

There are also examples of countries vigorously
pursuing and defending their national interests extra-
territorially and striving to legitimize such actions, so
why do others deny us the right to defend our territorial
integrity and maintain law and order within our borders?

The report before the Council notes in several
parts and in a clearly selective way, which is typical
of the Court since its inception, the deterioration of
security conditions in Darfur, including abductions and
attacks on humanitarian workers and peacekeepers.
As expected, the report contains no reference to the
persons responsible for those violations, or the actual
perpetrators, to whom we have referred in detail in our
statement before the Council during its review of the
periodic report on the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), on 28 October
(see S/PV.7545).

We are concerned about clearly emphasizing
the fact that the Prosecutor's Office of the Court is
responsible - through its actions and by explicitly and
implicitly encouraging gun-toting rebels and armed
outlaws - for all lives lost in Darfur since 2005, and
for the human rights violations committed by those
outlaws and the suffering of the injured and displaced
persons and the loss of property, not only in the Sudan
but in all other cases in which the Court has intervened
on the African continent.

The Court concocted - through the actions of
its Prosecutor and thanks to vague and overly broad
powers granted by the Statute to the Prosecutor and the
Prosecutor'sOffice,aswellasbyabusingtheProsecutor's
authority and deploying that authority to serve the
interests of certain countries and non-governmental
organizations that are well known for their influence
on the Court's process and, subsequently, on its
work, competencies and funding - an unwarranted
contradiction between the principles of justice and
peace. By creating that contradiction, it has encouraged
the ongoing killing and displacement of persons and
of all types of abuses and violations in countries and
regions where it has exercised jurisdiction, all of which
happen, by chance, to be African countries, which is in
fact no coincidence.

I would like to refer to the policy paper issued
by the ICC Prosecutor's Office in 2007, interpreting
article 53 of the Rome Statute, entitled "Policy Paper
on the Interests of Justice", in which the concept
of the interests of justice does not include peace.
Such a policy not only undermines all future dispute
settlement efforts worldwide, local or international, but
also starkly contrasts with the core task of the Security
Council under Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, thereby posing serious questions regarding the
feasibility of submitting the report to the Council not
once but twice per year.

Resolution 1593 (2005), by which the Council
referred the situation in Darfur to the Court, and
which we stress, with all due respect, is in violation of
international law as it concerns a State that is not party
to the Rome statute, emphasizes, in paragraph 5, "the
need to promote healing and reconciliation".

The same was emphasized by the African Union
Peace and Security Council when it stressed, on 21 July
2008, that:

"The Council reaffirms its statement of 11 July
2008, in which it expressed its strong conviction
that the search for justice should be pursued in
a way that does not impede or jeopardize efforts
aimed at promoting lasting peace".

Due to the conduct of the Office of the Prosecutor
and of the Chief Prosecutor, coupled with the policy
paper issued by her Office, which rendered article
53 of the Statute ineffective and practically repealed,
together with the overall principle of complementarity,
it is due to such dispositions that the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of South Africa stated on 18 November, before
the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of
the ICC that,

"South Africa cannot and will not be silent in the
face of serious flaws in some of the practices of the
Court in the interpretation of the Statute."

The Minister further asked:

"Has this Court become the universally accepted
institution for justice as initially hoped for when
we established it?"

It is therefore not surprising in the least that the
Court, as we have said, is directly responsible for all
of the violations of human rights that have occurred
in Darfur. The Court has transformed those outlaw
perpetrators into more daring hardcore criminals
capable of committing all sorts of crimes, including
attacks on peacekeepers, in pursuit of media coverage
for propaganda purposes, and the resulting instability
and confusion, an example of which is the attack by
an armed rebel movement on UNAMID peacekeepers
in Darfur in 2008, which was distorted by global
media entities, such as the The Washington Post, The
New York Times, Cable News Network and the British
Broadcasting Corporation, to implicate the Sudanese
Government as having instigated affiliate militias to
launch that attack. The Court has also discouraged
outlaws from responding to calls for peace and
invitations to join peace agreements, encouraging
them, on the contrary, to mount attacks and instigate
rebellion against legitimate national authorities.

In that context, and commensurate with its covert
objective to drive a wedge between justice and peace,
the Court strived to subvert the Abuja Peace Agreement
of 2006, which was welcomed by the Security Council,
and to divert attention from the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur, of 2011, which was also welcomed by
the Security Council and which has been totally ignored
in the report, with a view to undermining it, as well.

In that regard, I would like to note some positive
developments that, fortunately, were overlooked in
the last UNAMID report (S/2015/729), which was
submitted to the Council on 25 September and includes
first, a decrease in the number of displaced persons;
secondly, the Government's success in ending tribal
hostilities - in which regard the Court's report seeks
to incite racial and ethnic division and fuel hostilities
by citing unfounded allegations of Arab settlement in
Darfur - and thirdly, the successful internal dialogue
in Darfur.

We consider the observations contained in this
report regarding the Republic of the Sudan, which was
among the first African countries privileged to join the
membership of the United Nations, and its President,
whose status is also enshrined in the 2005 Constitution
of the Republic of the Sudan, as a symbol of the
country's sovereignty, and whom I have the honour
to represent here at the United Nations, as not being
worthy of the trouble to consider.

We also wish to refer to the Common African
Position enunciated since 2008 concerning established
international law on the immunity of Heads of State - a
concept that is being further bolstered and fortified by
the Sudan in its quest for peace and stability through
the cessation of bloodshed, for the sake of which we
have left no stone unturned. In so doing, African
leaders have stressed their rejection of the targeting
of African leaders and peoples under such pretexts as
feasibility and possibility, which were introduced in
the policy papers of the Prosecutor's Office and which
make individuals criminally liable, not through proof
of guilt but by virtue of their nationality. In that regard,
the representative of India was right when he said, on
the occasion of at the adoption of the Rome Statute
in the summer of 1998, that its first victim would be
international law.

To date, the Court has received some 9,000
complaints through various channels, relating to
situations in 139 countries where crimes and violations
are being committed. Yet the Court and the Prosecutor's
Office have shown interest in leveling charges and
opening proceedings and investigations only against
African States. So far, it has issued indictments against
39 Africans and no one else. They have been singled out
from among all humans on the vast planet with its five
continents. I leave it to the consciences and minds of
members of the Council tojudge for themselves. By way
of comparison, in the aftermath of the Second World
War in Europe the Nuremberg Tribunal adjudicated
hundreds of cases in just a single year, whereas the
International Criminal Court has been unable to
process more than two or three cases since 2002, at a
cost of more than 61 billion. Despite that huge waste
of resources drawn from the assessed contributions
of Member States and the voluntary contributions of
the European Union, along with donations by Western
non-governmental organizations, the Court is now
requesting the United Nations to supply it with more
resources in order to pursue its mandate in Darfur.

We have before us testimonies from around the
world and from non-governmental organizations,
including in particular Human Rights Watch, according
to which the allegations of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court are lies. The only way to
protect the victims is by ending the conflict, and it is no
coincidence that the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
and the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur have been
ignored by the Prosecutor's Office. Frankly, when I
heard the statement made by the representative of the
United Kingdom, I could not believe her description of
the situation in Darfur, which we monitor consistently
and constantly. As the United Kingdom's former Foreign
Secretary Robin Cook remarked, the Court was not
established to prosecute any British or other Western
official. That is what he said. Unfortunately, and in
response to what we have heard from some Council
members, this is our message to the conscience of the
international community. There can be no graver insult
than this position of the Court, which has persisted in
its practices from 2002 until today.

Finally, the Prosecutor's report contains many gross
references and transgressions regarding the practice of
addressing the United Nations and the Security Council,
particularly in paragraphs 12 and 45, which refer to the
failure of the Council and its inability, inaction and loss
of credibility in its attempt to alienate my country. I
call on the Council to take whatever action it deems
appropriate in that regard.

Members of the Council have also witnessed to
what we in the Permanent Mission of the Sudan have
gone through as the Prosector of the ICC has tried to
muzzle and threaten us with litigation. We are still
curious to know on what basis the Court could legally
evaluate what we are doing to defend the symbols of
our sovereignty, our unity and our territorial integrity
within the framework of multilateral diplomacy, in
which we have engaged in with a view to maintaining
peace and stability with the conclusion of agreements
aimed at restoring peace in our homeland, including
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement of 2005, the
Abuja Agreement and the Doha Document, and all
that we have done to honour the letter and spirit of our
obligations under international law, in accordance with
the duties and rights stipulated therein.

