Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): May I, at this
first meeting, briefly pay a warm tribute to the
outgoing presidency of the Council and warmly
welcome you, Sir, to the presidency. My delegation
looks forward to working closely with yours.

I should like particularly to congratulate you on
convening this afternoon's meeting. We find it a
welcome and imaginative initiative to invite James
Morris and the World Food Programme (WFP) here to
talk to us. We think that this sort of initiative helps to
build a fuller understanding of conflict prevention in
the Security Council's work and we see this as a
contribution to getting different parts of the United
Nations system to work more effectively together.

We would like to thank the World Food
Programme for its efforts. We understand the
challenges that the agency confronts when 80 per cent
of its budget is directed to humanitarian emergency
operations. It must surely be an objective for us all to
see that percentage reversed back towards where it was
10 years ago, when 80 per cent of WFP's efforts were
directed to development.

Part of that effort must lie in addressing the link
between conflict and food insecurity. We see a clear
link between peace and security, on the one hand, and
food security on the other. Conflict can be a major
cause of food crises and, at the same time, food
insecurity can he sometimes a direct cause and
sometimes a contributory cause both of the start of
conflict and of its prolongation, be it through refugees
and internally displaced persons or through
competition for natural resources, such as water.

Mr. Morris was kind enough to make several
references to the United Kingdom's investment in basic
agricultural development. The point here is that we
consider food insecurity to be a symptom of a wider
phenomenon - that of poverty. Our increased
investments in agricultural production in less
developed countries are based on the perception of that
link and the recognition, therefore, that poverty and
conflict are far too often handmaidens that go together.
We need to look at how food, poverty and conflict link
together and recognize the need to address those links
in our discussions in the Council on peace and security.

If I might, I have four brief questions to address
to Mr. Morris.

One is to ask whether the World Food Programme
is confident that those who need food aid in Africa are
receiving it and whether it is satisfied that it has
sufficient mechanisms for monitoring this.

A second area that we would be interested in
exploring is how WFP is coordinating with other
agencies to ensure that any potential for conflict in the
areas in which it is working is minimized. We would be
interested in Mr. Morris's comments on coordination
between the World Food Programme and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, for example,
on dealing with food insecurity in conflict situations
and the handling of food aid in those areas.

Lastly, I have a question about the situation in
Southern Africa, which is clearly very grave. We would
be interested in the views of WFP on the extent to
which this crisis is caused by drought and the extent to
which it is worsened by Government policy. Mr. Morris
made reference to the role that economic policy and
Government decisions can play in this area. I have
Zimbabwe particularly in mind in this context.

