Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to commend Nigeria for organizing this
important open debate. We align ourselves with the
statement to be delivered later today by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt, who will speak on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement. We are particularly
pleased, Mr. President, that this debate is being
presided over by your good self, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Nigeria, whom we welcome to the
Council.

Nigeria, together with South Africa, co-hosted the
High-level Forum on African Perspectives on Security
Sector Reform, held on 14 May 2010, the outcome of
which was submitted to the Secretary-General. We
thank the Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his
briefing to the Council and for apprising us on the
work being done by the Secretariat on security sector
reform (SSR).

Given our own history, South Africa attaches
great importance to SSR, as the reform and
transformation of our security sector was both a
constitutional and political objective. South Africa's
approach to security sector reform is a holistic one
aimed at creating effective and accountable security
institutions, which are absolutely essential for the
building of sustainable peace, development,
reconciliation and the culture of human rights.

South Africa believes that building accountable
and democratic security institutions is important in
countering the potential destabilizing effect that
unregulated security forces might play in the political
life of any country. The role of the United Nations in
working with national Governments in strengthening
SSR is therefore crucial in the area of conflict
prevention. The legitimacy and global character of the
United Nations gives it a particular responsibility to
facilitate a coordinated approach to SSR.

The assumptions and principles on the role of the
United Nations in SSR contained in the Secretary-
General's 2008 report (8/2008/39) remain valid today.
We also recognize the important role United Nations
peacekeeping missions play in SSR where
peacekeeping missions have become increasingly
multidimensional. The importance of SSR has also
been recognized as an important element for
peacebuilding. We have seen the increasing
involvement of the Peacebuilding Commission in this
regard.

South Africa recognizes the importance of close
partnerships between the United Nations in particular
and regional, subregional organizations and other
intergovernmental organizations, including the
international financial institutions, in the area of SSR.
The multiplicity of actors involved requires greater
coordination among donors to facilitate synergy and
avoid duplication.

At the regional level, the African Union (AU) is
in the process of developing a policy framework
document for SSR that refocuses emphasis from
military security to human security by defending and
protecting all citizens from all forms of violence and
insecurity, including gender-based violence. The
rationale and scope of this policy framework stresses
the importance of African ownership in the SSR
process. The many externally generated narratives on
SSR do not fully address African approaches, as it is
preferable to refer to African-originated references.
The policy framework has been adopted in principle
and will be presented to the AU Assembly during the
AU summit in 2012.

The experience of SSR on the African continent
indicates that SSR is not an event but a process that
requires continuous attention and political will.
Throughout our involvement in security sector reform
in Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic, and in our own experiences
in South Africa, it has become clear that each country
faces its own unique challenges, and therefore,
whatever approach is adopted has to be context-
specific.

We have also learned from those experiences that
SSR can only be sustainable if the principle of local
ownership is upheld. There can therefore be no one-
size-fits-all solution to security sector reform. The
international community should therefore work in close
collaboration with countries emerging from conflict,
including in recognizing the important role that women
and vulnerable groups can play as agents of change.

In conclusion, as we have said, the legitimacy
and global character of the United Nations gives it a
particular responsibility to facilitate a coordinated
approach to SSR based on the principle of national
ownership. Fundamental in the assistance and expertise
that the United Nations can provide is the cooperation
and consent of the States involved. Additionally, the
strategic partnership developed between the United
Nations and the African Union on SSR is an illustration
of an important role that the United Nations can play in
advancing SSR on the African continent.

We hope that the discussion here today will move
us a step closer towards further enhancing and
coordinating our approaches to SSR. South Africa
supports the draft presidential statement that will be
adopted later today.

