Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): We join other
Member States in expressing our appreciation to the
Russian Federation for convening this open debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. We trust that the debate will assist
in mobilizing the international community, in particular
the Security Council, to support the Palestinians and
the Israelis in finding a lasting solution to the conflict.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

A few weeks ago, President Jacob Zuma addressed
the General Assembly during its general debate (see A/71/PV.9). He expressed South Africa's concern over
the lack of progress in finding a durable solution to the
Palestinian question and stressed the importance of the
United Nations in carrying out its historic mission of
ensuring that the issue is resolved once and for all.

The Palestinian people have lived under Israeli
occupation for almost half a century. The occupation
remains untenable and threatens the two-State solution.
The West Bank continues to experience heightened
tension and sporadic acts of violence between
Palestinians and Israelis, as we have seen in Jerusalem
and Hebron recently. Illegal Israeli settlements
continue unabated and have led to a fragmentation of
the West Bank and continue to threaten the feasibility
of a contiguous Palestinian State. The illegal blockade
of Gaza has led to a dire humanitarian situation,
which is both unacceptable and unsustainable. The
Israeli occupation not only violates the collective and
individual rights of the Palestinians, but also poses a
threat to the security and very existence of Israel.

South Africa reaffirms that the central responsibility
for attaining peace is primarily in the hands of the
Palestinians and the Israelis themselves. We, as part
of the international community, should support and
encourage the parties towards that endeavour. In that
regard, dialogue and negotiation remain the only way
forward to finding a lasting solution. The guidelines for
those negotiations have to be based on the established
international legal framework, which includes General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map, to name but a few.

The Security Council must live up to its Charter
obligations and play a more active role in resolving
the conflict. Meetings of the Security Council like
this open debate are important, but they need to be
followed up with meaningful, concrete action, as the
Council does in other cases on its agenda. In other
cases, the Council has asserted the moral and legal
weight of the United Nations and coerced action by the
parties through threats and action under Chapter VII
of the Charter.Surprisingly, in the case of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, responsibility for facilitating the
peace process has been deferred to the Quartet with
questionable results. My delegation has long held
the view that there should be a broader international
framework to assist the parties towards a negotiated
settlement and in which the United Nations assumes the
role of neutral arbiter.

In this context, we welcome the French initiative.
The common message flowing from the participants
at the Paris conference is that the time has come for
the parties to resume negotiations with the full support
of the international community, based on the existing
international legal framework, and to work towards a
two-State solution. South Africa recently co-hosted, in
partnership with the United Nations, an international
media seminar on peace in the Middle East. This
seminar was held for the first time in sub-Saharan
Africa and helped to heighten awareness of the
situation in Palestine, we believe, in a balanced and
objective manner. It also provided an opportunity for
civil society and the media to contribute towards an
atmosphere conducive to dialogue.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the situation
on the ground cannot be allowed to continue unchanged
as it will continue to be an impediment to the peace,
security, stability and development of the wider Middle
East region. In our view, ending the occupation is in
the interest of Israel and Palestine alike, and we would
encourage all Member States to direct the parties
towards attaining a lasting solution to the conflict.

