The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
representative of the Russian Federation for his kind
words addressed to the presidency.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of Qatar.

At the outset, I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Jan Egeland for his briefing this
morning.

06-6406]
In accordance with the Charter, the prevention of
armed conflict is without a doubt one of the first
priorities of the international Organization. However,
the most tragic losses in armed conflict are those
inflicted upon civilians. Such losses are among the
most heinous consequences of armed conflict. For that
reason, it is essential that United Nations bodies for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict devote
sufficient attention, time and efforts to that task.

Despite efforts to protect civilians, there has
unfortunately been an increase in the number of armed
conflicts throughout the world in recent years. There
has also been a noticeable change in the nature of such
conflicts. Urban and residential areas have increasingly
been transformed into battlefields in cases of internal
conflict and civil strife. That has contributed to the
surge in the number of victims among civilian
populations.

Although armed conflict takes a higher toll
among women and children in comparison to other
groups, the international community has only recently
begun to realize that fact. We must, therefore, focus
greater attention on the suffering of women and
children caught up in armed conflict. We also take note
of the ongoing recruitment of children and adolescents'
which makes them victims of armed conflict.

Moreover, many of the armed conflicts raging
today involve non-State actors. Many such actors fail
to uphold international humanitarian law and fail to
commit themselves to respecting human rights. That
problem must be addressed differently from the way
such violations committed by States and Governments
are addressed.

In the context of the efforts made to put an end to
armed conflict, it is crucial to obtain correct
information about unfolding developments. That
important task falls to journalists, who face serious
challenges in delivering information to the public. The
international community, and especially the parties to a
conflict, must therefore commit themselves to
protecting journalists, for they too are civilians.

It is abhorrent that civilians find themselves in
harm's way during armed conflict. But even more
abhorrent is the deliberate violent targeting of
civilians. This phenomenon is not confined only to
targeting civilians for acts of violence, but it also
includes indiscriminate acts of violence without taking
into account the necessary measures to avoid striking

06-6406]

civilian targets. That constitutes cynical disregard for
the lives of civilians and, as such, it is no different
from targeting them deliberately.

The State of Qatar is part of a region in which
civilians continue to suffer from the repercussions of
armed violence. Dozens of innocent civilians are killed
in Iraq every day. The war in Lebanon last July
resulted in the deaths of more than 1,500 people in
only one month, most of them civilians. There have
also been numerous victims in occupied Palestinian
territory as a result of ongoing violence. They too are
predominantly civilians. The total number of civilians
killed since the outbreak of the recent crisis in the
ongoing Palestinian-Israeli conflict exceeds 4,000
since 2000.

Endangering the lives of civilians is not only a
violation of international norms, laws and conventions -
including the Charter of the United Nations - it is also a
violation of numerous resolutions and presidential
statements issued by the Security Council on the
protection of civilians.

Prevention is always better than cure. It is
important that we treat symptoms; however, it is more
important that we address the root causes of this
problem. Therein lies the importance of adopting
policies that promote sound sustainable development,
building a harmonious society, bringing about national
reconciliation and encouraging preventive diplomacy.
To do otherwise would constitute reaction at best. We
need comprehensive plans to ensure more protection of
civilians, plans that include existing mechanisms.
Those, in turn, must be translated into reality and
implemented, while activating the role of humanitarian
organizations and emphasizing the need that they
remain unbiased, neutral and independent.

The United Nations role in the protection of
civilians is indispensable. We note that the protection
of civilians is a priority of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and that, in that context, it is
especially important to have child protection advisers
during conflict, particularly when children are
endangered. In that regard, we call on the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations to include child protection
advisers in the structure of peacekeeping operations,
and particularly the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon following its recent expansion.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Israel.

