I thank you, Sir, and the German presidency for convening this important open debate on climate and security. Let me also thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenea and the other briefers for their insights and recommendations. Viet Nam is among the nations most heavily affected by climate change. Our Mekong river delta - crucial for Viet Nam's and regional food security - is one of the deltas most affected by sea-level rise and salination. Effective response to climate change is therefore vital to our sustainable development. Viet Nam seriously implements our commitments and obligations under all key international legal instruments on climate change. We support efforts to address climate-related challenges, including at the Security Council. At the regional level, we work with partners to strengthen Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) awareness, coordination and resilience and to implement an ASEAN Joint Response to Climate Change. The adverse effects of climate change are increasingly visible. They have deprived populations of livelihoods and exposed them to acute food and water insecurities. They have caused mass displacement and ignited fierce competition over natural resources. Climate change has proven to be a dangerous threat multiplier, to aggravate vulnerable political and security situations and to prolong, exacerbate and even instigate conflicts and instabilities. In the face of these tremendous challenges, the Security Council must do its part. The ongoing efforts to advance the climate agenda in the Council, in which Viet Nam actively engages, are going in the right direction. But more could be done. First, the Council should continue with an integrated and comprehensive approach in addressing root causes of conflicts, such as poverty, injustice, militarism and disregard for international law. Secondly, the Council should include in its conflict analysis consideration of the impacts of climate change. This is key to developing strategies that can address all aspects of crises and conflicts in a comprehensive and sustainable manner. Thirdly, the Council must support efforts of the entire United Nations system and the role of key international instruments for addressing climate change. The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement must continue to guide national and global responses based on mitigation, adaptation and resilience, which would contribute to the prevention of climate-induced conflicts and crises. Special attention and assistance should be given to developing, least- developed, small-island and landlocked countries, many of which suffer heavily from the impacts of climate change, but lag far behind in terms of response capacity, expertise and resources. Fourthly, in addressing climate and security issues, the Council, like any other international institution, needs to respect the sovereignty, national ownership and primary responsibility of States and act in line with their respective mandates. Climate change knows no borders and will cause more severe consequences unless we coordinate our efforts more effectively and efficiently. To address this global challenge, we need a global response, in which multilateral cooperation coordinated by the United Nations is essential. I strongly believe that strengthening global partnership is key to securing sustainable peace and prosperity for our people and the planet.
