I thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMID), for her valuable briefing, and I welcome the representative of Iraq to our meeting today. We are delighted by the recent positive developments in Iraq following the formation of the new Government headed by Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi. We have witnessed progress in the Iraqi Government's delivery of its promises to combat corruption, reform the economy, provide basic services, strengthen control over border crossings and finalize the technical and legal requirements to proceed with the plan to hold early elections in June 2021. We believe the newly ratified election law is an important step that will help move the country in the right direction. The Security Council and the wider international community should encourage the Iraqis to build on those initial achievements and take more concrete steps forward. We also commend the Iraqi leaders for their efforts in working with the Kurdistan Regional Government to tackle pending issues. We hope that the recent agreements between them will create a favourable environment for the return of displaced persons, the restoration of stability and the strengthening of trust and confidence. We believe that dialogue, solidarity and national harmony continue to be the key factors in solving the country's internal matters. Regarding Iraqi-Kuwaiti relations, we are pleased with the ongoing cooperation between the relevant parties in the search for missing Kuwaitis and third-country nationals, despite the constraints resulting from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The repatriation of human remains to Kuwait in September was a demonstration of their efforts and commitment. We encourage further efforts and cooperation to accelerate the process. We also urge the international community to continue to provide support for the work of the technical teams. However, the challenges facing Iraq today remain profound. The security situation continues to be a grave concern. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant still poses a threat, and violent attacks occur in many places. Meanwhile, the surge of COVID-19 and its impact on the economy, the health-care system and humanitarian situation are alarming. According to the World Bank, poverty in Iraq is estimated to increase in the short term by 7 to 14 percentage points. That means that 2.7 to 5.5 million Iraqis would become newly poor, in addition to the pre-crisis 6.9 million. Currently, 1.3 million people remain internally displaced across the country, and 1.77 million people are in a state of acute need of assistance. In that context, the role of UNAMI and other United Nations agencies standing with Iraq has proved essential. The reports of the Secretary-General on UNAMI and the letter sent by the Government of Iraq to the Security Council last week demonstrate the need for the continuation of the Mission. We reiterate our support for UNAMI and United Nations agencies to continue with their mandate to help Iraq to overcome its ongoing difficulties. We call for continued and strengthened collaboration between United Nations teams and the Government of Iraq in coping with the country's political, economic and humanitarian challenges. We also urge the international community to continue to stand beside Iraq, while providing support and fully respecting Iraq's political independence, unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1099) mentions violations of Iraq's sovereignty, which is another major concern of the region and beyond. To conclude, we strongly believe that, with the determination of the Government, the resilience of the Iraqi people and the support of international actors, Iraq will soon recover and thrive in the future that it deserves.
