Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): As
this is the first time that I am taking the floor in the
Security Council since having been appointed and
begun my work as Permanent Representative by the
President of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire, His
Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara, on this solemn
occasion I should like to convey the profound and
sincere gratitude of the people, the Government and the
President of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire to the
members of the Security Council for having paid
tireless attention to the Ivorian crisis.

The obligation and responsibility to protect
civilians in situations of imminent danger is at the
heart of the concerns of the international public
opinion, given the situation that has prevailed in Cote
d'Ivoire since 28 November 2010 and despite the
presence of the United Nations Operation in cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI), which is mandated, inter alia, to
protect civilians in imminent danger of violence. Over
the past three months, Mr. Gbagbo's forces have
committed massive violations of human rights and
massacred more than 500 civilians with their hands
tied. In the light of this duty and responsibility to
protect civilians, my delegation calls on the Security
Council, acting under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter, to authorize the strengthening of the
mandate and current posture of UNOCI.

The thirty-ninth Ordinary Summit of Heads of
State and Government of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), held in Abuja,
Nigeria, on 23 and 24 March, adopted resolution
A/RES.l/O3/ll of 24 March. The resolution, inter alia,

"requests the United Nations Security Council to
authorize the immediate implementation of the
Authority Decisions of December 2010. In this
context, [it] requests the United Nations Security
Council to strengthen the mandate of the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire... enabling
the Mission to use all necessary means to protect
life and property, and to facilitate the immediate
transfer of power to Mr. Alassane Ouattara".

The resolution also recalled

"the decisions of the Extraordinary Summits of
the Authority of 7 and 24 December 2010,
particularly regarding paragraph 10 of the latter,
which states: "In the event that Mr. Gbagbo fails
to heed the immutable demand of ECOWAS to
hand over power, the Community would be left
with no alternative but to take other measures,
including the use of legitimate force, to achieve
a"

the goals of the Ivorian people .

Therefore, taking into account the deep
involvement of ECOWAS in addressing the Ivorian
crisis, the application of Chapter VIII in this regard
seems relevant to us, with a View to ensuring the
necessary coordination and cooperation between
UNOCI and ECOWAS in order to effectively protect
C6te d'Ivoire's civilian population, millions of whom
were born in other ECOWAS countries.

In its decision taken at the 265th meeting, held in
Addis Ababa on 10 March, the African Union Peace
and Security Council definitively confirmed the
legitimacy of Mr. Alassane Ouattara as President of
C6te d'Ivoire. It also called on Mr. Gbagbo, for the last
time, to peacefully cede power in no more than two
weeks. A high representative of the African Union is to
be appointed to implement that decision. With the
deadline having passed yesterday, a high representative
is yet to be named.

Assistant Secretary-General Khare referred to the
escalation of Violence currently taking place in C6te
d'Ivoire, which is a matter of genuine concern.
Ivorians are dying every day. Human rights violations
are taking place daily. Every Ivorian is experiencing
the traumatic effects of this situation. I would just refer
to two incidents. On the morning of 3 March, women
who had gone out to demonstrate - in a joyous,
carnival-like atmosphere - were machine-gunned by
Mr. Gbagbo's forces. Like members of the Council,
many people were shocked by the images broadcast
around the world. Four days later, artillery shells were
fired at a market in the neighbourhood of Abobo. The
mortars that fell in the centre of the market, during the
busiest period, killed 40 and injured 60.

My delegation is concerned, and has asked to
speak here to draw the Council's attention to this
unbridled escalation of violence in Cote d'Ivoire.
Moreover, we wish to reiterate our condemnation,
voiced some time ago, in connection with what is a
situation of ethnic cleansing or premeditated genocide.
Those being targeted include, first, Ivorians of Dioula
and Baoule ethnicities, whose members include,
respectively, President Alassane Ouattara and President
Henri Konan Bedie, his ally in the coalition with the
Rally of Houphouetistes for Democracy and Peace;
secondly, nationals from other ECOWAS States living
in Cote d'Ivoire, including from Burkina Faso, Niger,
Senegal, Mauritania, Mali, Ghana, Togo and Benin;
and, thirdly, Africans of the Muslim faith.
5

Civilians living in Cote d'Ivoire are victims of
Mr. Gbagbo's reign of terror, whose atrocities include a
propensity by his militias to desecrate mosques and
assassinate Muslim clergy, in the hope of provoking a
similar reaction by the Muslim community, thereby
sparking an inter-ethnic conflict of incalculable
consequences. Fortunately, in their great wisdom,
leaders of the Muslim community have echoed the
calls for calm and restraint, which have been heeded by
their followers.

The toll of the atrocities since the beginning of
the post-electoral crisis up to 18 March is as follows:
859 killed by gunfire; 1,886 injured, 542 of them
seriously; 100 persons disappeared; and 876 arrests,
with 45 persons still being held.

As expected, this situation has set off an
unprecedented humanitarian catastrophe in Cote
d'Ivoire, with negative consequences for the region.
The Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations has already cited statistics, so I shall not
repeat them.

Faced with a situation that is further deteriorating
on a daily basis, the tragedy being experienced by our
people and the danger of increased crimes against
humanity, my delegation solemnly calls on the Security
Council to immediately adopt robust measures against
former President Gbagbo and all those who support
him. Those measures should include, first, the
immediate establishment by UNOCI and the Licorne
force of a comprehensive plan throughout the country
to provide security for civilians in imminent threat of
danger, especially in Abobo and Anyama, by putting in
place a security cordon; second, the destruction of
military weapons used by Mr. Gbagbo's forces to carry
out the massacre of civilians; third, completely
isolating Mr. Gbagbo by not recognizing his
representatives, in particular in Africa; fourth, a
prohibition on the issuance of visas to Mr. Gbagbo and
members of his family and inner circle; fifth, the
6

strengthening of monitoring of the embargo on
weapons and the application of sanctions against
countries that contribute to its violation; sixth, freezing
the assets held abroad by Mr. Gbagbo, his family and
his inner circle; seventh, submitting the serious
violations of human rights and crimes against humanity
in C6te d'Ivoire to the International Criminal Court;
and, lastly, emergency authorization of the legitimate
use of force to safeguard Cote d'Ivoire's population,
democracy and peace, as well as to install President
Alassane Ouattara fully into office.

We have recently learned that Mr. Gbagbo's
militias have acquired weapons of mass destruction,
including BM-21 multiple rocket launchers and a
Mi-24 helicopter, which they are preparing to use
against civilians. In addition, we have been informed
that heavy weapons are pointed at the Golf Hotel,
where the President of cote d'Ivoire is temporarily
lodged. Those weapons pose an ongoing real threat
against the personal security of the country's President,
his Government and all those inside the Golf Hotel.

The question that arises is, Can the Security
Council content itself with remaining a passive
observer in the face of the calculated extermination of
many thousands of people living in C6te d'Ivoire?

In his latest message to the nation, President
Ouattara expressed his desire to bring together, without
distinction, all the people of Cote d'Ivoire, carrying out
a concrete programme for national reconciliation and
the unification of the army and the country as a whole.
President Ouattara believes that we must close the
chapter on violence and civil war. Cote d'Ivoire should
once again become the country of peace and hospitality
it has always been, and once again follow its calling, in
the words of its national anthem, as a united and
welcoming country.

