The President: I thank the representative of the
United States of America for the kind words he
addressed to me and to my delegation.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Pakistan.

First, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his introductory statement, which has set the tone
for this important debate. The Charter of the United
Nations describes its central purpose, "to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war".
Although the concept of collective security, as
originally envisioned, did not prove to be feasible,
especially in the midst of the cold war, United Nations
peacekeeping has emerged over time as the most
visible and effective instrument for preventing and
containing conflicts and building the foundations of
peace.

Since 1948, the United Nations has deployed 57
peacekeeping missions, many in difficult war zones.
While United Nations peacekeeping has had some
well-advertised failures, its many successes deserve
greater public acclaim.
In 1988, the Nobel Peace Prize was presented to
United Nations peacekeeping forces for their unique
role in "making the ideas which were the very reason
for the establishment of the United Nations a reality".
In his Nobel Lecture, Secretary-General Perez de
Cuellar stated:

"The essence of peacekeeping is the use of
soldiers as a catalyst for peace rather than as the
instruments of war Their strength is that,
representing the will of the international
community, they provide an honourable
alternative to war and a useful pretext for peace."

Peacekeeping traditionally consisted of the
insertion of a military force to separate warring parties
and to create the necessary political space for peace to
take root. Peacekeeping was most often restricted to
monitoring ceasefires. Even today, seven of the 14
current United Nations peacekeeping missions involve
these traditional tasks. However, more recently, United
Nations peacekeepers have been deployed in complex
conflict situations that require a multidimensional
approach encompassing military, political,
humanitarian, social and economic actions.

The current United Nations peacekeeping
expenditure on its 14 missions, involving 51,000 troops
and over 3,000 police personnel, stands at $2.82
billion. This may rise further once the three or four
new peacekeeping missions are deployed. Although
peacekeeping is an expensive undertaking, it is far
cheaper than its alternative - war. Hostile military
operations can entail immensely larger costs, including
economic, social and human costs, as we are
witnessing today. The cost of civil wars alone has been
estimated at $128 billion a year. Peacekeeping remains
the most cost-effective way of maintaining peace,
preventing conflict and facilitating the transition from
war to peace.

Pakistan is proud to be one of the oldest, largest
and most consistent contributors to United Nations
peacekeeping. Since 1960, Pakistani peacekeepers have
served in 28 out of 57 United Nations missions.
Presently, over 7,500 Pakistani troops are serving in
eight peacekeeping missions. Sixty-six Pakistani
peacekeepers have paid the ultimate price while
serving under the flag of the United Nations.

Pakistani soldiers have served in some of the
most difficult and most dangerous United Nations
peacekeeping operations. They have acquitted
themselves commendably, with honour and
professionalism.
Our participation in the United Nations Security
Force in West New Guinea from 1960 to 1964 was
instrumental in preventing war between Indonesia and
Portugal.

The decisive action of our peacekeepers with the
United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia
helped the consolidation of peace in that country.

In Bosnia, Pakistani troops defended the United
Nations safe area of Tuzla and its ethnically-mixed
civilian population against the repeated onslaughts of
ethnic-cleansing militias.

In Sierra Leone, an unsteady United Nations
presence was transformed into a major United Nations
success story, in large measure - if I may say with
humility - as a result of the participation of Pakistani
peacekeepers whose actions, apart from stabilizing the
situation, included the construction of roads and
playgrounds and the renovation of schools, hospitals
and places of worship.

In neighbouring Liberia, Pakistani troops,
deployed in Lofa County, are also providing
humanitarian and medical assistance to 20,000 people.
Their approach, I am very proud to say, was explained
simply by one of our soldiers: "We cannot be eating
while the vast majority of the population are hungry."

In the Ituri district of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Pakistani troops are providing security to
thousands of civilians exposed to brutal ethnic
Violence.

Three years ago, speaking in Islamabad of our
peacekeepers, Secretary-General Kofi Annan said:

"Your soldiers have made the ultimate
sacrifice in the service of world peace, and the
United Nations. I salute this record of global
idealism because I believe it reflects a
determination among the Pakistani people to
serve the world."

Pakistan has a Vital stake in the success of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. The United Nations
success will be our success. The following are essential
for success.

First, United Nations peacekeeping operations
should be well conceived and well executed. Their
mandates should be clear, realistic and achievable, and
conducted with the full support of the international
community. Secondly, they should have well-trained,
well-equipped and disciplined peacekeepers. The
considerable experience of Pakistani peacekeepers in
different parts of the world has given us a certain
expertise in peacekeeping, which we are willing to
share with others. Thirdly, United Nations
peacekeepers must be provided with full financial,
administrative and logistical support. Fourthly, they
must have accurate and timely field intelligence and,
where necessary, robust rules of engagement. Fifthly,
they should address the root causes of conflict so as to
ensure durable peace and stability and to prepare the
ground for post-conflict reconciliation, reconstruction
and development. Sixthly, once deployed, United
Nations peacekeepers must complete their tasks.

This debate has crystallized the challenges the
United Nations is facing due to the unprecedented
surge in demand for peacekeeping. Four new complex
missions in C6te d'Ivoire, Burundi, Haiti and, possibly,
the Sudan will have to be deployed over the next few
weeks and months. These will need the commitment of
additional human financial, administrative and
logistical support by the international community.
Several new suggestions have been advanced in this
debate, including by the Secretary-General today. I am
confident that the presidential statement that the
Council will adopt shall reflect these ideas and
suggestions.

Pakistan is not only one of the major contributors
to United Nations peacekeeping; we also host one of
the oldest United Nations peacekeeping missions. The
United Nations Military Observer Group in India and
Pakistan (UNMOGIP) is responsible for monitoring the
ceasefire along the Line of Control in Jammu and
Kashmir. It continues to make a substantive
contribution to the preservation of peace in Kashmir. In
the Islamabad Declaration of 6 January 2004, Pakistan
and India agreed to resolve all disputes between them,
including that on J ammu and Kashmir, through a peace
process to the satisfaction of both sides. It is obvious
that, in order for there to be durable peace, the solution
of the Jammu and Kashmir dispute should be in
consonance with the aspirations of the people of
Kashmir. UNMOGIP can help in promoting a just and
peaceful resolution of the J ammu and Kashmir dispute.

Apart from reviewing the status of United
Nations peacekeeping to improve its performance, this
special event is designed to pay high tribute to all the
men and women who have served or continue to serve
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. This
debate honours their professionalism, dedication and
courage and the memory of those who lost their lives
in the service of the United Nations and the noble
cause of peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I propose to suspend the meeting now and to
resume it at 3.30 pm. this afternoon, when the Council
will hear the rest of the speakers inscribed on my list.

The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.
