Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would like, Mr. President, to express once
again on behalf of my country, the Syrian Arab
Republic, our pride in the Russian presidency of the
Security Council this month. We believe that the
coincidence of the announcement of the formation of
the Constitutional Committee with your presidency of
the Council once again asserts your country's key role
in establishing international peace and security and
upholding the principles of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations, especially the principles
of sovereignty and non-interference in other countries'
internal affairs.

The Syrian Government, in close coordination
with its friends in Russia and Iran, and in collaboration
with the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Geir Pedersen, was able to achieve the formation
of the Constitutional Committee, as announced by the
Secretary-General, and to agree on its terms of reference
and rules of procedure. The Committee is Syrian-
led and -owned and free of any foreign interference,
as reiterated by Mr. Pedersen at the beginning of this
meeting. This success represented by the establishment
of the Constitutional Committee is a Syrian national
success par excellence, overcoming all the impediments
placed by Governments hostile to Syria so as to prolong
the crisis and obstruct a political solution.

Syria's determination to establish a Constitutional
Committee, with close follow-up by the President of
the Republic, contributed to this important national
achievement for the Syrian people. Indeed, all of us
are familiar with the famous saying, "Victory has a
thousand fathers, but defeat is an orphan". Given the
fact that the Constitution is the supreme legislation
reflecting the aspirations of any given people and that it
determines their national, political, economic, cultural
and social visions and choices, national ownership of
the Constitution is its cornerstone and foundation. The
Syrians alone have the exclusive right to discuss their
national Constitution and to adopt it of their own free
will, without any foreign interference, preconditions or
extortion by parties or Governments that wish to see
the country's destabilization and the destruction and
pillaging of its assets, violating its sovereignty and
prejudicing its national, independent determination by
engaging in terrorism in all its political, military and
economic forms.

Syria is as ancient as history itself. The tomb of
ourjoint ancestor, Abel, is in the suburbs of Damascus,
and Ugarit, Syria, provided humankind with the first
alphabet, in 1700 B.C.E. The Syrian legislator Emilios
Babinos, who was born in Horns in 142 B.C.E. and whose
statue still stands at the Palace of Justice in Rome, was
one of the five Syrian legislators whose national laws
constitute 80 per cent of the Justinian law code. The
engineer Apollodorus, born in Damascus in the year
60 AD, was the greatest architect in the history of
humankind and designed the great bridge over the
Danube. I say this so that everyone can know that we
are not novices when it comes to politics, history, law
or economics.

My country's Government continued to participate
in the Astana meetings as a framework that has yielded
tangible results on the ground. We have positively dealt
with the outcomes of the national dialogue conference
in Sochi, as represented by the agreement on the
establishment of the Constitutional Committee. That
has crystallized into the agreement with the Special
Envoy on the terms of reference and rules of procedure
of the Constitutional Committee. We have agreed on its
regulatory principles, foremost of which is the principle
of a full and strong commitment to the sovereignty and
independence and to the unity of the people and land
of the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as the Syrian-
owned and -led nature of the political process. No
preconditions or prejudged conclusions will be dictated
regarding the Committee's work and recommendations.

The Committee is the master of its own modus
operandi and decisions, and no country or party,
especially the one known as the small group, may
intervene in its work, either directly or indirectly.
We also agreed that no ultimatum or timetable can
be imposed on the Committee and that every single
step should be studied and clear, as the Constitution
will determine Syria's future for coming generations.
Mr. Geir Pedersen, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, is fully aware of all these facts.

We in Syria are keen on seeing progress in the
political process based on sound foundations that meet
the aspirations of the Syrian people. The role of the
Special Envoy for Syria is to facilitate the work of the
Committee and ensure compromise between the parties
thereto through his good offices, if necessary, as he
himself noted in his briefing.

On that basis, we reiterate that we stand ready to
actively work with friendly countries and the Special
Envoy to launch the Committee. We look forward to
the visit to be made by the Special Envoy to Damascus
in a few days to coordinate with the Syrian State for
the first meeting of the Constitutional Committee and
on the steps necessary for the Committee to produce
serious outcomes that respond to the aspirations of the
Syrian people.

At the time when my country's Government
stands ready to engage positively in the work of the
Constitutional Committee, we are very realistic,
responsible and cognizant of the fact that the political
process is not a walk in the park. The Council might
recall that we and other Members States, in this very
Chamber, have warned against allowing some to
tamper with the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of international law, as was done when Iraq
and Libya were invaded. What our States really need is
to inhibit the ball of flame that some have been trying to
fan across our region for decades in order to destabilize
the region, pillage its assets and displace its peoples.

Nevertheless, we remain confident in our national
capacities and in the support and assistance of our
friends and allies, who wish only good and stability
for Syria, the region and the world, while they reject
any foreign intervention and insist on an exclusively
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process. We
look forward to working with honest country partners
that genuinely seek to build the future of Syria and are
committed to the best interests of the Syrian people
and to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic. We do not want any untrue
partners whose only aim is to impose the agendas of
their paymasters or any other foreign interventionist
conditions as a pretext for acts of aggression, occupation
and terrorism under any name whatsoever.

Yes, we unequivocally state that we look forward
to working with true and honest country partners that
will confront the policies and practices of the infamous
countries that, up to this very moment, are trying to
impose their will at the expense of the Syrian national
interest by supporting terrorism and the separatist
militias known as the Syrian Democratic Forces, and
by using the platform of the Security Council to defame
the Syrian Government and its allies while imposing
continued unilateral, compulsory economic procedures
on the Syrian people to impede reconstruction and
prevent Syrian refugees and internally displaced
persons from returning to their homes.

I would like to tell those who have been decrying
the situation of Syrian civilians that, to this very
moment, no magnetic resonance imaging machines or
computed tomography scanners are being allowed to
enter Syria. We asked the World Health Organization
to send us such devices and it replied that it could not
do so because certain influential States object to such
medical equipment being sent to Syria. Those are the
very same countries that are shedding crocodile tears
in the Council on behalf of civilians.

The success of any political process in Syria
requires the end of the illegitimate presence of United
States, British, French and Turkish forces on the Syrian
territory. Our faith in the progress ofthe political process
does not mean in any way whatsoever that we relinquish
our right and constitutional commitment to liberating
every single inch of our territory from terrorism
and illegitimate military presence. My country will
continue to work in parallel on many tracks, including a
political solution, fighting terrorism, getting rid of any
illegitimate foreign presence, fostering deeper national
reconciliation and repairing the damage caused by
terrorism and the international coalition, while relying
on our own potential and the support of our true allies.

That being said, what Syrians need is for the
Council to back a serious, lasting political solution, to
support our efforts with our allies in fighting terrorism
and eliminating terrorism financing, and to put an end
to the unilateral, compulsory economic procedures
imposed on the Syrian people by the United States, the
European Union and other Governments.

In conclusion, my country's delegation would like
to draw the attention of all who supported the formation
of the Constitutional Committee to the fact that the
enemies of a settlement will never pass up any means,

including baseless fiction, to impede the Committee's
work. That has been proven by the spread of hearsay
and lies. As soon as the Committee was formed two
days ago, the Syrian Government was falsely accused
of using chemical weapons against its own people. We
stress that those who seek to impede the work of the
Committee should be held accountable and that, in order
to ensure that the Committee's discussions are fruitful,
the Governments of the notorious States must cease
their hostile practices and fabrication of accusations
and lies, and stop interfering in Syrian internal affairs.

We never falsely point a finger at others. No sooner
had the Secretary- General sent his letter to the President
of the Security Council two days ago regarding the
Terms of Reference and Core Rules of Procedure of the
Constitutional Committee (S/2019/775, annex), than
new ideas and proposals were made that ran counter to
what had been agreed by the Syrian Government and
the Secretary-General, with a view to overshadowing
the achievement before the work of this important
Committee had even been launched.

