Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We are meeting today at
the request addressed to the President of the Security
Council by nine separate Council Member States to
discuss the human rights situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea.

On 22 December 2014, the Council decided to add
to its agenda a new item, namely, the situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, separate from
the non-proliferation issue. At the time, we were not
a member of the Security Council. Had we been, our
vote would have been no, as it was today. Angola has
been extending its full support and cooperation to the
Security Council and to its Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), concerning the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, with particular
reference to the issue of nuclear proliferation by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Our position
is based on our unwavering support for the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and our conviction that nuclear
proliferation on the Korean peninsula constitutes a
threat to regional and international peace and security.

Concerning the human rights situation, however,
it is our conviction that it does not constitute a threat
to regional or international peace and security, and
therefore falls outside the mandate of the Security
Council, whose primary responsibility, conferred
upon it by the Charter of the United Nations, is the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Moreover, the General Assembly is already dealing
with the human rights situation in North Korea, and
the Human Rights Council is the appropriate forum
to discuss and deliberate on human rights issues.
Our position is also dictated by our disapproval of
the double-standards criteria that are so often applied
by the Council. There are country situations where
egregious human rights violations take place on a daily
basis, as well as countries that sponsor terrorism and
promote conflict, without being subject to a word of
condemnation by the Security Council.

