It is an honour for South Africa to preside over this meeting as our term as an elected member of the Security Council draws to a close. During this year we have had the privilege not only of serving on the Security Council but also of chairing our continental body, the African Union (AU). We welcome the opportunity in this meeting to reflect on the efforts of the Council to resolve conflicts on the African continent and to further enhance the partnership between the African Union and the United Nations. Over the past decade, the United Nations and the AU have deepened their relationship, with partnership agreements on peace and security, development and capacity-building. The most advanced cooperation between the two organizations is on peace and security, as provided for in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and reaffirmed in many outcomes of the Security Council on cooperation between the United Nations and regional arrangements. We are witnessing in Africa a continent that is taking responsibility for the complex challenges to its peace, security and development. It is working with the United Nations and other international partners in supporting African-led solutions to problems on the continent. While the United Nations, through the Security Council, has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, we have to acknowledge the important role played by regional organizations, such as the African Union, to address threats to peace and security. The African Union has recognized the nexus between peace and development. In that regard, it has aligned the African Peace and Security Architecture with Agenda 2063, the blueprint for Africa's development. The approach aims to prevent and end conflict through dialogue, mediation, peace support operations and a sustained focus on post-conflict reconstruction and development. The invaluable role of the United Nations in support of those African- led initiatives cannot be overstated. We underline once again the need for the United Nations and the African Union to expedite deliberations to ensure that AU-led peace support operations authorized by the Security Council are financed through United Nations assessed contributions. The African Union is determined to silence the guns on the continent. We have made significant gains towards the achievement of this necessary goal, as evidenced by ground-breaking peace agreements in the Central African Republic, South Sudan, the Sudan and, most recently, Libya. Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union must be flexible and strategic in order to confront the growing threat of terrorism, transnational organized crime, the illegal exploitation of Africa's natural resources and illicit financial flows. We would like to recognize the important role played by African Union and regional-led peace operations on the continent, which have paved the way for United Nations peacekeeping in the most difficult of circumstances. They include the operations in the Central African Republic and Mali, which have set a precedent for regionally led peace operations transitioning into United Nations peacekeeping missions. The novel African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur epitomizes the effective cooperation between the African Union and _ the United Nations in protecting civilians and facilitating the path to peace. The African Union Mission in Somalia remains important in contributing to stabilization and the advancement of peace in Somalia, and we call on the United Nations and international partners to continue supporting its efforts. We commend the bravery of the African women and men involved in United Nations peacekeeping efforts to protect civilians and support peace processes in Africa, as well as the contribution made by peacekeepers from outside the continent, whose dedication to the African cause is a demonstration of remarkable and selfless solidarity. Through our cooperation, we also need to address the root causes and drivers of conflict in Africa, including development and governance issues. We must look at all the factors that may impede the realization of a peaceful and prosperous Africa. Despite the significant gains that we have made, we remain concerned about the immense humanitarian challenges the continent faces as a result of ongoing conflicts and the coronavirus disease pandemic. South Africa supported the Secretary- General's call earlier this year for a global ceasefire to respond to the humanitarian challenges posed by the pandemic, and we are heartened to note that his call has resulted in progress on some protracted conflicts on the continent. The pandemic has shown that solidarity and cooperation through multilateral action are the most effective means to confront a common threat. This year is significant for women and girls across the world. This year we are celebrating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and marking 20 years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Those are cardinal policy frameworks that compel the international community to spare no effort in ensuring that women assume their rightful place in promoting and preserving international peace and security. We welcome the role played by women and youth in the prevention and resolution of conflict and peacebuilding. We are deeply concerned about the targeting of women and children, often through sexual violence used as a tool of war, terror and intimidation. Addressing that scourge is the litmus test for how effective we are in protecting our populations from the ravages of conflict. Furthermore, we remain concerned about sexual exploitation and abuse by those who are charged with the protection of civilians. That is utterly unacceptable, and we must have no tolerance for such acts. We need to further strengthen the strategic cooperation between the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council. International peace, security and development can be achieved only if they are built from the collective efforts of all actors, drawing on the respective strengths of every one of the building blocks of the multilateral system. I must applaud Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, a country that is part of the African diaspora, together with the African countries in the Security Council, namely the Niger, Tunisia and South Africa, for working jointly to promote cooperation between the United Nations and the AU for the peaceful resolution of African conflicts. We will be taking this work forward when the African Union holds its summit on the Silencing the Guns initiative at the fourteenth extraordinary session of its Assembly, two days from now. I am certain that our deliberations today in the Security Council will make a valuable contribution to the success of the summit.
