Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to welcome His Excellency Mr. Jose Luis
Cancela, Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay.

(spoke in English)

My gratitude also goes to the Deputy Secretary-
General, the Vice-President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and the
representative of OXFAM. for their briefings. I add
my voice to others to praise the humanitarian workers
of the United Nations, the ICRC, OXFAM. and other
humanitarian non-governmental organizations for their
tireless efforts, often made at the risk of their lives, to
help those who are suffering in armed conflicts.
Today's topic, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, is one of the most pertinent subjects that
the Security Council has to deal with. The appalling
situation in Syria, which the Council has been
discussing intensively for years, illustrates vividly the
importance ofthis issue. Japan associates itself with the
statement to be delivered later by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict. Since the
Swiss statement will cover many aspects mentioned
in the President's concept note (S/2016/22, annex), I
would like to focus my statement on two points only:
compliance and accountability.

As the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/453), submitted in June 2015, points out,
ensuring compliance in armed conflicts remains a
challenge to the international community. The thirty-
second International Conference of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent, which took place just one month ago in
Geneva, was a real opportunity for the international
community to demonstrate its commitment to
strengthening compliance with international
humanitarian law. One of the important outcomes
that many of us expected to see was the adoption of
comprehensive mechanisms and the strengthening of
the normative framework of international humanitarian
law. Very regrettably, however, we failed to reach an
agreement. Mechanisms that strongly encouraged
relevant parties to comply with international
humanitarian law are more than ever awaited. Member
States should strive ceaselessly and in a more inclusive
manner to establish such mechanisms. On that issue,
Japan will continue to engage in discussions with other
Member States.

When compliance fails, accountability must play its
role. Effective accountability deters non-compliance.
I believe that we have a unique tool to enhance
accountability when national judicial systems are
not sufficient; we all know that is the International
Criminal Court (ICC). Recently, we have witnessed a
case in which the ICC completed its first judicial cycle
of crimes committed against civilians, which includes
the issuance of arrest warrants, the surrender of the
defendant, a trial, a judgement and, finally, a sentence
served. In this case, it took more than eight years to
complete this cycle.

I am fully aware that States Members of the United
Nations have varying views and perspectives on the
ICC, but it is the first permanent international criminal
court. It is not an ad hoc court. It is the first permanent
international criminal court that can hold accountable
perpetrators of crimes committed against civilians.
With 123 States parties, which is very close to two-
thirds of the entire membership of the United Nations,
the ICC can be the most effective tool available to
ensure accountability. Therefore, I would like to
strongly encourage Member States that have not done
so to become States parties to the ICC. Let us make the
Court more universal so that we can effectively deter
crimes committed against civilians. I believe that the
Security Council, on its part, can do more to enhance
cooperation and communication with the ICC. To those
ends, Japan is willing to work together with the Member
States in and outside the Council.

In conclusion, I would like to refer to the importance
ofpromoting human security while protecting civilians.
In my view, it is not sufficient to simply protect civilians
from physical harm. Their human dignity must also be
protected. Vulnerable people in armed conflicts cannot
recover their dignity if they are left in extreme poverty
and fear. They need to be empowered to become
constructive actors in their communities by such means
as improving health-care systems and education. Japan,
being a strong advocate of human security, will further
strengthen humanitarian and development assistance to
address such needs.

(spoke in Spanish)

Finally, it is nearly 1 p.m.; we began this debate
three hours ago. There still remains one Council
member to speak and a lot of people are waiting. We
have 77 speakers today. I think that we, the Security
Council, need to put a little order into all of this and
to set a time limit so that all Member States, not just
members of the Council but all Members of the United
Nations that desire to take the floor to speak will be
able to do so before 5.30 pm.

