Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We are a
member of the Group of Friends on behalf of which the
representative of Switzerland made a statement earlier
in this debate, raising important issues, including the
question of reparations and amends. My remarks today
will concentrate on one single topic: the practice of the
Security Council in exercising its competencies under
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
which was a central topic of the workshop that the
Portuguese delegation organized in preparation for this
debate. We commend that very useful initiative as a
way to make thematic debates in the Council more
meaningful.

The Security Council has a double competence
under the Rome Statute. First, it may refer situations to
the Court and, secondly, it may defer ongoing
investigations or prosecutions for a renewable period
of one year. These two functions are complementary,
but they are not precise mirror images of each other.
The deferral power is limited in time and requires an
active decision of the Council to be renewed, while the
referral is a one-time and irreversible act. It is also
worth noting that a decision to refer a situation does
not automatically trigger an investigation. That
decision remains with the Prosecutor and is based on
the merits of the case. As a third function, the Security
Council will have a role to play with regard to
exercising the Court's jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression - once the relevant regime under the Rome
Statute is activated, which can be no earlier than
January 2017.

In its history, the Council has resorted twice to
the use of article 16. It adopted resolutions 1422 (2002)
and 1487 (2003), which are widely considered as
contradicting both the Rome Statute and the Charter of
the United Nations. Also, it has made two referrals by
adopting resolution 1593 (2005), on the situation in
Darfur, and resolution 1970 (2011) on the situation in
Libya. There is no doubt that the unanimous adoption
of resolution 1970 (2011) in particular was a landmark
in the Council's engagement on individual criminal
accountability, and that it is of outstanding importance
for the international acceptance of the Rome Statute
system.

States parties to the Rome Statute have therefore,
for the most part, celebrated these referrals as
significant gains in the fight against impunity. We
agree with that assessment. But we also believe that
referrals are not automatically effective tools in the
fight against impunity and, by extension, for the
protection of civilians. This is therefore a good
moment for the Council to reflect on its role vis-a-vis
the Court, to the mutual benefit of both the Council and
the Court.

The most important element in making referrals
effective is follow-up action by the Council, in
particular where cooperation with the Court is lacking.
Such cooperation is a legal obligation for the State in
question under Chapter VII of the Charter, and for all
States parties to the Rome Statute. The Council has a
broad range of means available to promote and enforce
such cooperation, but has so far not made use of them.
They could lead to ineffective and prolonged
proceedings before the Court that are expensive and
create a perception of ineffectiveness, compounded by
accusations of political bias.

For the Council, the effects could be equally
damaging, leading to the view that the referral was less
an expression of a genuine commitment to ensure
accountability for the most serious crimes under
international law, than a decision based on political
expediency of the time. That is particularly true for the
practice of exempting certain categories of persons
from the referral decision - a practice that may at
some point have to stand the test of the Court's judicial
scrutiny.

There are, of course, quite different perspectives
among individual Council members on this issue, given
that some are, and some are not, parties to the Rome

11-5866]
Statute. Finding the strongest possible support for
referral decisions - ideally unanimous - is therefore
a key component in that respect.

The Council has a rich experience as a source for
mechanisms to provide for individual criminal
accountability, dating back to the early 1990s. The
models it has adopted have been diverse in nature,
ranging from ad hoc to hybrid tribunals, incorporating
various financing modalities. They are still actively
functioning, and a final lessons learned exercise is
therefore not possible at this moment. It seems clear,
however, that this chapter of the Council's history is
largely a thing of the past. For political and financial
reasons, it is unlikely that the Council will continue to
establish tribunals for specific situations on a regular
basis. Referrals to the Court will therefore likely
become the main tool of the Council to act in situations
where genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes, and eventually crimes of aggression, have been
committed with impunity.

Resorting to the services of the Court will,
however, also require a fresh look at the financing of
such investigations. Under the current practice, those
costs are shouldered by the States parties to the Rome
Statute. This is at odds with the treaty, which foresees a
system under which the United Nations membership
should bear the costs arising from a Security Council
mandate - just as the Court reimburses the United
Nations for its services.

For example, the costs for the Libya investigation
next year will amount to a projected €7 million. That is
not much money compared to the costs of some of the
accountability mechanisms set up by the Council, not
to mention other activities it has mandated. But it
represents an increase of more than 5 per cent in the
Court's budget. Competence in that respect of course
lies with the General Assembly, not with the Council.
We therefore hope that a constructive discussion can be
held in the appropriate forums in order to bring this
issue to a successful conclusion.

