The Secretary-General (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the presidency of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
for having organized this open debate on a theme of
great importance to the United Nations.

(Spoke in English)

Today's event continues the useful discussion
initiated last year under the Chinese presidency. The
year 2015 saw important steps taken to uphold the
values and advance the vision set out in the Charter
of the United Nations. Reviews of the international
peace and security architecture provided valuable ideas
for strengthening our work in conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development ( General Assembly resolution 70/1) and
the Paris Agreement on climate change demonstrated
our capacity to overcome divisions and chart a course
towards the common good.

While we celebrate these achievements, we must
also recognize that 2015 was one of the most troubled
and turbulent years in recent history. Civil wars ravaged
Syria and Yemen. Violent extremism spread. The blatant
disrespect for fundamental principles of international
human rights and humanitarian law defies our common
humanity and challenges the Security Council in
fulfilling its duties under the Charter. For the millions
living amid war and extreme poverty, and for countless
others whose rights are violated or neglected in other
ways, the ideals and aspirations of the Charter remain
elusive. Bringing the promise of the Charter to the most
vulnerable must continue to be our goal.

Decades of experience have validated the Charter's
vision. We understand better than ever that peace,
development and human rights are intrinsically
connected. We have seen that conflict-affected countries
generally experience the highest poverty rates and were
the least likely to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals. We know that human rights abuses are our most
effective early-warning signs of the instability that
often escalates into atrocity crimes.

The primary responsibility for preventing conflict
and protecting human rights lies with Member States.
It is clearly established in the Charter and reiterated in
numerous resolutions adopted by the Council, as well
as by the General Assembly. But in some situations,
Member States may lack the capacity to fulfil their
obligations. In others, it is Member States themselves
that are the main violators of human rights. The United
Nations can help Member States meet these national
challenges and uphold their responsibility to protect.

We continue to offer assistance in building up
national capacity to identify and address the precursors
of genocide and other grave crimes. The Human Rights
Up Front initiative is helping the United Nations system
to coordinate better across the peace and security,
development and human rights pillars, and to engage
with Member States at early stages of crises. We are
placing a growing focus on prevention through both
early warning and early action.

We should all much prefer to assess early
information than to wait for the warning signs of
disaster. We should be open to modest steps that could
address situations of concern before they grow more
serious and complex. Our engagement with Member
States on these matters will continue to be based on
cooperation, transparency and respect for sovereignty. I
know that at times Member States feel that such efforts
are a form of interference that undermines national
sovereignty, but it is violence and conflict - and not
our attempt to help Member States prevent them - that
threaten State sovereignty. It is violations of human
rights by the State that erode the legitimacy of the
State. In its engagements, the United Nations seeks to
reinforce sovereignty, not challenge or undermine it.

Article 99 of the Charter empowers the Secretary-
General to

"bring to the attention of the Security Council

any matter which in his opinion may threaten the

maintenance of international peace and security".
The General Assembly has recognized this as well.
Article 99 has been formally invoked only rarely in
United Nations history, but that does not mean it is no
longer operative or relevant, or that it cannot be invoked
in the future. It remains a key mechanism.

Whether or not Article 99 is formally invoked may
be secondary. First and foremost is our responsibility
to alert the Council when we see situations that we feel
require its engagement. I will continue to act in that
spirit. When considering which items reach the agenda
of the Security Council, my further hope is that we will
be driven by the Charter, not by geopolitical rivalries
or other external dynamics. When a Member State uses
an overly broad definition of terrorism to monopolize
power at the risk of long-term stability, that would seem
to merit the Council's attention. When we see massive
loss oflife and cross-border flows ofpeople, that would
seem to merit the Council's attention. We must not avert
our eyes from these or other such situations, no matter
how complex or contentious they might be to discuss.
And the world must see that the Council is addressing
the situations that matter most to most people.

The Security Council has many tools with which to
encourage and seek to secure the peaceful resolution of
disputes before they escalate, but ultimately the unity
of the Security Council is the crucial factor. We have
seen what heights are possible when unity is visible,
and we have seen the depths that are inevitable when
unity has vanished. We look forward to working with
Council members to best serve we the peoples in the
enduring spirit of the Charter.

