Ms. Bensouda: I regret all of the allegations of
selectivity on the part ofthe Office that have been made.
A close look at our work should suggest otherwise. I
regret also the blatant misinformation presented by the
representative of the Sudan to cover up the situation in
Darfur. I regret this misinformation.

As has been commented on, there is a perceived
tension between articles 27, on the irrelevance of
official capacity, and 98(1), on cooperation with respect
to waiver of immunity and consent to surrender, of the
Rome statute. The question naturally arises: if a Head
of State for whom an International Criminal Court
(ICC) warrant has been issued travels through the
territory of a State party, is that State party bound to
arrest and surrender the suspects to the Court, given the
provisions of article 98(1)?
Reasonable minds, reasonable lawyers may differ
in their interpretation of the Statute. However, what
is clear and indisputable is which body determines
with authority and finality the issue of whether or not
immunity is attached to the individual in question in any
specific case, and that is the Court and only the Court.

It is an obvious fact, but it must be emphasized,
that the ICC is a Court. It is not an association, it is
not a non-governmental organization or any other type
of organization. It is a criminal Court that determines
individual criminal responsibility within the framework
of the Rome Statute. States may choose to join the
Court by acceding to the treaty or choose not to join
the Court.

However, if a State chooses to join the Court and
becomes a State party, then it is bound to accept and
follow the provisions of the Rome Statute as they
apply to States parties; this includes being bound by
the decisions of the Court. So who decides the issue
of the apparent tension between the apparent tension
between articles 27, on the irrelevance of official
capacity, and article 98(1), on cooperation with respect
to waiver of immunity and consent to surrender? The
answer is clear: it is not the States parties themselves;
it is not the Security Council; it is not academics; it is
the Court itself.

Regarding the specific case ofPresident Al-Bashir,
the Pre-Trial Chamber made this fact absolutely clear in
its non-compliance decision regarding the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, on 9 April 2014. The Court is
the only and sole authority to decide whether or not the
immunity is generally attached to Mr. Al-Bashir, as
sitting Head of State, where applicable in this particular
case. The conclusion finds support in article 119(1) of
the Statute, which provides that any dispute concerning
the judicial functions of the court shall be settled by the
decision of the Court. This is a decision of the Court;
therefore, simply put, it is binding on States parties that
have joined the Court.

Similarly, the Court has ruled on several occasions
that in the specific case of Mr. Al-Bashir, States parties
are obliged to arrest and surrender him should he travel
to their territory. That is why non-compliance findings
have been made and referred to the Council in that case.
For example, this obligation is clear from the same 2014
decision finding the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in noncompliance to which I have referred. It is also
crystal-clear from the June 2015 decision in which
the Pre-trial Chamber also wrote that there exists no
ambiguity or uncertainty with respect to the obligation
of the Republic of South Africa to immediately arrest
and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir to the Court.

What I want to stress by referring to this decision
is that the Court has made plain on several occasions
what the answer is to the apparent tensions between
article 27 and 98 in the case of Mr. Al-Bashir. If States
parties do not agree with these decisions or find them
politically inconvenient, they are nevertheless bound
to follow the decisions of the Court. If States parties
disagree with these decisions, the appropriate response
is to challenge them before the Court through the legal
process if necessary and seek to appeal decisions if
they disagree with them. That is the correct way. That
is the legitimate way to receive legal disputes and to
respect the rule of law.

