Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me, at
the outset, thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). I would also like to thank His
Excellency Prime Minister Ivica Dacic' of Serbia and
Mr. Hashim Thaci for their statements.

The reporting period has seen several important
developments. It is a matter for satisfaction that the
conduct of the Serbian presidential and parliamentary
elections in Kosovo went off in a peaceful and orderly
manner, thanks to the efforts of UNMIK and other
international organizations, especially the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE),
to establish an appropriate modality for the voting
acceptable to all sides.

We also welcome the expression on the part of both
Belgrade and Pristina of the will necessary to resume
the European Union - facilitated dialogue, once
the new Government assumes office in Belgrade, in
order to discuss the implementation of the agreements
reached so far and take up new subjects. In that regard,
we particularly welcome the statements by President
Tomislav Nikolie reaffirming Serbia's commitment
to honouring all agreements reached in the dialogue,
as well as his readiness to engage in talks with the
Pristina leadership in the future. We hope that the talks
will resume soon and result in concrete progress on the
contentious issues.

The question of missing persons is an important
humanitarian issue. We hope that, with the direct
support and encouragement of UNMIK, it will be
possible to make further progress on it. We have noted
the steps taken by the Special Investigative Task Force
of the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX)
to investigate allegations of organ trafficking, as well as
Albania's recent adoption of a law on cooperation with
the Task Force. We reiterate our stand that a thorough
and impartial investigation should be carried out into
all aspects of the matter.

We share the Secretary-General's assessment that
the situation in the northern part of Kosovo continues
to be fragile and requires constant vigilance and
restraint from all sides in order to reduce the potential
for instability. We note with concern that during the
reporting period a number of inter-communal violent
acts took place in June and July. The attack on buses
transporting Serb children is a matter for serious
concern, as are the continuing violence and crime
against the Serbian minority, including the murder of a
returnee couple. We share the Secretary-General's view
of the need for genuine outreach by Kosovo institutions,
particularly the police. We urge the international
organizations present in Kosovo, especially the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) and EULEX, to exercise their authority
in order to prevent a recurrence of such incidents and
ensure the minority's safety.

In conclusion, I would like to express our
appreciation for the fact that UNMIK has continued
to implement its mandate in an impartial and status-
neutral manner, and to facilitate cooperation between
Pristina and Belgrade, the communities in Kosovo,
and KFOR, EULEX and the OSCE. We commend
and support the Special Representative and UNMIK
for their contribution to improving the situation in
northern Kosovo, and for the services that the Mission
is rendering in areas that better the daily lives of
all Kosovars. The Mission should be continued in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999) and other
relevant decisions. Other agencies in Kosovo * the
OSCE, KFOR, EULEX and so on - should continue to
cooperate and coordinate with UNMIK in accordance
with their respective mandates.

