Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation congratulates the delegation of the Kingdom
of Sweden on presiding over the Security Council for
this month. I also thank His Excellency Prime Minister
Stefan Lofven for personally presiding over this
constructive and important debate. We would also like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia
Gamba, and the Executive Director of UNICEF,
Ms. Henrietta Fore, for their tireless efforts in assisting
and supporting children all over the world.

Iraq held detailed dialogues with the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary -General in
the period leading up to the preparation of this report
(S/2018/465).

Iraq provided very accurate information from
specialized offices - in the Ministries of Justice,
Defence, the Interior, and Labour and Social
Affairs 4 in response to all of the queries that were
made during the consultations. In that regard, we would
like to clarify our position on some of the points in the
report for the period under review.

First, pertaining to the claims of airstrikes against
schools, generally speaking airstrikes were carried out
by air force jets against military targets of the terrorist
group Da'esh. The strikes were carried out using
confirmed intelligence reports in cooperation with the
coalition air forces joint command, and employing laser-
guided missiles inside the city to avoid hitting civilians.

Secondly, the air force command was not informed
of any strikes against civilian targets during the
liberation process.

Thirdly, with regard to military use of schools and
hospitals, units of the Ministry of Defence did not use
civilian facilities for military purposes, particularly
schools and hospitals. The units do not remain in any
given area during military operations; they continue to
move in the direction of their targets. Once a city is
liberated there is no need to use civilian facilities.

Fourthly, with regard to accountability when it
comes to children accused of association with the
terrorist group Da'esh, we deal with such children
in accordance with our 1983 Minors Act Number 76
and the amendments thereto. The law provides for
preferential treatment for minors when it comes to
investigation and judicial proceedings. In that regard,
special courts for minors have been set up under the
Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs.

Fifthly, the process of liberating cities occupied by
terrorist organizations at times required the presence
of military forces in some civilian facilities so that
mine action and the removal of explosive ordnance left
behind by the terrorist group Da'esh could take place,
so as to safeguard civilians from risks and threats and
allow the displaced to return.

Since the publication of last year's report
(S/2017/821), Iraq has been continuously cooperating
with the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict to
address the violations against the children ofIraq during
our confrontation with terrorists, so as to rehabilitate
and integrate them into society. In accordance with
resolution 1612 (2005), our Prime Minister sent a letter
to the Special Representative in January in which he
expressed Iraq's full readiness to cooperate with the
United Nations regional task force on monitoring and
reporting to develop a joint action plan to address any
violations or abuses related to the legal provisions on
recruiting minors, in line with the recommendations
of the Prime Minister and with the National Security
Council as the focal point for the dialogue with the
United Nations.

We must clarify to the international community
that, while there have been images in newspapers of
young men who appear to be under-aged, those have
been exceptional cases from areas subject to direct acts
of aggression by the terrorist group Da'esh. As a result,
some families and clans began defending themselves
while Iraqi armed forces were not yet present. For
example, I would point to the city of Al-Haditha,
where people resisted the terrorists and prevented them
from entering.

On 26 February, Iraq invited the Office of the
Special Representative to visit Iraq and to support
the efforts being made to treat children who were
impacted while combating terrorism. On the basis of
that invitation, a working group from the Office visited
Iraq from 5 to 8 March, during which it met with the
Minister of Labour and Social Affairs, in addition to
other meetings with representatives from the Ministries
of Foreign Affairs and Justice and the National Security
Council. On 22 October 2017, our Prime Minister
authorized the establishment of a high-level national
committee on monitoring and reporting with a view to
protecting the rights of children from violations. The
committee, which is chaired by the Minister of Labour
and Social Affairs, also met with the working group
of the Special Representative on 7 March, to which
it subsequently submitted recommendations. Work
and coordination are currently under way in Baghdad
between Iraq, represented by the high-level committee,
and the office ofthe United Nations Assistance Mission
in Iraq and UNICEF with a view to developing a
mutually agreeable action plan.

Consequently, we hope that accuracy is considered
when including information in this report. Such
information should be verified, so as to avoid inaccurate
information and information gleaned from sources
hostile to Iraq. We stress that inaccurate information
contained in the reports that are issued by United
Nations bodies and committees often poses a burden
for a country defending its land and facing some of the
most ferocious terrorist groups in the world.

