Mr. Ohin (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to commend the German presidency of the
Security Council for organizing this high-level debate
on the Middle East in the context ofcooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States in
maintaining international peace and security. I also
thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations and
the Secretary General of the League of Arab States for
their respective briefings on the situation in the Middle
East. Finally, I welcome the presence of my fellow
Ministers for Foreign Affairs, which bears witness to
the importance of the issue before the Council.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States dates back to 1950 and is highly
important, particularly now that the international
community is facing all types of threats, including
armed conflict, terrorism, humanitarian crises, crises
linked to extremism, and the proliferation of nuclear
weapons.

The importance of the contributions of regional
organizations to the maintenance of international peace
and security, as stipulated by the Charter of the United
Nations, no longer requires proof. At a time when
serious conflicts and threats in the Middle East call for
all available resources, it is more important today than
ever to strengthen cooperation under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. That is not a choice,
but a necessity that brings to mind a statement made
by the former Secretary General of the League of Arab
States, Mr. Chedli Klibi, during a meeting between the
two organizations held in Tunis in 1983.

"The League would very much like to consolidate
and develop existing ties in all areas related to the
maintenance of international peace and security,
and to cooperate by every means possible in the
implementation of the resolutions of the United
Nations".

The advantage of the League of Arab States in its
ability to bring States together to address issues that
fall within the remit of the Security Council shows that
its cooperation with the United Nations is essential and
should be strengthened. That cooperation has taken
many forms, notably during the Syrian crisis, in which
the Arab League's initiatives have been supported by
the United Nations as a whole and the Security Council
in particular. The appointments of the Joint Special
Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab
States for Syria in February, and of the Joint Special
Representative in August, following the resignation of
the Joint Special Envoy, are examples of the readiness
and commitment of the Secretaries-General of the two
organizations to work together to seek a solution to the
crisis.

The League of Arab States and the United Nations
should continue to explore the ways and means
necessary to help the Syrian people to end the tragedy
that has already caused some 30,000 deaths and
generated hundreds of thousands of displaced persons
and refugees. Moreover, that cooperation should extend
beyond the Syrian crisis to other situations and conflicts
in the region, where the League of Arab States has not

been very visible. The increased involvement of the
League in the settlement of all crises in the Middle East
crises is desirable, not only because it is recommended
by the Charter of the United Nations, but also because
the League can suggest possible solutions that take into
account the cultural, historical and sociological ties
among parties to the conflicts.

While cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States has not yet achieved a
solution to the Syrian crisis, it remains a framework
for working together and seeking solutions in which the
courage and resolve of its actors could prove beneficial.
My country believes that the two organizations should
further pool their efforts towards a settlement to
that crisis and other conflict situations in the Middle
East, such as in Yemen and Lebanon, and the nagging
question of Palestine.

Regarding the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, my
delegation would like once again to welcome the Arab
Peace Initiative for a settlement of the conflict. The
implementation of that plan could calm tensions in the
region. In that context, we urge all the parties concerned
to work with a view to its harmonious implementation.

Cooperation between the League and the United
Nations should be strengthened to ensure the necessary
coherence among the initiatives and actions of the
two organizations. That will undoubtedly require
an updating of knowledge in all areas, particularly
an enhanced climate of trust among the parties, as
no today country or organization is fully capable of
assisting a country or region to overcome a crisis. That
objective formed the basis of resolution 2033 (2012) on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union. We
welcome the meeting held by the two organizations in
July in Vienna, at which they agreed to strengthen their
partnership in all areas, in particular with respect to the
situation in the Middle East.

Likewise, we welcome direct contact, on the
one hand, between the Secretaries General of the
two organizations, and on the other hand, among the
specialized institutions of the League of Arab States
and the bodies of the United Nations system. These
initiatives reflect the need for the League of Arab
States and the United Nations to develop a promising
partnership that will provide solutions to the challenges
and transformations under way in the Middle East. Such
cooperation could be developed by strengthening the
mechanisms that could emerge from regular meetings,
during which the two organizations could evaluate
their partnership and agree on joint actions to prevent
conflict or to seek appropriate ways and means to
achieve lasting solutions to ongoing crises.

Along those lines, my country believes that the
establishment of a United Nations liaison office at
the League of Arab States, such as that at the African
Union, would be desirable because it could certainly
help to bolster exchanges of information and facilitate
bilateral meetings. Consultations among the secretariats
of the League of Arab States and the United Nations
should, above all, include the Security Council with a
View to deeper exchanges on all questions related to
the maintenance of international peace and security,
especially in the Middle East.

Togo ardently hopes that this meeting will outline
ways to strengthen cooperation between the Security
Council and the League of Arab States with a view
to ensuring effective action to resolve conflicts in the
region. My country hopes to see the League of Arab
States become an organization working for peace in
close collaboration with the Security Council.

