Ms. Ivanovic (Serbia): I thank the members of
the Security Council, the High Representative and the
other speakers for their statements today.

Serbia's position in respect of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
is widely known, confirmed time and again and not
in dispute. So is its position in respect of the Dayton
Peace Agreement - after all, Serbia is a guarantor
of that Agreement. My country supports Bosnia and
Herzegovina as one State with two entities - the
Republic of Srpska and the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina * just as it supports the decisions taken
by that country in accordance with the competencies
and agreements ofits three constituent peoples, namely,
the Serbs, the Croats and the Bosniaks.

On many occasions, Serbia expressed its support
for the speedy formation of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
institutions at all levels, in accordance with the results
of the parliamentary elections held in October 2018,
which would make a significant contribution to the
stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region.
As more than a year has elapsed since the elections,
there is no justification for postponing the formation
of its institutions any longer, especially its Council
of Ministers, which should be constituted without
preconditions, on the basis ofthe Constitution ofBosnia
and Herzegovina and the democratic will of its citizens.

Serbia shares the concerns of the High
Representative over the destabilizing rhetoric in
statements of many political leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and calls on all the actors, inside and
outside the country, to demonstrate the necessary level
ofresponsibility and to refrain from mutual accusations.
We are worried in particular by the taking of, or the
threat to take, one-sided actions contrary to the letter
and spirit of the Dayton Agreement. I note that the
Agreement is the result of a compromise and reflects a
delicate balance, achieved painstakingly, from among
opposing concepts of the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Therefore, attempts to unbalance the
model set up 25 years ago are hardly conducive to this
country's full and lasting stabilization.

Serbia calls on all participants in the political
processes in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as on
the representatives of the international community, to
demonstrate greater responsibility and refrain from the
use of rhetoric aimed at disqualifying other political
actors, especially those elected democratically. Dialogue
within the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina is the
only way to raise the level of confidence and achieve
a compromise solution to the issues relevant for the
future development of Bosnia and Herzegovina and, by
extension, to the stability of the region. As in the past,
my country will do all it can to make a constructive
contribution in that regard.

Bilaterally, Serbia continues to intensify political
dialogue with Bosnia and Herzegovina. A number of
visits have been made recently in the context of my
country's endeavours to promote cooperation with its
neighbours, including Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
two countries have thus demonstrated their commitment
to building bilateral relations and upgrading regional
ones while proceeding from European and universal
values and based on understanding, compromise
and cooperation.

For many years now, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
been one of Serbia's most important foreign trading
partners. From January to September of this year, the
trade exchange amounted to over €l.5 billion, which is
indicative of the rising trend in strengthened economic
cooperation between the two countries. With over
€1. billion, Serbia is the largest foreign investor in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That cooperation takes place
in accordance with the Central European Free Trade
Agreement (CEFTA). In that context, I would like to
point out that the two countries have been affected by
the 100 per cent increase of the destabilizing tariffs
on their goods by the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government in Pristina. It is a senseless act contrary
to all regional processes and commitments, including
CEFTA. The international community is expected to
exercise influence on the Provisional Institutions of
civil Self-Government in Pristina to remove the tariffs
and normalize trade in the region.

Regional cooperation and European integration
based on stability, democratization, economic
development and social prosperity are Serbia's
pre-eminent foreign policy priorities. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is among my country's key bilateral
partners and, in that context, Serbia is firmly
committed to the vision of good neighbourliness. As
an EU candidate-country, Serbia renders selfless
support to other candidates and potential candidate
countries on their reform road towards the European
Union. We welcome each and every one of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's successes along that road, in line
with the European Commission's establishment of 14
priorities that Bosnia and Herzegovina must meet in
order to open accession negotiations.

In that connection, Serbia is ready to share its
experience accumulated from its own accession
negotiations in hopes that our neighbour, too, will
commence those negotiations soon. We believe that,
just like with other aspiring countries in the region,
the negotiation process will not be burdened by the
ongoing challenges within the European Union, and
that the EU will instead demonstrate its firm resolve
to continuing the process by keeping the question of
the Western Balkans' accession high on its agenda.
Serbia has a lasting commitment to peace, stability,
security and cooperation at both the regional and
international levels. To that end, it continues to
contribute to strengthening stability, democratization,
economic development and social prosperity, based on
the principles of reconciliation, good neighbourliness,
dialogue and compromise. We trust and believe that
those can be achieved by way of mutual respect and the
exclusion of counter-productive partisan politicking.

