Mr. Ouattara (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Throughout these negotiations, my delegation has noted
the markedly cautious posture of Council members
with regard to the need to provide greater flexibility
to the sanctions regime concerning Cote d'Ivoire, in
particular as the country enters the final stretch leading
to the holding of general elections in 2015.

Cote d'Ivoire would like to reassure the Council
that my Government will do its utmost to ensure that
the upcoming elections, which will be open, transparent
and inclusive, are held in a peaceful environment. I
can already confirm that the Independent Electoral
Commission is session with all its members and political
parties, and continues to embed itself at the local level,
as well as here in New York, where we are preparing
to welcome a delegation from the Commission. The
Commission will continue to update its electoral lists.
The political parties are expected to receive financial
support in the context of the electoral campaign, and
the Forces republicaines de Cote d'Ivoire are working
in close cooperation with the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) to secure the entire electoral
process, including the transfer of summary records.

My delegation takes note of resolution 2219 (2015)
that was just adopted. We note that it is identical in many
ways to resolution 2513 (2014), in which the Council
unanimously recognized that undeniable progress had
been achieved on the ground by the Ivorian Government.
My delegation therefore has mixed feelings, but in a
constructive spirit we remain hopeful that, at its next
meeting on the sanctions imposed on C6te d'Ivoire,
the Council will be able to reach an assessment and a
decision that truly reflect the efforts of my country's
authorities.

In spite of these feelings, my delegation welcomes
the significant progress noted in the resolution's
preamble regarding peace and security, and particularly
in the implementation of security sector reform, the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme, and the Government's efforts in the
areas of justice and national reconciliation. In terms
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process and security sector reform, it is important to
note that they have always enjoyed the overt political
support of the Ivorian authorities, and that to date the
implementation rate of the process is far higher than
the overall rate for the continent as a whole. We have
seen 78 per cent implementation of the DDR process
and 90 per cent in the area of urgent reforms to the
security sector.

Aware that many challenges lie ahead, particularly
in terms of peace, security and stabilization, my
Government will spare no effort to make this dynamic
and the hope that it fosters are felt in the everyday lives
of the Ivorian population. Peace and security are a
very visible reality in Cote d'Ivoire, and the authorities
intend to do their all to consolidate the gains of this
climate of peace, which is so vital to the development
of any country, in compliance, of course, with the
pertinent Security Council resolutions.

I take the opportunity to reiterate the commitment
of the Ivorian Government to full, sincere cooperation
with the Security Council and its various mechanisms
in order to allow my country to meet all the challenges
before it, including the protection our population and
the strengthening of border security. In so doing, my
country will make its contribution to efforts to secure
the subregion in the face of the growing number of
terrorist threats, such as the j ihadist movements in Mali
and Boko Haram in Nigeria. Along those lines, we will
need to continue marking and tracing all our weapons
and other munitions and, above all, insist tirelessly on
training and capacity-building in the areas of stockpile
management and security.

In the light of the remarkable progress noted in the
report of the Group of Experts in the areas of security,
disarmament and the collection and marking of weapons,
we need to seriously consider the complete lifting of
the sanctions regime. I invite Council members to align
themselves with this initiative, given that, as far as the
President of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire is concerned,
C6te d'Ivoire has no desire to remain under embargo
any longer. I also call on the Council to pursue its efforts
to to pursue the reduction of UNOCI personnel that has
already begun with a view to a complete withdrawal by
early 2017. These issues will inevitably be raised and
debated in the aftermath of the presidential elections
in October.

Cote d'Ivoire is hard at work. It intends to recover
its former prosperity and, above all, its natural calling
as a pole of stability and economic growth in the West
Africa subregion.

