Mr. Hyseni: For the sake of clarification, I wish
to state that Kosovo and Serbia negotiated final status
for Kosovo for two and a half years. At the end of
those negotiations - at the final round of talks, which
took place in Vienna - the Kosovo side proposed a
friendship and cooperation treaty between Kosovo and
Serbia, suggesting that joint commissions would be
established as instruments to observe the
implementation of provisions on the protection of the
Serb minority in Kosovo. Kosovo is committed to
peace and dialogue with all its neighbours, and that is
what Kosovo has been engaged in.

I cannot leave this Chamber without clearly
underscoring that Kosovo is the last country which
would want disorder or destabilization. Kosovo has
suffered for too long - for more than a century -
under various foreign regimes. One should not
interpret wishfully any statement coming out of
Kosovo. We are not being obstructive or interfering in
Serbia or in any system in Serbia, as the Serbian

Government has been doing by interfering very
disruptively in many systems of Kosovo. Kosovo
possesses and is a single legal entity: a single judiciary
and juridical entity. Nominating prosecutors and judges
for the courts in Kosovo constitutes a severe attack on
the systems of another country - a neighbouring
country. That sort of continued interference may
destabilize the region; it may destabilize Kosovo. We
all want to avoid that.

I can assure the Council that Kosovo is the last
country on Earth to destabilize the region. Quite the
opposite: we all know how significantly - how
critically - Kosovo's independence contributed to
regional peace and safety.

Dialogue on Kosovo's independence and
negotiations on Kosovo's independence are
unacceptable. It is something we cannot and will not
subscribe to. Let me re-emphasize Kosovo's willingness
and readiness, as soon as tomorrow, to sit with the
authorities in Belgrade and discuss any issue whatsoever
of common interest ~ and trust me: there are many
issues of that kind. We would like to see Belgrade
joining in the efforts of other countries in the Western
Balkans to build a better future for all: a European
future; a North Atlantic future.

I wish to comment very briefly on a few claims
that were made here today. With respect to the
participation of Kosovo in regional structures and
initiatives, yes, Kosovo is willing to take part in all
such initiatives, as we are certain that that would
benefit not only Kosovo but also the region. But Serbia
is blocking our participation, as it is blocking our
exports. We buy a lot from Serbia; we import a lot. But
we cannot export to Serbia, because Serbia has been
blocking exports from Kosovo.

The electricity issue has become almost
ridiculous. I would like to know: in what country
where there is profound law and order are citizens
allowed not to pay their electricity bills? We have
tolerated that in Kosovo for more than 10 years, and
we are willing to look into the needs of our
communities - into the needs of members of the Serb
community in the first place - as we have done for
more than 10 years. For more than 10 years, the vast
majority of the members of the Serb community have
not paid their electricity bills. We are a country which
is scoring economic growth and which is making
progress. But we are not yet rich enough to allow any
of our citizens not to pay for what they purchase. Still,
we are willing to look into the possibility of various
subventions, as we have done in the past, to meet the
needs of our citizens.

Ijust need also to clarify, for the sake of better
understanding, the issue of a so-called minister for
Kosovo visiting Kosovo. As all members may know,
there is a principled agreement between the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the
international presence in Kosovo, and the authorities in
Belgrade to announce such visits. The order is thus: the
visits are announced to the international presence in
Kosovo, and the latter comes to us seeking
agreement- which of course we give. And we
facilitate those visits. We provide an escort; we provide
transportation: whatever we are required to do. The
visit to which President Tadic' referred was carried out
on a very specific day: on the day of the solemn
inauguration of the new municipal assembly in
Shterpce. That should not have happened. It was a
clear provocation: a clear challenge to the security
situation in that Serb-majority municipality. And we
consider that and other recent actions on the part of the
Republic of Serbia into Kosovo to be clear
provocations and a clear challenge to security and
stability in Kosovo.

What we stand for is in fact a profound
understanding with the Republic of Serbia, and we are
ready to seek ways that are acceptable to all sides to
work together. We should help one another as we move
ahead with European and NATO integration. But we
cannot and will not discuss Kosovo's status: Kosovo's
independence. It is a country which has been
recognized by 65 nations around the world. And trust
me, many more recognitions are coming in the weeks
and months ahead. So, the sooner the authorities in
Belgrade realize this reality - and accept it as a
reality- the better. We are not inviting Belgrade to
recognize Kosovo formally, at least not in any near
future. But non-recognition should not prevent
Belgrade from working with us on the great many
issues of profound mutual interest for regional peace
and safety.

