Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Japanese
presidency for this very timely and critical debate,
which will help to bring about greater awareness and
therefore more coordinated and effective action by the
Security Council, the United Nations system and the
international community.

Since this is the last debate presided over by our
colleague Ambassador Bessho, as well as Japan's final
moments as a non-permanent member of the Council,
I wish to extend my congratulations to him and his
able team for their effective leadership in guiding the
Council during a busy and challenging month and
to thank them for the cooperation extended to my
delegation throughout the year of our membership in
this body.

We also express appreciation to Secretary-General
Guterres for his insightful briefing and commend him
for his determined efforts to strengthen the United
Nations peace and security pillar and its development
system and to undertake management reform, for which
he can count on our full support.

Today's debate takes place at a time when threats
and challenges to peace and security are considerably
more complex and serious than they have been in the
past. Contemporary and likely future perils arise not
just from inter-ethnic conflicts and armed attacks alone,
but also from terrorism, organized crime, and illegal
trafficking in weapons, drugs and human beings. These
threats are further aggravated by developments that
have societal and economic roots, such as the senseless
killing of innocent civilians, migration destabilization
due to refugee flows and internal displacement
caused by forced expulsions of people, environmental
degradation and climate change.

Kazakhstan fully supports the Secretary-General's
vision for a new Agenda for Peace that bolsters the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development in order to bring
about national, regional and global stability as well as
development. Kazakhstan believes that early warning,
preventive diplomacy, mediation and peacekeeping are
interdependent and complementary components of a
comprehensive integrated strategy in which sustaining
peace should be an integral element running through
the entire cycle.

When my country gained statehood in 1991, we
realized that investing in sustaining peace should begin
early enough to avoid conflict; without it, stability can
be uncertain and fragile, vulnerable to new shocks.
Since its independence 26 years ago, Kazakhstan
has therefore been at the forefront of preventive
diplomacy and conflict prevention, which is one of the
core principles of our foreign policy. An outstanding
example of this approach has been the initiative of
my President to create the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia,
which is celebrating its tenth anniversary this month.
The Centre constitutes a mechanism for preventive
diplomacy available to the United Nations. Kazakhstan
has also founded the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-Building Measures in Asia, which today
comprises 26 countries, including some outside Central
Asia, engaging them in efforts to ensure peace and
stability in Asia through confidence-building measures.

At the open debate in January (see S/PV.7857),
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan,
Mr. Kairat Abdrakhmanov, presented a policy
address entitled "Kazakhstan's concept and vision of
sustaining global partnerships for a secure, just and
prosperous world". According to that address, one of
the goals of the Security Council should be to create
conditions conducive to preventing and eliminating
the threat of a global war by reducing the degree of
military confrontation at the global and regional levels
through many means, including mediation. A recent
illustration of that approach has been Kazakhstan's
direct engagement in supporting United Nations efforts
through the Geneva process for Syria. Astana hosted
several rounds of intra-Syrian talks, which were led
by Russia, Turkey and Iran as stakeholders, and which
contributed to the creation of de-escalation zones,
reduced military activity and the improvement of the
humanitarian situation.

We are convinced that the achievement of peace and
the renunciation of war as means of settling inter-State
problems are central to the survival of humankind in
the twenty-first century. In that context, Kazakhstan
is promoting the implementation of the Manifesto: The
World. The 21st Century, which declares war on war
and violence worldwide by the centenary of the United
Nations in 2045.

United Nations peacekeeping is another fundamental
tool in addressing today's threats and challenges. In
that regard, Kazakhstan fully supports the Secretary-
General's reform of the structures of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Political Affairs, as well as his many initiatives, as
introduced on 6 April. Together with others, we will
work towards making the mandates of peacekeeping
missions more relevant and achievable, especially
in multidimensional and hybrid operations that are
deployed in zones of violent extremism. Peacekeeping
operations need to be made more effective, accountable
and flexible, with strong components for the protection
of civilians and human rights, as the Secretary-General
has suggested. Missions also have to focus on active and
inclusive political processes to reach peace accords that
include all parties. The recruitment of well-qualified
staff, the provision of adequate equipment and the
engagement of new countries with United Nations
peacekeeping, could greatly enhance what we hope to
achieve.

Having attended several visits of the Security
Council to various countries and regions in 2017,
we can rightly conclude that adopting a three-track
strategy can help to address conflicts. That should
include strengthening the three pillars of the United
Nations system, particularly peace and security and
the development nexus, as they are closely interlinked.
A regional approach should prevail in tackling
problems in conflict-prone areas, rather than adopting
a narrow, country-specific focus. That approach
becomes efficient when it is accompanied by a well
coordinated, comprehensive development paradigm
in which the entire United Nations system functions
as one United Nations. Such a vision would ensure
optimal investments in the prosperity of all Member
States, cooperating with one another in the interest of
capacity-building, building resilience and disaster risk
reduction.

In conclusion, Kazakhstan will continue to be
fully engaged in addressing threats and challenges to
international peace and security, not just during our
presidency of the Council during the month of January
2018, but throughout its term and beyond.

