Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Allow me at the outset to
thank Kuwait for requesting this emergency meeting,
and you, Sir, for accommodating that request in a very
speedy manner.

I also want to thank the Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs for his briefing at the beginning of
this meeting.

Before I deliver my statement, I would like to say a
few words in Arabic, mainly addressed to our people in
the occupied Palestinian territories.

(spoke in Arabic)

At the outset, I wish to commend our steadfast
and valiant people all across the occupied territory
of the State of Palestine, including our people in the
Gaza Strip, Jerusalem and the occupied West Bank, as
well as our people living inside the Green Line and in
the diaspora, as they commemorate Land Day and the
March of Return. We bow respectfully to our heroic
martyrs and wounded, and we stress their leading role
always.

We condemn in the strongest terms today's heinous
massacre and we call for an end to it. We demand that
those who are responsible be brought to justice and
call for international protection for civilians in the
occupied territory. The Security Council must uphold
its responsibility and take a stance in condemning the
massacre in order to put an end to it and protect our
civilians. If that effort is blocked and the Council is
unable to assume its responsibilities, those responsible
must also bear the responsibility for covering up and
protecting the Israeli criminals instead of stopping
them.

(spoke in English)

We come before the Security Council today with a
sense ofrepugnance and urgency in light ofIsrael's latest
campaign of military aggression and attacks against the
defenceless Palestinian civilian population, in grave
breach of international law, including international
humanitarian law and the relevant provisions regarding
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Today, at least 17 Palestinian civilians have been
killed and more than 1,400 injured - many of them
seriously - in the besieged Gaza Strip. Tomorrow has
been declared by our Government as a national day of
mourning in Palestine. The majority ofthose killed were
taking part in a peaceful, non-violent demonstration - a
peaceful, non-violent demonstration - to mark the forty-
second anniversary of Land Day, commemorating
events in which six Palestinians were killed in protest
against Israel's illegal expropriation of thousands of
dunums of Palestinian land in 1976, and to reiterate the
right of return for Palestine refugees. In this regard, I
recall that 70 per cent of Gaza's 2 million Palestinians
are registered refugees whose right of return has been
systematically been denied by Israel.

The names of some of the Palestinians tragically
killed are Mohammed Najjar, age 25; Mahmoud
Muammar, age 38; Mohammed Abu Omar, age 22;
Ahmed Oudeh, age 19; Jihad Freneh, age 33; Mahmoud
Saadi Rahmi, age 33; Abdelfattah Abdelnabi, age 22;
and Ibrahim Abu Shaar, age 20; as well as Iyad Abdelal,
Abdelqader Al-Hawajiri, Sari Abu Odeh, Hamdan Abu
Amsheh, Jihad Abu Jamous, Bader Al-Sabbagh and
Naji Abu Hjai, whose ages remain unknown. Moreover,
earlier on Friday Omar Waheed Abu Samour, a farmer
from the Gaza Strip, was also killed by Israeli artillery
fire while standing on his land near Khan Younis,
just hours ahead of the peaceful and non-violent
demonstrations.

There is nothing more repulsive than a massacre
of unarmed, defenceless people, including women and
children. Yet this is exactly what Israel, the occupying
Power, has done and continues to do year after year
ever since its inception. Those peaceful demonstrators
posed no threat whatsoever to Israel or to its heavily
armed soldiers. I repeat - those peaceful demonstrators
posed no threat whatsoever to Israel or to its heavily
armed soldiers. Yet, Israel's trigger-happy soldiers used
live ammunition, tear gas and rubber bullets to shoot
indiscriminately at those non-violent protestors, who
were demonstrating inside the Gaza Strip near the site
of the well-fortified barrier that separates them from
Israel.

How can that be condoned? People who were
demonstrating peacefully, as was their right to do under
all elements of international law, including international
human rights law, cannot be equated in any way with
the belligerence, attacks and massacre committed by
the Israeli armed forces. To those who would call for
a balanced perspective, I say that there is no balance
in this case. It was a case of armed forces unleashing
massive power against unarmed civilian protestors
demonstrating peacefully, leading to the massacre and
the large number of casualties.
Today's protests were meant to kick off six weeks
of peaceful protests leading up to the commemoration
of Al-Nakba on 15 May. This year's commemoration
of Al-Nakba will solemnly observe the passage of 70
years since more than 800,000 Palestinians - 70 per
cent of our people at that time - were forcibly uprooted
and expelled from their homes and lands or fled in fear
for their lives after brutal massacres were carried out
in over 400 Palestinian towns and villages by Zionist
terrorist groups in Mandate Palestine, in a clear act of
ethnic cleansing.

As is usual practice for Israel, today's Vicious
attacks by Israel against disarmed and unprotected
Palestinian civilians were premeditated and deliberate.
Israeli officials have been preparing the ground for
these attacks with inciting, provocative and violent
rhetoric. Such incitement even led to statements being
made by human rights organizations, such as Amnesty
International, which issued a warning yesterday calling
on the Israeli occupying forces to "refrain from using
excessive force" following reports that it had deployed
more than 100 snipers - as despicted in the Israeli
media - with orders "to shoot anyone who breaches
the wall between Israel and Gaza". In addition to
the snipers, the occupying forces also sent armoured
vehicles, sniffer and attack dogs, as well as hundreds of
other occupying forces equipped with all sorts of lethal
ammunition to use as they pleased and without regard
to Palestinian lives in the Gaza Strip. We should not
forget that the 2 million Palestinian civilians in Gaza
already suffer immeasurably from Israel's lO-year
blockade, which has led to a dire socioeconomic and
humanitarian crisis.

It is more than clear, in words and deeds, that
the latest the incitements of Israeli officials and the
barbaric Violence of its occupying forces against the
rights and lives of the Palestinian people have little to
do with Israel's so-called security and everything to
do with maintaining its strangulating control over the
lives of every Palestinian man, women and child living
under its brutal occupation. It should be stated that
the occupying Power's ongoing violent silencing of all
Palestinian non-violent actions against its systematic
dehumanization of the Palestinian people and the denial
of their inalienable rights will never succeed. The
people will continue to fight for their rights, including
their rights to be free from occupation and to live in
peace and security and with dignity.

Tragically, as we witness the events of today, in
which tens of thousands of Palestinians are peacefully
marching throughout the occupied State of Palestine,
including East Jerusalem, as well as among the
Palestinian population living in Israel and in the
diaspora, these events remind us that Al-Nakba did not
end in 1948 and continues to this day. In this connection,
it is beyond tragic that millions of Palestinians continue
to live either in exile as refugees, denied the inalienable
right to return to their homes, or under Israel's half-
century belligerent military occupation of the State
of Palestine, including East Jerusalem, where they
are forced to endure the constant violation of their
fundamental human rights, including Israel's ongoing
theft of Palestinian land for illegal settlements, its
destruction of Palestinian homes and agricultural
land, the revocation of residency rights, deportations,
recurring brutal military assaults that have resulted in
mass civilian casualties - such as those that took place
in Gaza in 2008-2009, 2012 and 2014 - and the denial
of the internationally recognized legal right of return of
millions of stateless Palestinian refugees.

We call on the Council to act swiftly to uphold its
Charter duties and the integrity and authority of its
resolutions in light of the violations of and provocations
against the rights and legitimate national aspirations of
the Palestinian people. The international community
must condemn unequivocally and in the strongest terms
Israel's criminal and illegal actions in the occupied
Palestinian territory, especially in the Gaza Strip. Israel
must be held fully accountable for all of its crimes,
including the most recent killings today of innocent
Palestinian civilians, in accordance with international
law and the principles ofjustice.

We welcome the requests made by many Council
members for investigations of the Israeli occupation
forces with respect to the massacre that has taken
place today in the Gaza Strip. With the high number
of deaths today, we call once more on the international
community, particularly the Security Council, to act
now to provide protection to the Palestinian people
in order to avert more bloodshed and to save innocent
Palestinian lives, and to defuse this volatile situation,
which clearly constitutes a threat to international peace
and security. The international community must uphold
its responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and to bring an immediate end to the
occupying Power's military aggression.

As we have stated in the past, the Palestinian
people cannot remain the exception to international
commitments to and obligations under international
law, including the obligation to protect civilians from
atrocities and grave breaches, especially under foreign
military occupation.

