Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Chinese presidency for organizing a
debate on a topic that is dear to us and which seeks to
engage all our energy. Your presence helps us in that
respect, Mr. Minister, and while the French Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Laurent Fabius, was not
able to attend this debate, I know he welcomes your
initiative, which is a very useful one in the lead-up to
the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations.

Some 70 years ago, at the end of the Second World
War, the San Francisco Conference ended with the
enthusiastic adoption and signing of the Charter. That
moment was celebrated as a key moment in history.
When we read that text together, let us not forget that
even its words are imbued with the trauma of the war
and its atrocities. The United Nations is determined to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
as stated in the preamble to the Charter, and its primary
goal, as reaffirmed in Article 1, is the maintenance
peace and international security.

I wish to respond to the invitation of the Chinese
presidency and to state here, as President Hollande did
on 25 September 2012, that to be a permanent member
of the Council means "making the commitment to take
action to promote peace in the world" (A/67/PV. 6, p. 44).

The maintenance of international peace and
security is not the only goal affirmed by the Charter
of the United Nations. Its Article 1 also sets out two
essential pillars of the Organization, namely, the
development of friendly relations between peoples
and international cooperation in solving international
problems by promoting and encouraging respect for
human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all.

France identifies strongly itself with these values,
and I should like to recall that on 31 January 1964, as
we were forging bilateral relations between France and
China, General de Gaulle stated that, most importantly,
it is possible that in the context of the immensity of
global processes, it is by promoting relations among
peoples that we will serve the cause of humankind, that
is to say, the cause of wisdom, progress and peace.

On its path towards lasting peace, the international
community bases itself on points of reference that
include its values, one Organization and respect for the
principles of international law.

The note submitted by the Chinese presidency
(S/2015/87, annex) rightly stresses the need for
respect for international law and the importance of
the rule of law. These collective standards are aimed
at constraining force in accordance with the principles
set out in Article 2 of the Charter. It is essential to
do everything possible to settle disputes by peaceful
means, and France underlines in this regard the key role
ofthe International Court ofJustice in the strengthening
of the international rule of law and recognizes the
contribution it has made through its many advisory
opinions. Through its work, it helps us understand
that the rule of law cannot be applied in a vacuum but
must be interpreted in the light of the realities of the
international community in order to remain fruitful.

It is this living practice that has allowed the Charter
to remain relevant. It shows that the United Nations has
been able to adapt to changes throughout the world that
have given rise to new challenges and new crises. An
example here is the indispensable tool of peacekeeping
operations, initially not provided for by the Charter.
However, now we have more than 120,000 personnel
members, as part of 16 operations, working daily for
the maintenance of peace. France fully contributes
to this effort, with 7,800 French soldiers engaged in
peacekeeping operations. Our meeting today is also an
opportunity to pay tribute to them and to restate our
concerns regarding their security in the performance
of their duties.

Increasingly, regional organizations, whose
contributions the Charter anticipated in its Chapter
VIII, play a pivotal role in collective security. France,
as a member of the European Union, recognizes their
value and welcomes the decisive role played by the
African Union in crisis resolution in Africa.

The maintenance of international peace and
security has become a more complex undertaking in
increasingly fragmented and unequal societies, at a
time when globalization allows terrorism to claim more
victims and inflict more suffering, ignoring borders
and destabilizing entire States. Upon the seventieth
anniversary, we will not be able to forget the Syrian
tragedy and its more than 220,000 victims, whose
memory cries out for justice, and many other mass
atrocities.

We are facing unprecedented challenges. Mass
crimes offend the global conscience and the memory of
the sentiments that inspired the drafting of the Charter.
It is when our responsibility to protect civilians fails
that we the peoples of the United Nations are tested.
It is in the face of such tragic failures in terms of
collective security that France emphasizes the role of
the International Criminal Court in ensuring that the
victims of mass atrocities, not satisfied solely with
confronting their past, can help us to build a better
future.

But France also wishes to help prevent such
tragedies. Without waiting for Charter reform, France
proposed a restriction on the use of the veto in the
Security Council in case ofmass atrocities, which would
represent a major step. It is our duty to demonstrate the
extent to which a permanent seat in the Council is a
responsibility rather than a privilege or a manifestation
of some longing for status.

As set out in Article 24 of the Charter, the Security
Council, in discharging its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
must act in conformity with the purposes and principles
of the United Nations. Be that as it may, France remains
convinced that the best possible protection against
conflicts will remain economic and harmonious
development and respect for human rights. The Council
itself has repeatedly recognized that creating the
most favourable conditions possible in all areas of the
international arena in itself ensures and contributes to
the maintenance of international peace.
Let us not forget that, despite all the tragic events
that have taken place, considerable progress has been
achieved in the areas of education and health, for
example. Nor can we forget the efforts undertaken
under the auspices of the United Nations to protect our
planet. The year 2015 will be marked by a major event
to be held in Paris at the initiative of France: the twenty-
first Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, which is
to lead to an ambitious global agreement to protect our
climate. Let us also recall the universal acceptance
of the Geneva Conventions last year to mark their
150th anniversary, as they create the conditions for
peace for succeeding generations.

Values and respect for the rule of law - here it
behoves me to speak of our Organization, which has
been able to reform itself in the past. France actively
backs Security Council reform, as recent crises have
made more pressing the need to make the Organization
more effective and more representative of global
balances, so as to fully discharge its mission of the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Recent crises have shown just how essential the
United Nations and its founding text remain. I thank
you, Mr. President, for having allowed us to reaffirm our
common commitment at a time when our Organization
is faced with challenges that only the cooperation that
you have called for can address.

