Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
today's meeting. I also wish to thank Special Envoy
Ms. Sellassie for her briefing.

The Sahel is a vast region with a large population
and rich natural resources. In recent years, thanks to
the ongoing efforts of the regional countries and the
strong support of the international community, the
overall situation in the Sahel region remains stable. Its
economy continues to grow and there has been positive
progress in the implementation of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel. China appreciates
the active efforts of the United Nations, regional and
subregional organizations in Africa, such as the African
Union, and the relevant countries and bodies to improve
the situation in the Sahel and to promote development
in the region. China welcomes the good work of the
newly appointed Special Envoy, Ms. Sellassie, for the
implementation of the integrated strategy.

However, it must be acknowledged that the countries
of the Sahel still face multifacted challenges, such
as uneven development, growing ethnic tension, the
spread of terrorism, the proliferation of illicit weapons
and increased transnational organized crime. With
regard to how to further improve the situation in the
Sahel region and encourage the countries of the region
to achieve lasting stability and development as soon as
possible, I would like to underscore the following three
points.

First, support for the efforts of the regional countries
to maintain peace and stability is key to improving the
security and humanitarian situation in the Sahel region.
Currently, owing to an impasse in the political process
and a turbulent security situation, some countries in the
region face the threats ofincreasing terrorist activities,
the proliferation of illicit weapons and the spread of
transnational organized crime. Effectively dealing
with such threats requires the unwavering efforts of
the various countries to promote a political process
for which they have ownership and to continuously
strengthen capacity-building in the area of security.
The international community should also strengthen
coordination and cooperation so as to provide consistent

and effective support to the countries in the region,
promote mutual trust through dialogue and cooperation
and maintain security and stability in the border areas
through common efforts to combat the threats of
terrorism and extremism.

Secondly, focusing on addressing the root causes of
conflicts, such as poverty and underdevelopment, is the
very foundation of lasting stability in the Sahel region.
Building on the gradual strengthening, self-reliance and
self-development of Sahelian countries, the international
community and the international financial institutions
should increase humanitarian assistance to the Sahel
region, as well as technical support and investment to
the countries in the region so as to help those countries
to achieve social and economic development and to
improve the livelihood of their people. China welcomes
the World Bank, the African Development Bank and
other financial institutions providing financial support
to the Sahel region. We hope that the relevant pledges
will be provided as soon as possible.

Thirdly, the international community should
actively help the countries of the Sahel region
strengthen capacity-building in the area of security
through regional cooperation. In recent years, the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States have actively promoted the development
of a joint security mechanism and have committed
themselves to dealing with African issues with an
African approach, thus making good efforts to address
the issues in the Sahel. The United Nations should fully
utilize the role of the Sahel strategy as the coordination
platform, coordinate the efforts of various parties and
build synergy among various initiatives and strategies
for the development of the region.

Finally, the Chinese Government attaches great
importance to China-Africa relations and supports
African countries in finding a development path
appropriate to their national conditions. Through
bilateral assistance and by participating in peacekeeping
operations, China has supported the countries in the
Sahel region in their efforts to achieve stability and
development and has done its utmost to help African
countries take leadership in addressing their issues,
including the problems in the Sahel.

In future, China will continue to support African
countries in strengthening capacity-building in the
areas of peacekeeping and combating terrorism and
piracy. We are ready to further strengthen cooperation
with the United Nations and regional organizations
so as to play our part in an early and comprehensive
resolution of the issues facing the Sahel region.

