Mr. Benedejeie (Slovenia): In November, members of
the Security Council twice expressed their concern about a
volatile security situation in Sierra Leone. In all the
statements to the press by the President of the Security
Council, members of the Council noted the violations of the
Lome Peace Agreement and the consequent humanitarian
suffering of the people of Sierra Leone.

The disquieting nature of the Secretary-General's first
report on the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) is therefore not surprising. It is clear that,
despite some progress on the ground, the military and
human rights situation in Sierra Leone has deteriorated
markedly in recent weeks.

Slovenia is especially disturbed by the escalation of
attacks on civilians by former rebel elements. According to
paragraph 20 of the Secretary-General's report, these attacks
have involved rape, abduction, harassment and looting.
Such behaviour by former rebel elements is unacceptable.
Many compromises were necessary to sign the peace
accords in Lome; one was the blanket amnesty provision
for war crimes, which is, of course, difficult to reconcile
with the goal of ending the culture of impunity. It is
therefore imperative that the former rebel leaders, especially
Mr. Foday Sankoh, prevent any further excesses on the
part of their followers and ensure that all the provisions
of the Lome Peace Agreement are respected in full.

In the concluding part of his briefing, the Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Bernard Miyet, emphasized that,
despite all the difficulties, there was reason for cautious
optimism about the peace process in Sierra Leone. The
Government of National Unity has been established. The
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) has provisionally
registered itself as a political party. And recently there
has been an increase in the number of ex-combatants
registering for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme.

Moreover, the first elements of the United Nations
peacekeeping force are already on the ground. It is
therefore to be hoped that the current period does indeed
represent a critical watershed in the peace process that
will usher Sierra Leone into a period of reconstruction,
rehabilitation and reconciliation.

The last thing that Sierra Leone needs at this
juncture is a repeat of the events of December last year,
when the rebel forces launched an offensive and plunged
the country into chaos. Members of the Security Council
received advance warning of that oncoming catastrophe
during an open briefing by Ambassador Hans Dahlgren of
Sweden on his visit to the country as the Chairman of the
Sierra Leone sanctions committee.

Let us hope that this time around the open briefing
of the members of the Security Council will be followed
by a peace offensive, by renewed efforts of the
international community and key actors on the ground to
ensure the successful completion of the peace process in
Sierra Leone.

