Mr. Jokonya (Zimbabwe): Mr. President, we are
delighted to see you presiding over this very important
and historic debate on a subject that has been described
by some as the survival of the human race.

We would also like to take this opportunity to
thank our brother and colleague Ambassador Kumalo
of South Africa, who has assisted you in facilitating
this debate.

The debate before us concerns a grave issue with
serious implications for multilateralism in the conduct
of our business in the United Nations. At risk is a
Member of this Organization that is small by all
standards and is being threatened with military action
by powerful neighbours.

Iraq, whose case has been before the Security
Council since 1991, risks having its case dealt with
outside of this body - a body whose responsibility it
is to provide international peace and security for all of
humankind. The whole world therefore expects those to
whom these positions of heavy responsibility have
been entrusted to desist from pursuing selfish national
interests. Instead, they should strive to preserve the
authority and credibility of the Charter of the
Organization.

The Council may recall that, when it was dealing
with the question of the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq in
1991, Zimbabwe was presiding over this body. We
strove then to put together an international coalition to

deal with the matter. The result was a unified action by
the international community to rectify untoward
international behaviour on the part of Iraq. That result
was a demonstration of what multilateralism can
achieve. To this day there are no regrets as to those
actions.

The Charter of the United Nations encourages the
peaceful settlement of disputes. Any action taken by a
Member State before the dispute-settlement channels
offered by the United Nations have been exhausted
represents a complete breach of international law. In
particular, unilateral measures taken outside of the
United Nations may register short-term gains but will
be very harmful in the long term. Yesterday we had the
opportunity to hear from some delegations about the
possible consequences for the subregion if the issue of
Iraq is handled outside the United Nations.

The Government of Iraq has agreed to receive
United Nations inspectors and to give them full and
unfettered access to all the areas they need to inspect.
Members of the Organization need to be vigilant in
guarding against tendencies to try to settle disputes
outside of the provisions of the Charter. We have
resolution 687 (1991) on the inspection of weapons of
mass destruction in Iraq. Let us use that resolution and
wait for a report from the inspectors. Iraq must comply
with resolution 687 (1991) and other relevant
resolutions.

My delegation finds it ironic that, at a time when
the Iraqi authorities have agreed to the return of United
Nations inspectors, there is talk of adopting a new
resolution, with stiff requirements meant either to
humiliate the Iraq authorities or to force Iraq to reject
the conditions and so stop the inspectors from
travelling to that country. This is the old gunboat
diplomacy against weak adversaries, and here the
goalposts are being shifted. We believe that this world
body's responsibility is to disarm the Iraqi war
machinery, particularly with respect to dangerous
weapons of mass destruction - chemical, biological
and nuclear. The question of regime change is a new
phenomenon which makes clear that, instead of being
true to their word, as usual, the mighty are bent on
shifting the goalposts to suit their agendas.

No State, big or small, should threaten other
States with the possible use of weapons of mass
destruction. We call for resolute action by this body
against such States. We are of the view that Iraq's level
of destructive capacity should also be of concern to its
neighbours, which, in any case, feel the greatest threat.
We have not heard cries from these neighbouring States
about potential threats from Iraq, except, of course,
from Israel.

Like other Members who have spoken before us,
my delegation is concerned that, while we are -
rightly - rushing to render useless Iraq's capacity to
produce and to own weapons of mass destruction, we
do not see the same zeal on the part of members of the
Council to do away with the weapons of mass
destruction that they themselves own. Other members
of the Council have even decided not to sign
disarmament treaties that seek to make the world free
from these dangerous weapons.

We are also concerned that, whereas there is a
rush to have Iraq abide by Security Council
resolutions, the same rush is not displayed when it
comes to Israel, which has flouted no less than 28
Security Council resolutions. The murdering and
maiming of Palestinian people and the destruction of
Palestinian homes does not, in our View, seem to
concern the Council. Israel, after violating Security
Council resolutions with impunity, has been shielded
by the same members which today want to wage war
on Iraq. It is common knowledge in the Security
Council and to one and all that that country has
weapons of mass destruction. It, too, must be disarmed.
The Security Council should address this double
standard in order not to bring the Charter of the United
Nations into disrepute.

Let me conclude by reiterating that we need a
solution which will quickly put an end to the sanctions,
which have brought so much suffering to the people of
Iraq. Let the inspectors proceed with their business, so
that the suffering of the people of Iraq and the threat of
weapons of mass destruction can be buried in the pages
of history once and for all.

The question before us today is about doing the
correct thing. It is about the credibility of
multilateralism, adherence to international law and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. My delegation urges
the Council to opt for multilateralism and for the
upholding of international law, which gives credibility
to this body. The law of the jungle should not creep
into this Organization.

