Mr. Pascoe: I would like to thank Council
members for this opportunity to brief them on the
situation in Zimbabwe. Four days before the scheduled
presidential run-off election of 27 June, the situation
has deteriorated to alarming levels and has reached a
2

new degree of gravity. The withdrawal of
Mr. Tsvangirai from the Friday run-off demonstrates
this situation very clearly. While we have been
working to improve conditions, we also do not believe
conditions exist for a "free and fair" run-off election.
We strongly discourage the authorities from going
ahead with the run-off under these circumstances as
that would only increase divisions and produce a
discredited result.

In the Secretary-General's View, the situation in
Zimbabwe constitutes a major challenge to regional
stability in Southern Africa, not only because of its
likely direct impact on the region's political and
economic security and the possible displacements, but
also because it creates a dangerous precedent for the
political future of the continent. Since the beginning of
the political impasse following the 29 March elections,
the Secretary-General has expressed his concern about
the process and the politically motivated violence. He
has remained closely engaged with all relevant regional
and international leaders to assist in a resolution of the
crisis.

As a result of his meeting with President Mugabe
in Rome during the World Food Summit, in which he
persuaded the Government to engage and work with
the United Nations, he dispatched Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs Haile Menkerios to
Zimbabwe with the mandate to discuss ways to
improve the political climate ahead of the run-off
elections.

Assistant Secretary-General Menkerios was
granted broad access by the Zimbabwean authorities
and met with a wide spectrum of actors and
stakeholders in order to gain a balanced understanding
of the situation. He met with President Mugabe; with
the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Justice, Labour and
Social Welfare; with the Deputy Commander of the
army; with the Electoral Commission; with the leaders
of the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC),
Morgan Tsvangirai and Arthur Mutambara; with
Mr. Simba Makoni who came third in the most recent
presidential election; with civil society and church
organizations; and with the heads of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) and other
observer missions as well as with the diplomatic
community.

In his meetings with the Government, the
Assistant Secretary-General's message was that the
08-39337

Government has the primary responsibility to ensure
the security of all citizens; that conditions for free and
fair elections must exist, in particular that the violence
and intimidation had to stop and violators brought to
justice; that an equal playing field had to be created for
both candidates and their parties; and that dialogue was
critical to ending the crisis. He also pressed for the
resumption of humanitarian activities.

Based on his observations, Mr. Menkerios
informed the Secretary-General that conditions did not
exist for free and fair elections in Zimbabwe and that
no outcome of an election run under these conditions
could be considered credible.

The country has experienced a staggering degree
of violence, with the opposition claiming that over 80
of its supporters have been killed by supporters of the
Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front
(ZANU-PF) and thousands displaced from their wards.
There is ample evidence that such violence has been
perpetrated by a combination of State agencies -
army, police, and intelligence - by war veterans and
by youth militias. The Government claims that
violence has also been perpetrated by MDC activists
against ZANU-PF supporters. Evidence suggests that
while there has been some retaliatory violence, it has
been of a much lesser degree than that of the
Government and its supporters.

This widespread campaign of intimidation and
threat is antithetical to the very spirit of elections.
Instead of openness, free competition and transparency,
the current climate is one of fear, hostility and attacks
on the physical integrity of Zimbabwean citizens. The
violence and the displacements pose an immediate
challenge to the credibility of the voting process.

It was hoped that the climate would improve with
the arrival of a large number of regional and
international observers, as the presence of the
observers could have helped deter the violence and
increase confidence. As part of its cooperation with
regional organizations, the United Nations has
provided logistical and technical assistance for SADC
observation efforts. As a result of combined efforts, the
number of observers significantly increased over those
present for the first round, when SADC deployed 120
observers.

The observers were also mandated to stay
in-country for a longer period of time after the
election. The United Nations provided support for
08-39337

some 300 observers from SADC member States. As of
today, 397 SADC observers have been accredited and
deployed in Zimbabwe. The expected total number of
SADC observers is about 430. The African Union and
the Economic Community of West African States have
also increased their number of observers dramatically.
Initial reports by SADC and Pan-African Parliament
observer missions provided first-hand accounts of
politically motivated violence.

There has been growing concern that domestic
observer groups would not be able to field as many
observers as they did for the first round, held on
29 March, due to the restrictive provisions adopted by
the authorities. One such domestic group, the
Zimbabwe Electoral Support Network, suffered great
restrictions in the accreditation of its observers. It has
only been allowed to deploy 500 domestic observers to
cover over 9,000 polling stations. The MDC candidate
has little or no access to the Zimbabwean media; he is
barred from freely campaigning; and it was reported
that campaign buses and vehicles were seized by the
State, allegedly for unlawful registration. The party's
Secretary-General, Mr. Tendai Biti, remains under
arrest, charged with treason. Today we heard reports
that the MDC headquarters had been raided and dozens
of supporters detained.

In Zimbabwe the distinction between the ruling
party, Government and State institutions is blurred. The
civil service, the judiciary and in particular security
institutions such as the army and the police do not play
a neutral role to ensure security and a peaceful
atmosphere. The chiefs of security forces in Zimbabwe
have on many occasions declared that they would not
"allow puppets to take charge" or "salute sell-outs and
agents of the West". President Mugabe himself
declared that he was "prepared to go to war" if he lost
and that the MDC would never be allowed to rule the
country. State institutions are partisan, and not neutral
effective instruments of citizenship and the rule of law.

Yesterday, opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai
announced he was withdrawing from the Friday run-off
election, pointing out that condition for credible
elections did not exist. He argued that there is evidence
of widespread State-sponsored violence, that he had
been unable to campaign, that the MDC has lost
confidence in the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission
since the institution has been staffed with war veterans
and youth militia and that the political leadership of
ZANU-PF and war veterans have made public
3
statements openly declaring that they would defy an
MDC victory.

The MDC called on SADC, the African Union
and the United Nations to intervene urgently to restore
the rule of law, peace and conditions for a free and fair
election. Mr. Tsvangirai further advised that the MDC
would make public its next move on Wednesday,
25 June. In the interim, he has indicated that the MDC
remains open to participating in any future elections
under conditions which are consistent with SADC
norms and principles governing democratic elections.

As I stated earlier, conditions for a free and fair
run-off election do not exist at present. It is our view
that the election should be postponed for an
appropriate period. The Government must ensure that
conditions are in place for a credible process to take
place.

Given the gravity of the situation, the parties
should immediately engage in talks to establish a
period during which conditions for free and fair
elections can be created. I reiterate the Secretary-
General's offer of his good offices in support of such
efforts, as appropriate. The United Nations is prepared
to work urgently with SADC and the African Union to
help resolve this political impasse. The Secretary-
General's envoy, Assistant Secretary-General
Menkerios, remains in the region to assist.

Africans have made very clear their concerns
regarding the situation in Zimbabwe. The voice of
African leaders has grown stronger, and the region is
mobilizing to solve this challenging crisis. President
Mbeki of South Africa, who has been mandated by
SADC to mediate the crisis, has declared that the
political leadership of Zimbabwe should get together
and find a solution to the challenges faced by the
country.

SADC Chair and Zambian President Mwanawasa
has called for the postponement of elections to allow
for the establishment of conditions suitable for free and
fair elections in accordance with Zimbabwean law, the
SADC principles and the Charter and conventions of
the African Union.

Angolan President Dos Santos, the Chair of the
SADC Organ on Politics, Defence and Security, has
also urged President Mugabe to observe a spirit of
tolerance and respect for differences and to cease all
forms of intimidation and political violence.

Furthermore, a group of 40 prominent African
former heads of State and other personalities have
signed an open letter calling for an end to the current
political violence in Zimbabwe, declaring their concern
at the reports of intimidation, harassment and violence
and saying that it is vital that appropriate conditions be
created so that the presidential run-off can be
conducted in a peaceful, free and fair manner.

The Secretary-General recognizes the continuing
efforts by SADC to facilitate a solution in Zimbabwe
and the leading role that South Africa has played in this
effort, and he has been encouraging and supporting
these. He welcomes the decision by SADC to hold an
emergency meeting on Zimbabwe and gives his support
to SADC and African Union measures to address this
pressing situation.

It is now time to redouble efforts to assist in
facilitating the immediate start of a period for
establishing conditions necessary for free and fair
elections and to help restore security and the rule of
law in the country. We believe it is clear that a winner-
takes-all approach will not bring peace and stability to
the country. All forms of violence, intimidation and
obstruction must stop.

I reiterate the Secretary-General's call on both
parties to resume talks immediately to seek a peaceful
resolution of this crisis for the good of all
Zimbabweans. Zimbabwe must have a credible process
in place so that the run-off election can produce a
legitimate outcome in the eyes of the Zimbabwean
people and the world community.

