Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Let me begin by once again
expressing appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate to discuss the intersection
between terrorism and cross-border crime in Africa
and to take a broad look at its implications for regional
and international peace and security.

I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
and Ambassador Tete Antonio for their comprehensive
and lucid briefings. Ethiopia fully aligns itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the African Union,
which extensively covered all the salient issues, and
therefore my remarks will be brief. Ambassador
Antonio's statement was indeed very comprehensive.
There is no need to repeat what he said.

The link between terrorism and cross-border crime
has been a matter ofreal concern for us in Africa, and its
ramifications for the peace and security of our continent
cannot be overemphasized. Al-Shabaab, Al-Qaeda in
the Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haran and others groups
have expanded their terrorist and criminal activities
beyond the confines of national boundaries, and various
regions of Africa are already suffering the impact of
these negative developments. It is not always easy to
make a clear distinction between terrorist activities that
affect a whole region and other forms of cross-border
crimes, because no doubt they feed on each other.

In our region in particular, Al-Shabaab is posing
threats not only to Somalia but also to the wider
region. That terrorist group has been benefitting from
piracy, ransom, the illicit charcoal trade and taxes to
finance its outrageous terrorist and criminal activities.
Although Al-Shabaab has been significantly weakened
by the joint military operation of the Somali National
Army and the African Union Mission in Somalia, it has
nonetheless expanded its activities beyond the Somali
borders. It has been launching a series of asymmetrical
attacks in neighbouring countries. Of course, we all
recall the barbaric Westgate Mall attack last year by
Al-Shabaab in Nairobi that claimed the lives of many
innocent civilians. The group has also been threatening
to launch similar attacks in Ethiopia, and no country of
the region is immune to the danger.

The meeting of the African Union Peace and
Security Council, held at the level of Heads of State and
Government in September, noted the regional dimension
of terrorism, particularly in northern Africa, the Sahel
region, central and eastern Africa. Accordingly, it
expressed its serious concern over the increasing
terrorist and other criminal activities of extremist
groups across national boundaries. That is why it has
called for practical and action-oriented cooperation at
the regional level, building on the experiences of the
Nouakchott Process and other similar initiatives to
combat terrorism and cross-border crime, including
drug trafficking, illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons, and others.

The exchange of information and intelligence, the
enhancement of border security, the establishment of
regular mechanisms for cooperation and the sharing of
experiences and best practices are indeed very critical
to dealing with the threat of terrorism and cross-border
crime at the regional level. That is what we are trying
to do in our subregion, and we are fully committed
to continuing to build on our experience to fight the
menace of terrorism and related crimes in all their
aspects.

At the level of the Council, we believe that the
issue needs to be given greater attention than it has
hitherto enjoyed. As clearly explained in the concept
note (S/2014/869, annex), there is a need to reflect
on the existing strategies and available tools so as to
enhance efforts to address the nexus between terrorism
and cross-border crime. In that regard, we believe
that it is imperative for the United Nations and its
relevant bodies to assess their cooperation with various
regions and identify gaps with a view to devising an
appropriate strategy to provide the necessary assistance
to build their capacity in addressing this challenge,
thereby reducing the ability of terrorist groups to take
advantage of cross-border crimes.

There is no doubt that, insofar as our region is
concerned, there is a critical need to ensure that decisions
taken by the Council are effectively implemented. Here,
the illegal charcoal trade comes to mind immediately.
In that spirit, we support the recommendations outlined
in the concept note and look forward to the report of the
Secretary-General on United Nations efforts to address
the threat of terrorists benefiting from cross-border
crime in affected regions, including Africa. That is
why we have also sponsored resolution 2195 (2014), and
welcome its unanimous adoption by the Council. The
real challenge lies with the effective implementation
of the resolution, which requires enhanced cooperation
and coordination on the part of Member States and
other stakeholders at all levels. I hope that we will all
rise to the challenge.

