Mr. Pavlichenko (Ukraine): While Ukraine
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
observer of the European Union, I would like to
commend Germany for its strong commitment to
advancing the children and armed conflict agenda, as
well as the intensive work done by the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict under the leadership
of Ambassador Wittig. I would also like to recognize
the personal commitment to this issue on the part of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and his Special
Representative Radhika Coomaraswamy.

We welcome the Secretary-General's most recent
report on children and armed conflict (S/2011/250), as
it contains many valuable recommendations, including
those on measures that could be undertaken against
persistent violators. Important progress has been made
over the past year. We welcome the expansion of the
triggers for listing to include the killing and maiming
of children, rape and other sexual violence. We also
welcome the exchange of information among the
sanctions committees. We would like to encourage

more such interaction between the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the sanctions
committees, their expert groups and the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

Noting with concern the increased number of
attacks on educational facilities, we encourage the
Security Council to address this problem in its future
deliberations. We consider it important to thoroughly
investigate, prosecute and punish all those who commit
grave violations against children. Ukraine also
encourages the Security Council to include in sanctions
committee mandates, where appropriate, provisions
pertaining to violations of applicable international law
committed against children and of Security Council
resolutions on children and armed conflict.

We in Ukraine have made child welfare a
strategic national priority. Ukraine has undertaken
appropriate measures to protect the rights and dignity
of every child. We remain fully committed to the
proper implementation of the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Earlier this
year, the Committee on the Rights of the Child
considered Ukraine's initial report under article 8 of
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. The
Committee welcomed, among other things, Ukraine's
endorsement of the Paris Commitments to protect
children from unlawful recruitment or use by armed
forces or armed groups, and of the Paris Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups. The Committee also welcomed
Ukraine's mandatory training regarding children in
armed conflict, including on the Convention and the
Optional Protocol, which is organized for Ukrainian
military personnel who participate in international
peacekeeping operations.

We firmly support the Special Representative's
campaign for universal ratification of the Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
and stress the great importance of such legally binding
international instruments for protecting all children
worldwide, with no exceptions.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reaffirm Ukraine's commitment - particularly as an
active participant in peacekeeping operations and a
member of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Executive Board of UN-Women - to applying all its
efforts to help assure children of healthy, appropriate
conditions in every situation of their lives. We believe
that resolution 1998 (2011), adopted today, can
contribute to children's well-being. As one of the
resolution's sponsors, Ukraine looks forward to its full
and successful implementation.

