Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation extends its sincere congratulations to
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert on her appointment as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) and wishes her every success in her new
mission. It also thanks her for her detailed briefing on
the developments in Iraq. In the light of that update,
my delegation would like to comment on the political
process, humanitarian and human rights situations and
security issues.

With regard to the political process, my country
notes with regret that dissension among the country's
various political forces persists, thereby preventing
the formation of a new Government by Prime Minister
Adil Abd Al-Mahdi. However, after Da'esh's military
defeat, the establishment of an inclusive Government
would have made it possible to implement the urgent
reforms that are needed to address the many challenges
facing Iraq, namely, finding sustainable solutions to
the issue of the return of internally displaced person
by providing them with basic administrative and social
services; accelerating the reconstruction of conflict-
affected areas; creating the conditions for genuine
reconciliation among Iraqis, with due respect for the
unity of the country and sociopolitical and ethnic
diversity; and ensuring an equitable representation of
women in institutions and decision-making structures.

Cote d'Ivoire therefore urges all political actors
to prioritize the national interest by overcoming their
differences with a view to the early formation ofa new
Government. Furthermore, Cote d'Ivoire encourages
the continuation of a constructive dialogue between
the central Iraqi authorities and the authorities of
the Kurdistan autonomous region in order to find a
peaceful solution to the dispute on the organization
of the referendum on the self-determination of that
autonomous region on 25 September 2017. In that
respect, it welcomes the negotiations between the two
parties, which in 2018 made it possible to reopen the
Erbil and Sulaymaniyah airports to international flights
and to reach an agreement on oil exports from Kirkuk
province. My country hopes that the forthcoming
meetings between Mr. Adil Abd Al-Mahdi, Prime
Minister of Iraq, and Mr. Nechirvan Barzani, Prime
Minister of the Kurdistan region, will resolve the
remaining points of disagreement.

The humanitarian situation is characterized by
extreme poverty, including insecurity, in which more
than 1.8 million people have been displaced since 2014.
Cote d'Ivoire urges the Iraqi authorities, with the help
of the international community, to find solutions to
the plight of those people, improve their security and
include them in local reconciliation initiatives with the
view to their full integration in the host regions.

With regard to the question of human rights, my
country notes with satisfaction that, at the request of
the Iraqi authorities, our Security Council adopted
resolution 2379 (2017), on 21 September 2017, on the
effective implementation of the principle of Da'esh
accountability. In that regard, our Council followed with
interest the briefing in December 2018 (see S/PV.8412)
delivered by Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan, Special
Adviser and Head of the Investigative Team established
pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017), on his first report on
the steps that the Team intends to take for the effective
implementation of resolution 2379 (2017).
The acceleration of the investigations of the
Team led by Mr. Khan is all the more urgent as 202
mass graves with more than 12,000 bodies have been
discovered in the northern and western provinces of
Iraq. Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its support for Mr. Khan
and calls on the international community, including
our Council, to provide him with all the assistance
necessary for the success of his mission.

On the security front, despite its recent military
setbacks in Iraq, Da'esh continues to pose a serious
threat to the stability of the country and to international
peace and security. Cote d'Ivoire therefore calls on
the international community to pursue its efforts by
providing the necessary assistance and training to the
Iraqi armed forces with a view to putting an end to
the activities of that group as soon as possible. In that
respect, it welcomes the rise of the Iraqi armed forces
and anti-terrorist forces, which are playing a major role
in the fight to eradicate Da'esh.

In conclusion, my country urges the international
community, including our Council, to continue to
support the efforts of the Iraqi authorities to restore
security and peace, which are essential for lasting
stability in Iraq.

