Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, on behalf of the delegation of Costa Rica
and in my personal capacity, I would like to bid a warm
farewell to Ambassador Khalilzad of the United States
upon his imminent departure. Ambassador Ripert, the
President of the Council, has emphasized central
elements of Ambassador Khalilzad's personality and
7

work in the Council, and we would like to second those
fitting impressions. We hope that these greetings will
be conveyed to Ambassador Khalilzad.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report of
2 January 2009 (S/2009/l), which updates us on the
situation of Nepal. We would also like to thank Mr. Ian
Martin, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his briefing this morning and for his
outstanding work in Nepal over all these years. We
wish him every success in his future endeavours.

Likewise, we thank the Permanent Representative
of the Government of Nepal for the information he
provided to the Council this morning on recent events.

Nepal is a successful example of democratization
and pacification of a society that experienced a bloody
armed conflict for many years. That success belongs
first and foremost to the Nepalese people, but the
United Nations can also be satisfied over these
achievements, given its contribution to the process.
However, as with any process of social transformation,
the changes in Nepal, and especially its pacification,
remain incomplete, precarious and fragile following
the initial parliamentary and constitutional elections, as
we have pointed out in the past. We said then that the
transition from monarchy to republic would accentuate
differences and contradictions that may have been
obscured until now by the civil war. Unfortunately, that
has taken place to a significant degree.

We are concerned by several specific matters.
First, we still have not seen the dismissal of minors and
former Maoist guerrillas who are ineligible to join the
army, a process that should take place as soon as
possible, pursuant to the request made by the
Secretary-General at his last meeting with the
Government. We must emphasize the fact that the
release of these minors must not depend on the
formation of the special committee. For Costa Rica, the
issue of child soldiers is of great concern in this and in
all other cases.

This morning, we learned the excellent news that
the special committee has finally been set up and has
held its first meeting. We hope that these events will
open the path to addressing other pending matters, such
as the return of property, the deadline for which has
expired, in accordance with agreements signed and
sealed; the activities of paramilitary groups affiliated
with young Maoists; the demobilization of combatants
8
who were minors in May 2006; and the problem of new
illegal seizures of land.

Costa Rica is also concerned by the issue of
transitional justice, especially with respect to people
who disappeared during the civil war. There can be no
peace without justice. We note that the Special
Representative highlighted that in particular as one of
the important elements in his briefing this morning
when he spoke about his concern about continued
impunity. In addition, we regard as inexplicable the
decision taken by the Nepal Cabinet on 27 October,
according to the Secretary-General's report, to
withdraw 349 cases filed at the district level either
before a court or the District Administration Office,
because it considered them to be of a political nature.

It is essential that the various Nepali political
forces make a supreme effort to overcome their
differences, which constitute obstacles, so that UNMIN
can move forward and complete its important mission.
The international community faces great and serious
challenges, and the Council must set priorities with
respect to where, when and how it intervenes.
Therefore, we favour a further extension of UNMIN's
mandate, as requested by the Secretary-General. At the
same time, however, we hope that Nepal's political and
social forces, in particular the Government, will clearly
note that the international community would like this
process to come to a swift conclusion.

In sum, Costa Rica appreciates the significant
progress made by Nepal and congratulates its people
and its various political and social forces for that. We
also appreciate the significant efforts of the
Government. We welcome the news that we received
today concerning the progress that has enabled the
special committee to be established and to begin its
work.

At the same time, however, we wish to encourage
all those sectors to comply more strictly with the basic
commitments undertaken vis-a-vis both their society
and the international community, by the agreed
deadlines. I would like to stress that that applies in
particular not only to the demobilization of former
combatants, particularly minors, but also to the
drafting of the new constitution, transitional justice and
issues basic to economic and social development, both
in terms of land ownership and property rights in
general and in terms of strengthening the State so that
it can provide essential services to the population.
Undoubtedly, those challenges can be better addressed
when greater commitment and trust is developed
among the political forces.

