The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council to be held this year, I should like to
welcome the new members of the Council: Chile, Egypt,
Guinea-Bissau, Poland and the Republic of Korea. We all
look forward with confidence to their participation in the
work of the Council, which will be of invaluable assistance
in the discharge of the Council's enormous responsibilities
as it tackles so many challenges.

I should also like to express the Council's gratitude to
the outgoing members for their important contributions to
the Council's work. The representatives of Argentina, the
Czech Republic, Nigeria, Oman and Rwanda all, in an
excellent manner, contributed their talents to the conduct of
the business of the Council.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President: I should also like to pay tribute to my
predecessor, Ambassador Sergey Lavrov, Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations, for the service he rendered as President of the
Council during the month of December 1995. I express my
deep appreciation to Ambassador Lavrov for the skilful
manner in which he conducted the Council's business last
month. I have particularly admired his patience, courtesy,
efficiency and thoroughness, as well as his quick-wittedness
and his overall lightness of touch, and we have all also
admired the way in which he was so ably assisted in his
efforts by his entire delegation.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi

Letter dated 29 December 1995 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1995/1068)


The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Burundi, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Terence
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council
is meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in the course of its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1995/ 1068, which contains the text of a letter dated 29
December 1995 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/l996/8, which contains the
text of a letter dated 3 January 1996 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the letter
of 29 December 1995 from the Secretary-General to
the President of the Council on developments in
Burundi (S/l995/1068). The Council shares the
Secretary-General's deep concern at the situation in
Burundi, which has been characterized by daily
killings, massacres, torture and arbitrary detention.
It condemns in the strongest terms those persons
responsible for such actions, which must cease
immediately. It encourages all States to take the
measures deemed necessary to prevent such persons
from travelling abroad and receiving any kind of
support. It reiterates its profound concern about
radio stations which incite hatred and acts of
genocide and encourages Member States and others
concerned to cooperate in the identification and
dismantling of them. The Council calls upon all
concerned in Burundi to exercise maximum restraint
and to refrain from all acts of violence. It reiterates
that all who commit or authorize the commission of
serious violations of international humanitarian law
are individually responsible for such violations and

 

should be held accountable. In this context, it stresses
the importance it attaches to the work of the
International Commission of Inquiry established
pursuant to its resolution 1012 (1995) of 28 August
1995 and undertakes to study carefully the letter from
the Secretary-General dated 3 January 1996 containing
an interim report on that work (S/ 1996/8).

"The Security Council is gravely concerned at
recent attacks on personnel of international
humanitarian organizations, which have led to the
suspension of essential assistance to refugees and
displaced persons and to the temporary withdrawal of
international personnel. The Council welcomes the
Secretary-General's decision to ask the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees to visit Burundi to
discuss with the Burundi authorities steps that might
be taken to defuse the situation. It underlines that the
authorities in Burundi are responsible for the security
of personnel of international humanitarian
organizations and of the refugees and displaced
persons there and calls upon the Government of
Burundi to provide adequate security to food convoys
and humanitarian personnel.

"The Security Council welcomes the assumption
of his functions by the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Burundi and calls on all
concerned to support his efforts. It commends the
work of the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in seeking to promote dialogue
and national reconciliation in Burundi, as well as the
role played there by the Organization of African Unity
(OAU). It welcomes the decision of the OAU in Addis
Ababa on 19 December 1995 to extend the mandate of
the OAU Mission in Burundi for another three months
and to strengthen the civilian component of the
Mission. The Council also welcomes the outcome of
the Cairo Conference of Heads of State of the Great
Lakes Region on 29 November 1995, supports the
work of the facilitators appointed by it and emphasizes
once again the importance it attaches
to all States acting in accordance with the
recommendations contained in the Cairo Declaration
as well as those adopted at the Regional Conference
held in Bujumbura in February 1995. It stresses the
importance of continued attention by the
international community as a whole to the situation
in Burundi and encourages Member States to
intensify contacts and visits.

"The Security Council notes the proposals
referred to in the Secretary-General's letter of 29
December 1995. It will consider these and other
proposals he may submit in the light of the reports
of Mrs. Ogata's mission and from his Special
Representative in Burundi. It also requests the
Secretary-General to consider what role United
Nations personnel in the region and other support
personnel might play in Burundi.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support for
the Convention of Government of 10 September
1994, which constitutes the institutional framework
for national reconciliation in Burundi and for the
institutions of Government established in line with
it. It calls once again upon all political parties,
military forces and elements of civil society in
Burundi fully to respect and implement the
Convention of Government and to give their
continued support to the institutions of Government
established in line with it.

"The Security Council will remain seized of
this matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1996/1.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

