Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): I am pleased
to brief members of the Security Council on the
developments in Kosovo since the last briefing of 22
June 2001. I will focus today on a few priority issues
regarding our Mission in Kosovo: the preparations for
elections, the preparation for Kosovo self-government,
relations with the minority communities, the Mission's
efforts to improve law and order, and the
implementation of confidence-building measures to
overcome the divisions that disunite Kosovo.

The first issue is the preparations for elections in
Kosovo. The preparations for these elections have now
entered a very active phase, with the conclusion of the
party certification period on 20 July. As of that date, 16
Kosovo Albanian parties; ll minority-community
parties, including four Serb parties; one independent
candidate; three citizens' initiatives; and one coalition
had submitted the requisite certification applications to
the Central Election Commission (CEC).

The institution-building pillar of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) has established a special task force to inform
the Kosovo Serb community about the electoral system
and ethnic representation in the Assembly that is to be
elected. We are encouraged by the positive signs we
have seen so far, but we continue to call on the
Belgrade authorities to send an unequivocal sign to the
Kosovo Serb parties to become fully involved in the
election campaign.

The Kosovo Albanian parties are gearing up for
the elections. Many of the smaller parties that received
less than 1 per cent of the vote in the municipal
elections are seeking coalition partners to strengthen
their popularity in preparation for the elections. In
order to encourage coalition-building, as opposed to an
excessively fragmented political scene, the CBC has
authorized a two-week extension so that these
coalitions can register, be certified and thus participate
in the upcoming elections.

Alongside party certification, preparations are
also under way for the beginning of voter registration.
This process will take place between 30 July and 9
September. In order to facilitate the registration of
internally displaced persons, the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) has concluded
memoranda of understanding with the Serbian and
Montenegrin authorities. In order to facilitate the
registration of voters from minority communities in
Kosovo, preparations are well under way for
establishing special registration centres. This process
includes the recruitment of 200 locals, mainly from
these minority communities that we want to encourage
to register to vote.

A key element that should make the
establishment of voting lists easier this year than
during the first elections, the municipal elections of
2000, is the distribution of identification cards to the
habitual residents of Kosovo. I note that more than
850,000 identification cards have been produced to
date, and that 600,000 of these have been distributed.
The objective is to provide such identification cards to
all eligible voters prior to the election.

I would like to say a few words on the second
point, regarding the implementation of the
Constitutional Framework, because, in fact, hand in
hand with the electoral preparations UNMIK is
continuing to work on fleshing out the provisions of
the Constitutional Framework and to prepare for the
transfer of authority that will follow the elections.
UNMIK is focusing on the development of the
institutions of the executive branch, because they are
not yet spelled out in detail in the Constitutional
Framework. UNMIK is also focusing on the support
and oversight that it is to provide to these nascent
institutions. The preparations for the transition have
stressed the "Kosovarization" of senior management
and the capacity-building of local staff in the areas of
administration, procurement, market management
policy, budget and finance.

I would like now to turn to the very important
issue of engaging the communities of Kosovo. Special
emphasis continues to be given to encouraging the
minority communities, particularly the Kosovo Serb
community, to participate in public life in Kosovo,
through both direct engagement and improving
contacts with the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

Preparations for the small-scale return of Kosovo
Serbs continue, with particular emphasis on returns to
the Osojane valley in the Istok municipality. In order to
meet the crucial funding requirements for safe and
sustainable return, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mr. Haekkerup chaired the first
donor meeting in Pristina on 29 June.

The Contact Group on Detainees and Missing
Person, comprising UNMIK officials and
representatives of the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, is now meeting on a
fortnightly basis. Some advances have been made on a
number of issues, such as direct collaboration on
exhumations and the identification of remains found in
mass gravesites, including the exchange of forensic
experts. The issue of the missing remains emotive, of
course, and continues to provoke demonstrations and
protests on all sides. Most recently, Kosovo Serb
relatives of the missing have been demonstrating in
Gracanica. They have done so since 10 July, with
several family members going on a hunger strike on 16
July. With regard to the remaining Kosovo Albanian
detainees in prison in Serbia, UNMIK now has fuller
access to case files and other pertinent information
from the Department of Justice.

Further means to engage the communities include
draft legislation on minority property sales to mitigate
irregular sales, and increased involvement of the
Kosovo Serb and other minority communities in the
education process.

The number of appointed minority members of
the communities continues to rise, including the recent
assumption by a Kosovo Serb of the function of
Deputy President in the Municipal Assembly of
anilane. This brings the number of minority Deputy
Presidents to seven. A further important, positive sign
was the minority community representation at the
inaugural meeting of the Assembly of the Association
of Kosovo Municipalities, which took place in Pristina
on 30 June: of the 76 participants, 13 were
representatives of the Kosovo Serb, Croat, Bosniac,
Turk, Ashkali, Roma, Egyptian and Gorani
communities.

Another point that I would like to touch upon is
the relations with Belgrade. UNMIK continues to
intensify its relations with the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to address issues of mutual
concern. The recent appointment of the Deputy Serbian
Prime Minister, Mr. Covic, as the Coordinator for
Kosovo - an appointment that has been welcomed by
UNMIK - adds a new dimension to this relationship.

A recent complicating factor, however, in
UNMIK's relations with Belgrade has been the
increasingly direct activity of the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and of Serbia in
Kosovo. These include attempts by the Federal
Committee for Kosovo to establish its own executive
taxation functions and business registration activities in
Kosovo, as well as the opening of regional offices
without UNMIK consent, and a humanitarian convoy
organized by the Democratic Party on 14 July.

On the security and law and order issue, I would
like to say that, following the formation of pillar I, the
police and justice pillar, better coordination is evident
in the crucial fight against organized crime and
extremist violence. Links with the Kosovo Force
(KF OR) continue to improve with the development of a
Joint Security Initiative intended to explore how KFOR
might assist further in law and order issues. Eleven
cases are now pending trial on the basis of regulation
2001/7, on the authorization of possession of weapons
in Kosovo. In addition to the consolidation of pillar I,
work continues on several other key law-and-order
initiatives: a draft regulation on organized crime; the
establishment of the Kosovo Serious Crimes Bureau; a
witness protection programme; the operational system
to handle police informants; and plans to establish a
Kosovo-wide crime hotline.

The Department of Justice is preparing for the
deployment of five new international judges and
prosecutors, bringing the total to 22. UNMIK continues
to seek to double the existing number of 17
international judicial personnel to alleviate the
increased caseload of sensitive cases. There is
continuing concern about the lack of prison space.
Currently, the number of prisoners is increasing by 60
persons per month. Should the number of prisoners
detained by the courts remain at present levels, penal
capacity will be exhausted in three months. UNMIK is
considering several potential solutions for this
problem.

UNMIK's efforts to bolster the indigenous police
force continue, with the first promotion of first-line
supervisors in the Kosovo Police Service taking place
at the end of June. The first batch of promotions
included 28 sergeants and one lieutenant-colonel. A
further six lieutenant-colonels are due to be promoted
at the beginning of August.

On Mitrovica, another sensitive place in Kosovo,
as the Council may know, at a meeting of the North
Atlantic Council (NAC), at which both the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Commander of KFOR were present, the NAC endorsed
UNMIK's and KFOR's joint efforts to develop a
comprehensive strategy for Mitrovica, building on the
principles described to the Security Council during its
mission to Kosovo in mid-June. The strategy will entail
concrete measures in a number of key areas: local
government and public administration; security;
economic development and job creation; returns; and
general confidence-building measures. An integral part
of the strategy will be a cooperative relationship and
political dialogue with Belgrade, as well as
consultations with the Kosovo Albanian leadership.
On the general issue of economic development I
would like to stress that key to the functioning of the
provisional self-government will be a sound financial
foundation. With a view to handing over a balanced
budget to the provisional self-government in 2002, the
economic reconstruction pillar has developed several
strategies to generate revenue and encourage a
functioning market economy. Part of this is the
reinvigoration of State and socially owned enterprises.
Another part was the introduction on 1 July of value-
added tax, which will be supplemented at the beginning
of 2002 by a property tax.

I would like to say a few words on the situation in
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. The
situation there continues to be of great concern to
UNMIK. The Mission's effort to reduce the influence
of members of ethnic Albanian armed groups operating
from Kosovo has proved effective, with over 300
people arrested to date under the provisions of the
regulation on the prohibition of unauthorized
border/boundary crossings. A further effort to stem the
support for the National Liberation Army coming from
Kosovo was the decision of the Special Representative
at the beginning of July to suspend five senior
members of the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) who
had been blacklisted in the United States executive
order.

As of 16 July, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees estimated that
approximately 62,000 registered refugees remain in
Kosovo, while some 12,000 have returned. At the
moment, the number of arrivals outweighs the number
of returnees, with many leaving Skopje as a
precautionary measure while awaiting the outcome of
the negotiations ongoing in Skopje. The fluctuating
numbers reflect continuing uncertainty over peace
prospects in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. Host families in Kosovo have now reached
their absorption capacity in the anilane area, where
most of the refugees are settling. UNHCR is
considering redirecting future influxes to other regions.

On 24 July, the Government of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia decided to close the
border with Kosovo at the Blace border crossing for
United Nations organizations and KFOR. Indeed, as
with the earlier closure of the border in March this
year, UNMIK is making representations to the
authorities of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, as this decision imposes severe restrictions
on the implementation of UNMIK's mandate.
To conclude, I should like to stress that
continuing progress on planning the transition to
provisional self-government, confidence-building
measures and consolidation in the field of law and
order over the past month has been a valuable
contribution to UNMIK's goal of laying a solid
foundation for Kosovo-wide elections later in the year.
We are very pleased that four Kosovo Serb parties have
decided to certify for the elections and again urge the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
unequivocally encourage participation in the elections
as a means to undercut extremism, reduce inter-ethnic
tensions and stake the rightful claim of the Kosovo
Serb community to participate in the political process.

Now that some Kosovo Serb parties have taken
the decision to certify for the elections, there is an even
greater onus to ensure that the Kosovo Serb community
sees that tangible benefits derive from this cooperation
in the UNMIK-led process. It takes time for some
projects to take root and for advantages to be seen. We
must work to ensure that the programmes UNMIK is
implementing at all levels to solicit the participation of
the minority communities continue, as only through
persistence will these goals be achieved.

