Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
As this is the first occasion this month on which my
delegation has taken the floor in the Council, I should
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency. We are pleased to see you presiding over
our work; we are confident that we are in good hands.

I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Traore for the transparency, skill and
composure with which he guided our work during a
month that was far from easy.

My delegation would like to associate itself in
advance with the statement to be made later by the
Permanent Representative of Greece on behalf of the
European Union.

I should like to make some additional points in
my national capacity.

In its 18 months of existence, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) has accomplished
remarkable work, which has been rightly recognized by
all, in monitoring, pursuant to its mandate, the
implementation by all States Members of the
Organization of resolution 1373 (2001). This generally
positive record is attributable in large part to the energy
and dynamism of its Chairman, Ambassador Jeremy
Greenstock. Like previous speakers, I would like to
pay him and the other members of his delegation a
well-deserved tribute. I have no doubt that the impetus
that he has so effectively given to the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee will be of great value
for his successor, our Spanish colleague Ambassador
Inocencio Arias, whom we are very pleased to see
taking over the leadership of that Committee.

On several occasions, including during the
ministerial meeting of the Security Council on 20
January, the Council rightly recognized and actively
supported the significant work being done by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, with the valuable
assistance of its independent experts, to secure
implementation by all concerned of resolution 1373
(2001). Because of its multifaceted and global
character, combating terrorism requires support and
resolute action on the part of all. This genuine scourge
is a universal threat to which no country, whatever its
geographical situation or level of development, is
immune.

That is why my country welcomes the impressive
number, unprecedented in our Organization, of national
reports submitted to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
to date. Nonetheless, as the Council has already noted
in resolution 1456 (2003) of 20 January, all States must
submit their national report to the Committee, pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) and in accordance with the
timetable set therein. In this respect and if the need
should arise, the experts of the Committee may give
useful counsel and assistance to those few States that
have yet to submit a report.
This universal participation in combating
terrorism, however, will be neither possible nor
effective unless those States that are experiencing
difficulties in fully implementing the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001) are able to benefit from the
financial and technical assistance that they genuinely
need. The Counter-Terrorism Committee has already
created some very useful instruments, such as the
Directory of Counter-Terrorism Information and
Sources of Assistance and, more recently, the Matrix of
Assistance Requests, so as to facilitate and contribute
to a better understanding of the needs that have been
stated in this regard and the responses provided by
States, regional or international organizations to
requests for assistance that have been received. We
must, however, seriously consider setting priorities
among requests for technical assistance if we wish to
make that assistance as useful as possible with respect
to stated objectives. It is encouraging that the
Committee has initiated this process.

It would be particularly useful in this respect for
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, in the light of all the
national reports submitted to it, to be better able to
identify the difficulties of a general nature encountered
in the effective implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). That would enable the Security Council, among
others, to take the necessary measures, in a well-
informed fashion, to remedy the problems that arise.

Lastly, I would recall that the French Foreign
Minister, Mr. Dominique de Villepin, proposed in his
statement to the Council in January that consideration
be given to the creation, under United Nations
auspices, of a cooperation and assistance fund
intended, in close cooperation with the international
financial institutions, to strengthen national counter-
terrorism arrangements, particularly in countries of the
South. Consideration of this proposal should be
pursued in the coming weeks in the appropriate bodies
of our Organization.

Moreover, France welcomes the vital cooperation
in which the Counter-Terrorism Committee has
engaged with regional or international organizations
that have counter-terrorism competence and have
developed programmes of action in that field. The
meeting of 6 March between the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the representatives of those
organizations was particularly useful in that regard. In
addition to increasing the awareness of the actors
concerned of the need to develop the fullest possible
exchange of information, the meeting helped to
highlight the important role that such organizations can
and must play vis-a-vis their respective Member States
in order to enhance and facilitate individual and
collective action to counter the terrorist threat.
Furthermore, in the context of its presidency of the
Group of Eight, France is eager to strengthen technical
assistance in combating terrorism, in support of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee.

However commendable the work completed by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee to date may be, it
must nevertheless be qualitatively strengthened. It is
important in particular for the Committee to ensure -
to a greater extent than it has done to date, for reasons
that are quite understandable - that the diverse
legislative or administrative measures announced or
taken by States to give full effect to the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001) are given concrete expression
and adapted in practice.

It is heartening to note the Committee's readiness
to undertake this course, as indicated by its programme
of work for this quarter. The cooperation of regional or
international organizations with the Committee on this
point will be essential in many respects. Indeed, those
among them that are already evaluating the
implementation by their respective Member States of
good practices, codes or standards that they have
developed in the various areas of counter-terrorism
should be ready to exchange information on this
subject with the Counter-Terrorism Committee.

