Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Let me offer you,
Mr. President, and through you the Council members,
warm felicitations on the occasion of Eid al-Fitr.

We thank Mr. Ibrahima Fall for his detailed
report. The Council should respond to his call for
continued engagement. That is the only way to prevent
the slide towards insecurity and instability.

Conflicts in West Africa are intricately
interlinked. They are fed and fuelled by one another.
Their resolution logically, therefore, requires an
integrated and comprehensive strategy. Bangladesh is
persuaded that a regional approach, as the report
recommends, would be most appropriate. Also, the
solution sought should be political. The alternative is
not a Viable option.

Developments in West Africa, despite persisting
volatility, are headed in the right direction. The
situation in Sierra Leone, in spite of many challenges,
appears promising. We hope that the successful
completion of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) by the end of this month and the
success of the political process preceding the national
elections in May 2002 will make peace irreversible in
that region. Bangladesh is deeply committed to this
goal.

The sanctions have achieved welcome results.
The sanctions Committee's report needs to be
implemented in full. Three regional countries, members
of the Mano River Union, have started a process of
dialogue that could lead to regional stability. We
encourage the Governments of Sierra Leone, Guinea
and Liberia to pursue the dialogue diligently. In that
context, we look forward to the Mano River Union's
summit scheduled for early next year.

The role played by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) in promoting regional
peace has been, and remains, crucial for sustaining this
positive trend. ECOWAS, chaired so ably by President
Alpha Oumar Konare of Mali, remains at the forefront
of international efforts. We applaud his leadership.
ECOWAS must receive adequate assistance from the
United Nations and the international community. The
United Nations must react positively to the support it
has sought. We look forward to the forthcoming
ECOWAS meeting as a source of further direction for
the work the Security Council.

We are encouraged that the United Nations has
persisted with a regional approach in its efforts to
promote peace. The Fall report made it clear that there
is no option but to pursue such an approach. Since
then, the Secretary-General has created the West Africa
Office. This is a praiseworthy initiative. The objectives
of the Office, outlined in the report, will enable it to
make a positive contribution to durable peace in West
Africa. It will also enable it to avoid being seen as yet
another layer of bureaucracy.

We are pleased with the Secretary-General's
emphasis on human rights. Good governance remains a
major challenge, as do poverty, education and the
status of women. These will require a system-wide
response from the United Nations and the donors.

The West Africa Office must be functional as
soon as possible. Coordination will be critical to the
success of its work. The three entities to liaise with one
another will be ECOWAS, the Mano River Union and
the United Nations Office. That Office will be required
to become the nerve centre of our collective efforts. It
can, and indeed should, address the twin problems of
instability and insecurity. It can, and should, rekindle a
lamp of hope for West Africa.

