Mr. Gusmao (Timor-Leste) (spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation):
First and foremost, on behalf of the people I represent,
please allow me to thank the Security Council and its
permanent members, as well as all others who have
walked in the Chamber, for the generosity and concern
that they have shown in their resolutions on Timor-
Leste. After more than five years, I must say that it is a
great pleasure to be back here at United Nations
Headquarters.

I must also recall that in May 2006 then Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste Ramos-Horta came
before the Council to plead for the support that our
people needed, at a time when intolerance trumped
constructive dialogue, so that we might find proper
solutions. My presence here today follows that SOS we
sent out five years ago.

I am also pleased to be accompanied by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ameerah Haq.
It is thanks to her commitment and dedicated
leadership of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) that the relationship between
Timor-Leste and the United Nations remains as strong
as ever.

I am also honour-bound to thank my good friend
Mr. Atul Khare for everything he did, in very trying
circumstances, both for the Timorese and for the
Mission he led. He always showed great responsibility
and care in his work, as well as great understanding
and cooperation, so that together we could achieve our
duty of restoring confidence in the Timorese society.
Since UNMIT's establishment, in 2006, both President
Ramos-Horta and Vice-Prime Minister Jose Luis
Guterres, as well as Mr. Atul Khare and Ms. Ameerah
Haq, have reported to the Security Council on the
progress achieved in Timor-Leste.

I would like to highlight a few of the steps we
have taken since the five-party coalition Government I
lead entered office on 8 August 2007. For the first two
years, we focused our efforts on restoring peace and
stability and on solving most of the social and political
problems created by the 2006 crisis, which continued
up to 2008. We have been implementing structural
reforms with regard to the management of State
administration. We are also creating systems and
structures to ensure good governance and continuing to
provide support for building the capacity of both
institutions and justice sector personnel. We are
implementing social policies in order to reduce the
imbalances in our society, taking into account the
physical, moral and psychological damage caused by a
war that lasted 24 years. We are nurturing structured
policies on education, health and agriculture. And we
are promoting a coherent economic policy throughout
the country with regard to our nascent national private
sector.

The restoration of peace and stability in the
country was primarily a result of the reforms started in
the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) and the
Falintil-Forcas de Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL),
which by 2008 finally ended the cycle of friction,
overcoming the petty differences that divided both
institutions. Since the joint operation in 2008, the
PNTL and F-FDTL have been activated here and there
to continue the exercise to restore normality in the
country, in full compliance with the values of a
democratic State under the rule of law.

While one of the main factors in the 2006 crisis
was the inability of State bodies to manage problems
collectively, in February 2008, at a time of extreme
gravity and threat against the constitutional order, we
saw all State institutions working in a coordinated
manner and in close collaboration, thereby meeting all
legal and constitutional requirements for overcoming
that prolonged crisis. The result was the creation of a
political precedent of enormous significance and scope,
which shows to the Timorese that there are proper
instruments that they can use to save the country from
anarchy and disorder.

Nevertheless, I must acknowledge the extremely
important role played by civil society, including the
Church and non-governmental organizations, as well as
political parties, youth and, most of all, our people, in
this process of consolidating national unity and
stability. In 2009, the year that marked the tenth
anniversary of the referendum, this enabled the
Government to issue a new motto, namely, "Goodbye
Conflict, Welcome Development", which the people
embraced with all their hearts.

Thus, on 31 December 2010, after the first decade
in which the Timorese people were truly free, we bade
farewell to the year in a festive atmosphere, knowing
that we were on our way to becoming a friendly and -
most of all - tolerant and, of course, peaceful society.
It was against that backdrop that fireworks displays
were held in Dili to greet the 2011-2020 decade, during
which we will be strengthening those values and
launching a bolder development period.

I did not come here to praise the progress made
by my Government in an effort to correct some reports
on Timor-Leste that tend to sound more like verdicts.
We regret those reports, but we try to understand the
respective rationales behind them. I also did not come
here to underestimate the difficulties and the
challenges that still lie ahead of us.

We are aware that we still have many needs as a
nation. We are fully aware of the efforts that we will
have to make in order to build State and country. Still,
we have not been alone in meeting those challenges,
for we have benefited from the generosity and support
of nations from all over the world. The members of the
Council represent that generosity and support, as you
represent the countries from throughout the world. We
therefore continue to strengthen and gradually expand
our ties of solidarity with friendly countries from
various continents and with different histories, beliefs
and ethnicities.

Most of all, we are taking our due place in our
region. We are currently formalizing our application
for membership in the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) during the Indonesian presidency of
that regional forum. We believe that having Timor-
Leste join ASEAN during the Indonesian presidency
will have great symbolism, not only for Timor-Leste
and Indonesia but also for all the members of the
Association.

We are continuing to strengthen our relationship
with other friends in the Asia-Pacific region, including
China, Japan, South Korea, Australia and New
Zealand. Timor-Leste is also strongly committed to the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, which
has members around the world.

We also have ties of cooperation with India,
where dozens of Timorese are studying in the areas of
information technology and oil.

We are also fortunate to have strong support and
assistance from the European Union and its member
States. After this important visit to the United States, I
will also be travelling to Cuba, where over 700
Timorese are studying medicine, and to Brazil, a
country with which we are also cooperating in several
areas.
7

Timor-Leste is truly committed to engaging in
dialogue with several countries so as to enable a
critical review of its processes. As a nation, we have
received much from the international community.
Currently, we hope to be able to reciprocate in a
genuine manner and with the same spirit of solidarity
by sharing experiences, both sweet and sour, with other
fragile countries throughout the world.

As such, in April 2010, we had the honour of
hosting the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding
and Statebuilding, with the participation of the least
developed countries of the Group of Seven Plus (g7+),
which is currently chaired by Timor-Leste. The general
goal of the g7+ is to awaken leaders and peoples so
that they may reacquire ownership of their processes
over the long term, without losing sight of each
country's characteristics and priorities, and without
forgetting to focus on the need for better control over
and adjustment to outside help. That would require
greater transparency from donors and beneficiaries,
which would in turn ensure that external support has a
real impact on the development of the countries
concerned.

The g7+ is enabling fragile and conflict-affected
countries to gather together and speak about
themselves, to learn from their mutual experiences and
to create new opportunities for facing the future with
determination and optimism. The g7+ currently has 17
member countries, representing 350 million people
from Africa, Asia, the Caribbean and the Pacific.

For the third consecutive year, Timor-Leste has
been involved in the Bali Democracy Forum, which has
been gaining participants every year. Such countries as
India, Iran, Bangladesh and others have also chosen to
make important contributions to the Forum, which
shows that the world wants to discuss the subject of
democracy. I would like to convey my respect and
admiration for my friend Mr. Susilo Bambang
Yudhoyono, the President of the Republic of Indonesia.
Under his leadership, the largest Muslim country in the
world is taking steady steps towards consolidating
democracy and has managed to bring together, in Bali,
representatives of various Governments to discuss the
values of peace, non-violence and tolerance, and
particularly the connection between democracy and
development.
Today, we are witnessing an inevitable movement
by societies and peoples who demand freedom of

expression and fundamental rights. In the context of
current events, the g7+ and the Bali Democracy Forum,
people are becoming aware that they must be sovereign
in terms of the decisions that concern them, rather than
remaining subject to the imposition of the programmes
of others and, worse still, to interests that are not their
own.

While we Timorese fought alone for 24 years, we
never lost sight of what was going on in the world. The
objective awareness that the world was changing, both
in our region and others, was something that nurtured
our aspirations to be free, even in extreme situations.
And the world continues to change, fortunately.
Against that backdrop, the most important thing is that
people are the masters of their own fate.

Changing topics now, but remaining in this world
in which we live, the least developed countries, of
which Timor-Leste is one, are concerned by the
continuous indecisiveness of the large economies in
establishing a new economic order. As time passes, that
indecisiveness at best generates anxiety, if not despair.

And that is the truth: time goes by, as it has done
ever since the first alarms were sounded on climate
change, decades ago. Today, all over the world, it is
meaningless to talk about preventive measures, since
all that can be done is invariably to bury the dead and
assess the amount of damage in order to establish funds
to alleviate the suffering of people. Thus, countries
such as Timor-Leste that yearn for development so as
to improve the living conditions of their peoples face
one of the worst challenges, namely, uncertainty in
view of the adverse effects of the world economic
recession and the lack of coherence with regard to
measures to save humankind from hunger, disease,
poverty and all their consequences.

Accustomed to huge challenges during their
lengthy struggle for liberation, the people of Timor-
Leste are determined to focus on their development.
After a thorough review of the needs and challenges,
we are drafting the National Strategic Development
Plan, which will be submitted to Parliament for
approval. We hope to launch it at the next meeting with
our development partners, to take place in Dili in July.

In macroeconomic terms, the National Strategic
Development Plan is based on the following paradigm:
production, production capabilities and productive
employment opportunities. Only by creating
employment can we improve the social and economic
situation of our people, since only employment can
generate income, and income results in the eradication
of poverty. For that, the Timorese State will have to
invest boldly in basic infrastructure and human capital
development.

With the Council's permission, I will again go
back to the reasons that brought me here to New York.

On 25 August 2006, in response to a request by
the then-Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, the
establishment of UNMIT was approved for an initial
period of six months, with the possibility of renewal.
In December 2006, an additional agreement was signed
on the restoration and maintenance of public order. It
regulated the relationship between UNMIT and the
State of Timor-Leste, transferring leadership of the
national and international police to the United Nations
police (UNPOL). In parallel, support for the reform,
restructuring and rebuilding of the national police of
Timor-Leste was also defined. That enabled the
registration and certification programme of all PNTL
elements to begin, which facilitated the final
certification of all members of the police who did not
have trials pending for crimes or human rights
violations.

Meanwhile, the PNTL promotions system was
approved, which established a promotions committee
to select PNTL officers and recommend them for
promotion. The committee was supported by senior
police officers from friendly countries, which made
possible the creation of an international jury to give the
process greater credibility.

On 14 May 2009, the transfer of executive
responsibility from UNPOL to the PNTL began in the
various districts. We expect that process to be complete
by 27 March - the date of the PNTL's eleventh
anniversary - with the handing over of the Dili
district command and the PNTL general command.
From then on, the PNTL will be responsible for
conducting, leading and monitoring all police
operations in Timor-Leste.

I acknowledge the concerns stated in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2011/32) with regard to
completing certification of the remaining PNTL
elements. Here, I only wish to underline the
Government's commitment to strengthen command and
control and to resolutely implement disciplinary
procedures so as to ensure the integrity of our police.

Next year will be very important in the
consolidation of the process of building our young
State. It will thus be the year when we will hold
presidential and parliamentary elections - the third
democratic elections in our country. I am confident that
they will take place in an atmosphere of calm, as in
2007, when, despite the recent crisis and a few isolated
events, the elections took place in full normality
throughout the entire territory.

For that, we are ready to continue ensuring the
stability of our country. Also to that end, the PNTL will
continue to require the assistance of their colleagues at
UNPOL, who will undertake only advisory and
capacity-building functions in various areas, in
accordance with the needs of the Timorese police and
the plan already drafted by its general command. That
issue should, however, continue to be subject to
consultation and coordination with the relevant
Timorese authorities.

Allow me to recall that, with regard to legislation,
training, administration, discipline and operations, it
would of course be ideal if the advisers to the PNTL
have technical and professional skills in these fields. If
possible, we would like to see the advisers already
cooperating in these areas to remain until the end of
their mandates.

Under the leadership of our President of the
Republic, at high-level meetings involving UNMIT and
the Government we will continue to study the post-
UNMIT period, that is, the period after the 2012
elections, when UNPOL may start to withdraw.

For the election period - March and April for
the presidential elections and June for the
parliamentary elections - we seek to draw up a
special agreement with UNMIT so as to enable
UNPOL to participate jointly with PNTL in the
maintenance of public order in our country. In addition,
a year in advance, I would like to recall that UNMIT
will be requested to provide logistical support to the
elections, as it has always done, most recently in the
elections for local leaders in 2009. We count on the
presence of the international community through
international observers, who, we hope, will be present
in sufficient numbers to cover the 700 polling stations
in order to anticipate any irregularities that may
emerge and that we want to avoid.

The United Nations has been present since the
start of our nation-building . Therefore, I urge it to

remain in solidarity with us in fulfilling the dreams of
our people, which today are for peace and
development. I thank the United Nations, the Security
Council and the entire community of nations for their
efforts and support for State-building in Timor-Leste.
The Timorese people vow to continue to work hard
towards peace and stability in our country. Only by
doing so can we help the United Nations to provide due
assistance to other countries in crisis that have a
greater need for aid than Timor-Leste.

On behalf of all Timorese, I thank all those men
and women who have left their families and their
countries to be part of the noble mission to assist in the
building of Timor-Leste throughout these five long
years. I also thank all Governments that were part of
the Council during those years and deliberated on the
support to Timor-Leste in a spirit of true friendship and
solidarity among peoples and nations.

I cannot conclude without congratulating the
Governments and peoples of the Sudan for their
intelligent embrace of non-violence during the recent
referendum process. We know that significant
challenges remain in that process. The people of
Timor-Leste, who have experienced the devastation of
destruction and violence, hope that their Sudanese
brothers and sisters, from both the North and South,
will continue to engage in dialogue towards a peaceful
solution, which is the only way to ensure the integrity
and survival of both peoples.

The year 2012 will also mark the tenth
anniversary of the restoration of our independence and
the realization of our sovereignty. I would like to seize
this opportunity to invite all those here today to take
part in the celebrations, as we did together back on
20 May 2002.

In conclusion, I would like to thank His
Excellency the Secretary-General for his report and for
the recommendation to extend the UNMIT mandate for
one more year. In the consolidation phase of the PNTL,
the reconfiguration of UNPOL is important. I have
every confidence that the PNTL will be well assisted in
the process of building institutional and human
capacity.

(spoke in English)
During this time of anguish, it would be remiss of
me not to express my sincere and deep sympathy and
solidarity with the people and the Government of New
Zealand for the second earthquake that has hit
Christchurch.

