Sheikha Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
open debate. It also gives us great pleasure to welcome
the participation of His Excellency the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the friendly Republic of Lithuania in
conducting the discussion this morning. I would like to
commend the comprehensive concept note (S/2014/75, annex) that you have introduced. I would be remiss if I
did not pay tribute to the role the Security Council and
His Excellency the Secretary-General for continuing
discussion of this subject, given the importance the
international community attaches to the promotion of
the rule of law at the national and international levels.

The definition by the international community
of the elements included in the concept of the rule of
law affirms the interrelationship between the rule of
law and the three pillars of the United Nations, that
is, international peace and security, development
and human rights. It is also a culmination of the
international efforts in that regard. Therefore, the State
of Qatar renews its support to what was stated by the
Heads of States and Governments in the Declaration of
the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the
Rule of Law at the National and International Levels
(General Assembly resolution 67/1) and in the other
resolutions adopted in that connection, which stress
the need for clear legal frameworks to mainstream
the rule of law in all aspects of life and at all national,
regional and international levels. Hence, the promotion
of international peace and security, which we all seek,
depends upon the ability of States to respect and follow
up the implementation of those legal frameworks.

The commitment by States to respect the rule of
law and its entrenchment in all spheres of life is the
cornerstone of the maintenance of international peace
and security. Also, the protection of human rights and
the achievement of development and social justice are
at the very heart of the responsibilities of States at the
national and international levels. The commitment to
them is a translation of the principles of the rule of law.

International instruments have provided for the need
to respect and to enforce the rule of law and equality
before the law and to act accordingly That cannot be
achieved without taking accountability measures,
preventing grave violations of international law and
international humanitarian law and other international
crimes, and ensuring that perpertrators do not enjoy
impunity and that subjective political interests are not
allowed to undermine justice.

If we look at the situations that threaten international
peace and security, we conclude that the reasons behind
them include the absence of the rule of law in some
States. That has led to the emergence ofdespotic regimes
that disregard the law and the will of their peoples;
rather, they violate their basic rights to justice, freedom
and decent life. Those regimes have become a source of
threats to regional and international peace and security.
The promotion and implementation of the principle of
the rule of law threfore require respect for mechanisms
agreed upon by the international community in order to
put an end to grave violations of human rights, combat
impunity, support United Nations efforts to achieve
the peaceful settlement of disputes, empower women,
combat corruption and ensure respect for the right of
peoples to self-determination, in a manner that paves
the way for achieving international peace and security.

Believing as it does in the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes on the basis of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations, and recognizing
the importance of international cooperation, the State of
Qatar has sought to contribute effectively to promoting
the efforts of the international community to achieve
international peace and security. It has contributed, in
coordination with the Security Council and the relevant
international organizations, to achieving a peaceful
settlement to a number of disputes.

As an affirmation of the commitment of the State
of Qatar to the responsibility of Member States to
participate in promoting the principle of the rule of law
on the basis of United Nations resolutions, and with
a View to supporting the international community's
efforts in this area, my country, in cooperation
with the United Nations Development Programme,
took the initiative of establishing in Doha a regional
centre for the rule of law and combating corruption,
which was inaugurated in 2011 under the sponsorship
His Highness the Amir of Qatar. The centre plays an
important role in promoting the principle of the rule of
law in the region and in enabling relevant officials and
civil society organizations to promote the rule of law
and combat corruption.

Finally, the State of Qatar supports what is
underscored in the concept note regarding the
integration of the rule of law at the national and
international levels. Such integration should be given
particular importance. Relations among the topics must
be subject to the rule of law on the basis of equality,
mutual respect and international cooperation, and the
behaviour of States should be in line with the provisions
of international law.

The current crises and violations in the world
reflect the disregard and disrespect by some regimes
for international law and international humanitarian
law, and their feeling that they can escape their
responsibilities in the absence of robust implementation
of international accountability. The violations being
inflicted upon the brotherly Syrian people are clear
proof thereof. Consequently, we once again call on
the Security Council, by virtue of its responsibility to
apply the Charter of the United Nations, to implement
the mechanism adopted by the international community
in that connection, and not to allow any negligence
with regard to international law, regardless of baseless
pretexts. That will not be achieved without a scrupulous
commitment to the principle to the rule of law.

