Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
afforded my delegation to speak to the Security Council.
I would like first to commend you for your outstanding
leadership of the Council this month. It has been a busy
month due to global events that have not permitted you
a moment of rest.

Rwanda notes the adoption of resolution 2078 (2012),
submitted by France, on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Without addressing the details
of the resolution, permit me to make some general
comments on the conflict in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo with respect to the Council's
action.

My country has expressed its concern about the
prevailing situation in our neighbour, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. When fighting resumed on
15 November, Rwanda called on the two parties, the
Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo and the Mouvement du 23 mars (M23), to halt
the hostilities immediately and to respect the ceasefire
imposed three months earlier by the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR).

On 21 November, after the fall of Goma, President
Paul Kagame went to Kampala where he met with
Mr. Yoweri Museveni, President of Uganda and Acting
Chair of the ICGLR, as well as Mr. Joseph Kabila,
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The three Presidents signed a joint statement calling
on the M23 to halt its offensive and to withdraw
from Goma, in exchange for an investigation by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
of the causes of its discontent. The joint statement
was affirmed at the summit of the Heads of State
and Government of the ICGLR, held in Kampala
on 24 November. The summit adopted 12 decisions
regarding the crisis in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the most important of which called, of
course, for the withdrawal of the M23 from Goma in
exchange for a commitment by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to investigate "their
legitimate concerns". While paying genuine tribute
to President Museveni's unfailing efforts, Rwanda
calls on the two parties swiftly and unconditionally to
implement the Kampala declaration.

My delegation calls on the Security Council to
support its regional efforts to resolve the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The countries
of the region have spent several months working on
a solution to that fratricidal conflict. The Kampala
declaration - which, I reiterate, was signed by the
Heads of States of the region - warrants the respect
and consideration of Council members.

By falling into the trap of sanctions and easy
scapegoating, and by ignoring the root causes of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Council is undermining the progress made in Kampala
and squandering an opportunity to help the Government
of the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo to re-establish
peace, security and stability in the country and the
region.

In that context, it is most regrettable that some
members of the Council that bear a great deal of
responsibility for the crisis in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, especially following their own culpable
escapades in the region, have launched a crusade
against the decision taken by our Heads of State while
seeking scapegoats for the conflict. The crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo began almost at the
very moment of its independence. Several peacekeeping
missions have been deployed in the country, where one
of the most corrupt regimes in Africa long enjoyed the
external support of Council membes in exchange for
profitable contracts. We continue to pay the price today.

I turn now to the Group of Experts on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which, I recall,
consists of six consultants appointed by the Secretary-
General. Despite everything, Rwanda has played its
part. Our country has made every effort to respond in
detail to each of the allegations made by the Group.
I would remind Council members that in late July
Rwanda transmitted a 130-page response to the
addendum of the interim report of the Group of Experts
published in June (S/2012/348/Add.1). Following that
and pursuant to its request, the Rwandan delegation
officially presented its response before the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Nonetheless, following our detailed presentation
on both substance and procedure, members of the
Committee never sought to discuss the substance of our
presentation and merely read out statements prepared
in advance, stating that the report was "credible" and
that Rwanda must continue to collaborate with the
Group of Experts. To follow up, Rwanda transmitted
several letters to the Committee, including the
legal opinion of a law firm in Washington, DC,
demonstrating that not only did the methodology of the
Group of Experts not respect the Council's own rules,
but that the coordinator of the Group of Experts, in the
spare time before his appointment, had made excuses
for the genocidal actions of the Forces de'mocratiques
de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR). To date, Rwanda has
received no response to its request.

In such conditions, it is astonishing that the
Security Council has continued to support the report of
the Group of Experts (S/2012/843, annex), despite the
fact that it has never studied in detail the methodology
used, the evidence provided or the accusations
made against Rwanda. I am not even referring in that
context to a proper consideration of our response and
inquiries. I am sure that the Council is aware that such
an inquisitional procedure, providing no place for
discussion of both sides of a situation and led by an
individual who had openly taken a position against the
accused party well in advance of assuming his position,
would never have been considered legitimate for even
a moment before any court in any of the Council
members' States.

In the recent fighting, Rwanda has been accused
of providing up to 4,000 people to fight alongside the
M23. That allegation was repeated by Ambassador
Ileka. There are approximately 4,000 Rwandan troops
in Darfur. Does anyone really believe that those troops
could have crossed the border with impunity and then
returned without a trace, leaving behind no dead bodies
and no photographic evidence? The United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) itself, which is
there on the ground, said that it had no tangible proof
of such a Rwandan presence. So all of this is just
preposterous, far-fetched speculation based on the
same old stories about Rwandan uniforms, supposedly
sophisticated weapons, and even, believe it or not, the
accents of M23 fighters.

The Congo is a huge country where more than
20 armed groups are active in a security vacuum.
Can MONUSCO really say for certain that it has
such in-depth knowledge about all the uniforms and
weapons in the region that it can conclude that the
M23's weapons could have come only from Rwanda? I
will give an example. The FDLR, which just yesterday
attacked Rwanda - I will come back to that later - had
machine guns, grenade-launchers, mortars and other
so-called sophisticated weapons. Must we therefore
conclude that Rwanda is also providing the FDLR with
weapons?

Rwanda places its trust in the Joint Verification
Mechanism set up by the ICGLR, which is composed
of senior officers from the armies of all of the countries
members of the Conference. We would like to inform
the Council that in a report submitted to the summit
of Joint Chiefs of Staff of the region, held in Kampala
on 19 November, the Mechanism concluded that at this
stage there was no proof that Rwanda had provided any
military or logistical support to the M23.

I should also like to recall that on several
occasions in recent days Rwanda has been provoked
into entering the conflict. Last week, rockets and
mortar shells were launched into our territory, causing
the deaths of innocent persons. Yesterday, as I was
saying earlier, FDLR forces actually attacked our
country, causing additional deaths. But the Security
Council remained indifferent to that act of aggression.
Yesterday's meeting, at which no delegation condemned
those attacks, and the resolution adopted today are clear
evidence of this. But Rwanda will not give up and will
not respond to that provocation.

I should like to reiterate today, loud and clear,
that Rwanda is neither the cause of the crisis in the
east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo nor
a party to it. I wish to note that, above and beyond our
unswerving commitment in the context of the regional
process, President Kabila and President Kagame
are in regular contact on this issue and that their
relations have remained cordial.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda
are blood brothers, and we will continue, to the extent
possible, to work to iron out our differences and ensure
lasting peace in the region.

In conclusion, I should like to reiterate that Rwanda
will continue to be a party to efforts to resolve the crisis
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, be it at the
bilateral or regional level or in the Security Council.
We support the efforts made by the Secretary-General
as well as any initiative he might put forward that would
promote an inter-Congolese dialogue and address the

root causes of the endless conflicts that are tearing that
country apart.
Our country very much looks forward to becoming
a member of the Security Council, and we are prepared
to work with maximum goodwill within the Council to
resolve that crisis as well as the others that are plaguing
the world.

