Mr. Ishikawa (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my appreciation to the Lithuanian presidency
for its leadership in convening today's open debate on
what is an important issue for all and for ciculating a
draft presidential statement. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing,
which impressed upon us the importance of today's
discussion.

Let me echo many other colleagues in stressing
the importance of promoting and strengthening the
rule of law in post-conflict situations. The rule of law
plays a significant role in preventing the recurrence
of conflicts and paving the road to sustainable peace.
Japan believes that in extending assistance in the field
of the rule of law, the keys to success require a tailor-
made approach and long-term efforts.

It is very natural that the challenges a post-conflict
country faces in re-establishing the rule of law differ
from those that other post-conflict countries face.
Therefore, assistance in this field must be tailor-made
for the specific conditions of each host country and be
under its strong ownership. To that end, countries and
relevant international organizations offering assistance
must engage in close dialogue with the host country
to optimize their available assets as much as possible
through close coordination and by making use of their
comparative advantages. As a case in point, I would
like to share with the Council Japan's effort to assist
Afghanistan in strengthening its security maintenance
capacity.

The transition in security from the International
Security Assistance Force to forces of the Government
of Afghanistan started in July 2011, and the need to
enhance Afghanistan's capacity, both in quantity and
quality, cannot be stressed enough. In that context,
Japan has extended assistance in a variety of ways,
with special emphasis on supporting Afghanistan's
self-reliance on a bilateral basis, as well as by working
in cooperation with other like-minded countries and
international organizations. In addition to bilateral
assistance for Afghan police salaries, which helped to
significantly increase the number of police officers,
Japan, with a View to enhancing the quality of police
officers, has implemented training programmes in
Turkey for 1,500 Afghan police officers, in cooperation
with the Government of Turkey; conducted literacy
education for the Afghan National Police in cooperation
with UNESCO; and assisted in criminal justice
capacity-building by constructing judicial facilities
and training judges and prosecutors through the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. I believe
that the experience of Japan in Afghanistan shows the
importance of capacity enhancement over a wide range
of aspects and with effective coordination among the
relevant partners, with their respective comparative
advantages in mind.

Secondly, I would like to stress that strengthening
rule-of-law institutions requires a long-term perspective
and enduring efforts on both on the assisting and the
receiving sides.

Let me now relate our experience gained in
assisting Cambodia in its efforts to rebuild its legal
and judicial systems. After the two-decade-long civil
war, Cambodia suffered severely from the absence of
a system of fundamental legislation and from a lack
of competent legal officials. The Japan International
Cooperation Agency started the Legal and Judicial
Development Project in 1999, in which a Japan-
Cambodia joint team drafted a civil code and a code
of civil procedure. Since their entry into force in 2007,
Japan has continued its assistance in formulating related
laws, reinforcing the Cambodian Ministry of Justice
and developing professional human resources. Human
resource development must be given special emphasis
in that field, because a country cannot proceed on the
path of the rule of law without its own sustainable
institutions. Our experience from over a decade in
Cambodia tells us that assistance in the rule of law must
be pursued from a long-term perspective.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that Japan stands
ready to support those countries working to rebuild
themselves in the aftermath of conflict and remains
committed to providing assistance in the field of the
rule of law.

