Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation is very pleased by the
holding of the Security Council's open debate today on
the Secretary-General's report on Africa. At the
ministerial session of the Council last September, the
Vice-Premier of China, Mr. Qian Qichen,
comprehensively laid out the Views of the Chinese
Government on the African situation and China's policy
towards Africa. On this basis, I would like to share with
you China's preliminary comments and some ideas on the
report.

The Secretary-General's report covers a wide scope.
It contains not only an analysis of the sources of conflicts
in Africa and their consequences and an overview of the
experiences and lessons of the Council's response to these
conflicts, but also the Secretary-General's Views on
Africa's economic and social development, as well as his
hopes and expectations for African countries. The
Secretary-General has also put forward proposals
regarding peacekeeping, the promotion of socio-economic
development and the role of the Council and other
international bodies. We believe that the report will help
draw the attention of the Council, the United Nations
system and the entire international community to the
importance of solving the problems faced by Africa. This
is highly necessary. The Chinese delegation would like to
express its appreciation for this.

This open debate should also serve to enhance our
understanding of the relevant issues involved. In this
context, special attention should be given to the opinions
of African countries and regional organizations. We hope
that follow-up actions in line with the realities of Africa
and the interests of the African people will be taken, on
the basis of a full exchange of views by all sides,
especially African countries.

Africa is a vast continent, rich in resources and full
of Vitality. The African peoples are industrious and
courageous. They have made tremendous contributions to
and sacrifices for the world's development. African
countries account for nearly one third of the United
Nations membership and represent an important force in
international affairs. We must View Africa from a
strategic standpoint of global peace and development.

 

Without peace and development in Africa, there will be no
genuine world peace and development. It is therefore vitally
important that Africa be a truly equal partner for
development. It is the unshirkable common responsibility of
the international community to give strong support and help
to the efforts of African countries in maintaining peace and
pursuing development.

The African continent has long been plagued by
conflicts and hot spots. As the Secretary-General pointed
out in his report, since 1970 more than 30 wars have been
fought in Africa, and in 1996 alone, 14 African countries
were afflicted by armed conflicts. Conflicts in Africa can be
traced to deep-seated historical causes and have a complex
background. Therefore, the defusing of tensions and
peacekeeping and peacemaking are formidable tasks. We
are of the view that conflicts and disputes should be
resolved through peaceful means such as negotiations. We
highly appreciate the untiring efforts to this end made by
African countries and regional organizations and the marked
achievements they have scored. We support a greater role
for the Council in solving African issues and timely
deployment of peacekeeping operations in accordance with
the United Nations Charter and at the request of the African
countries concerned. In seeking solutions to Africa's
problems, it is essential to respect the Views of the African
countries, as well as their sovereignty and territorial
integrity, and to follow the principle of non-interference in
internal affairs.

Peace and development are inseparable. Without
development, peace cannot stand on solid ground. Africa's
economic difficulties are one of the root causes of its
instability. Therefore, it is a task of the utmost urgency for
African countries to overcome economic difficulties and
realize and accelerate economic growth. We are in favour
of the Secretary-General's proposal to establish aid levels,
which we hope will result in more aid to Africa.

We should all realize that assistance to Africa
contributes to global development and prosperity and is in
the common interests of the international community as a
whole. It is by no means one-way charity to Africa.
International assistance should be based on actual
conditions in Africa and truly benefit the African people,
without any conditions being attached. African countries are
the masters of Africa. They know best their problems and
needs. Only they can decide upon their course of
development in the light of their specific conditions. To
impose a given model on them will be counterproductive.

China is pleased to see the growing trend among
African countries towards unity and self-strengthening, or
pulling themselves up by their own bootstraps. The
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and subregional
organizations in Africa are playing an increasingly
important role in both international and regional affairs
and have scored commendable achievements in dealing
with African conflicts and hot spots. We support the
continuous strengthening of contacts and coordination
between the United Nations and the OAU, as well as
relevant subregional organizations. We hope to see an
even greater role played by African countries on the
world stage.

We are of the view that the United Nations system
should focus more on African issues. We support the
Secretary-General's proposal for a biennial ministerial
meeting of the Security Council on the question of Africa
and a summit meeting at an appropriate time. Other
bodies of the United Nations system and the Bretton
Woods institutions should all play a more active role.
Other proposals of the Secretary-General, such as
instituting mechanisms like groups of "Friends" or special
conferences to handle conflicts, protect the humanitarian
interests of the African people, strengthen Africa's
peacekeeping capacity and assist regional efforts in Africa
deserve in-depth consideration. We hope that these
proposals will be translated into concrete action on the
basis of extensive discussions with African countries.

China has always maintained close friendship and
cooperation with African countries. Chinese leaders have
paid numerous visits to Africa. During his visit to Africa
in 1996, Chinese President Jiang Zemin proposed five
principles for the development of a long-term and stable
relationship of all-round cooperation with all African
countries, a relationship oriented towards the twenty-first
century. The principles are as follows: first, to foster a
sincere friendship and become each other's reliable "all-
weather friend"; secondly, to treat each other as equals,
respect each other's sovereignty and refrain from
interfering in each other's internal affairs; thirdly, to seek
common development on the basis of mutual benefit;
fourthly, to increase consultation and cooperation in
international affairs; and fifthly, to look into the future
and create a more splendid world. These principles define
Sino-African relations.
To date, China has provided different categories of
assistance to all 53 African countries and has completed
more than 600 projects in Africa. Last year alone, we
signed new assistance agreements with 41 African

 

countries. To adapt to the changing situation, China has
reformed its ways of providing aid and has adopted
additional methods, such as augmenting governmental
assistance with the involvement of financial institutions and
companies. We have also provided preferential government
loans to Africa and set up joint ventures or cooperative
projects with local enterprises for the execution of
assistance projects. The purpose of this is to help the
recipient countries develop productive projects based on
local demand and resources, enhance the efficiency of
assistance, boost local employment and, at the same time,
train African technical and managerial personnel. We
signed framework agreements with up to 20 countries in
Africa, and over 10 such projects are already in operation.
China does not attach conditions to its assistance. We will
continue to enhance economic cooperation and trade with
African countries and support their efforts to eradicate
poverty and realize sustained economic development at an
early date.

To solve the problems facing Africa is a challenge not
only for Africa but also for the whole international
community. The aspiration for stability and peace and the
pursuit of development and progress are shared by all
African countries and peoples. We stand ready to meet the
challenge together with the African countries and peoples
so as to usher in an even better tomorrow.

