Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, my delegation, too, would like to thank
Mr. Schwarz-Schilling for his briefing and to commend
him for the work he has accomplished as High
Representative and European Union Special
Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I also wish
to welcome the presence of Mr. Adnan Terzie,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The Permanent Representative of Finland will
shortly make a statement on behalf of the European
Union, with which my delegation fully associates
itself. For my part, I should like to make a few brief
comments.

More than 10 years after the signing of the Peace
Accords, Bosnia and Herzegovina has made significant
progress towards becoming a stable and democratic
State that embraces the values and norms of Europe.
The general elections that have just taken place in
satisfactory conditions testify to that positive
development. We await the formation of a new
Government that will have to work on moving closer to
the European Union.

It is unfortunate, however, that the period
preceding the elections was marked by a return of
nationalist rhetoric and by the stalling of crucial
reforms. To date, none of the reforms that were cited as
priorities by the High Representative in his speech to
Parliament in May have been adopted.

Those reforms must now be relaunched in order
to strengthen the central State and to delay no further
the modernization of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
country's European perspective must be formalized by
the signing of a Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union. That can take
place only when police and public broadcasting reform
has been implemented. That is why we expect from the
new central authorities of Bosnia and the entities a
strong commitment to the reforms that are also
expected by the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
that made little progress in 2006.

Moreover, efforts to cooperate fully with the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia must
be continued and stepped up. The arrest and transfer to
The Hague Tribunal of all indictees still at large is
essential to fulfilling Bosnia and Herzegovina's
international obligations and to completing the critical
reconciliation process.

The lasting stabilization of Bosnia and
Herzegovina requires the strengthening of its
institutions. The discussions on constitutional reform
have made significant progress, leading to the
agreement of 18 March. We offer our support to the
High Representative and to the other members of the
international community concerned in order to
reactivate that reform, which all the political parties of
the countries must endorse.

The High Representative raised the question of
the decertification of Bosnian police officers by the
International Police Task Force. We agree fully with
his approach. A solution must be found in order to
settle the matter in accordance with international legal
standards, in conjunction with the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Our goal is to move towards the gradual
dismantling of international protection, accompanied
by the transfer of competences to the Bosnian
authorities. That must take account of the evolution of
the situation in Bosnian and the region. While the
function of High Representative will expire, that of the
European Union Special Representative will remain to
play an important support and advisory role to the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to
coordinate European action.

Lastly, given the prevailing uncertainties
concerning the country's future and the regional
environment, we feel it necessary to maintain an
international military presence. To that end, the
Security Council will have to adopt a resolution to
renew the mandate of the European Union Force in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which will expire on
21 November.

