Mr. Baja (Philippines): At the outset, Sir, allow
us to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for March and to commit to
you our full cooperation. We also congratulate
Ambassador Wang Guangya of China on a successful
presidency last month. We thank the High
Representative, Lord Ashdown, and the Chairman of
the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Terzic, for their comprehensive briefings.

Given the steady progress being made in the
country, of which we have heard this morning, the
debate on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
not as sexy this morning as it was seven or eight years
ago. That is good for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
European Union (EU), for the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) and for the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). It is good
for the international community and for the Security
Council, and I suppose Lord Ashdown welcomes this
also. It means that the effort of the international
community to build a self-sustaining State in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is nearing its terminal phase. It means
also that quite soon our dilemma will become when
and how to disengage from Bosnia.

As indicated in the report of the High
Representative, the number of core tasks for his Office
has been reduced from six to the following four:
entrenching the rule of law; reforming the economy;
strengthening the capacity of the governing
institutions; and establishing, at the State level, civilian
command and control over the armed forces. Still,
these are formidable tasks of nation-building, in which
the country's foreign guardians will have to engage
themselves more deeply.

We take note of the fact that, as stated in the
briefing given by Lord Ashdown, the reform process -
a difficult task indeed - is driven by the international
community but carried out by the national
Governments. We endorse the High Representative's
approach of mobilizing a popular constituency for his
reforms - that is, the people themselves. We believe
that people who have a past and who know where they
come from will know where they are and where they
are going. Having a past means having a sense of
history. I hope Lord Ashdown's approach has a
significant impact on this process, since having a sense
of history also means having a sense of country.

If one can see the past, one can ask questions
about the present. We can ask questions such as
whether reform should be carried out within existing
bodies or by institutions restructured from within or
from without. We have observed from the report
(S/2004/ 126, annex, enclosure) that the people and the
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina are still relying
on the international community to make tough
decisions: drafting key laws and regulations and, in
most instances, paying the bills. However, we are
gratified to note that progress has been made in the
mission implementation plan setting out the specific
goals and the points at which the handover to domestic
institutions will take place.

If one can see the past, one can also demand a
future. We take note of Lord Ashdown's concern,
described in paragraphs 66 and 67 of the report, at the
growing challenges to the police certification process
conducted by the International Police Task Force
(IPTF) during its mandate in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is unfortunate that police officers who were denied
certification by the IPTF - most because of their
involvement in war crimes, the abuse of authority or
criminal activities - have taken advantage of a legal
loophole to get themselves reinstated. We were
gratified to hear this morning that Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno has recognized the
seriousness of the matter and is making proposals to
resolve it.

Another concern is the fact that those behind the
slaughter of civilians in Bosnia and Herzegovina
continue to evade justice. We join other countries in
expressing our desire to see indicted war criminals
brought before the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for war crimes and
other crimes against humanity. We call on the
concerned authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
extend their full cooperation to see to it that those
indictees are turned over and brought to justice. We
expect the relevant authorities in the country to
appropriately investigate and prosecute war crimes
cases that have been referred by the ICTY to local law
enforcement and prosecutorial agencies.

In the present situation, the national Governments
appear to have retained a veto capacity, to have a large
say or even to obstruct the reforms of the High
Commissioner. We are gratified to note the assurance
by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers this
morning about the Government's commitment to
coordinate on those reforms.

It is incumbent upon the international community
to be strong and to know what it is doing - and to
ensure that all know that it is strong and knows what it
is doing. We congratulate Lord Ashdown on his
intrusive approach to nation-building in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and on his mediation efforts among the
political actors in that country. I wish him well in what
he called the irreversible road to statehood and
European integration for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

