Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
express our condolences on the sad demise of South
Africa's great leader, Mr. Nelson Mandela.

At this meeting, my delegation is grateful to the
Presidents and the Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their respective
briefings. We also thank Ambassador Rosenthal
of Guatemala for his outstanding leadership in
conducting the work of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals for the past two years. With the
establishment of the Tribunals two decades ago, a new
era of international criminal justice began. It has been
20 years since the founding ofthe ICTY, while the ICTR
will reach that milestone in 2014. Both Tribunals have
been instrumental in the fight against impunity and in
developing key international legal precedents. We are
confident that the Residual Mechanism will continue to
maintain the high standard set by the Tribunals.

As the work of the Tribunals draws to a conclusion,
Member States must continue to lend their support at
this criticaljuncture. We welcome the fact that the ICTR
completed its workload on all 93 indicted individuals
at the trial level before the end of 2012 and we look
forward to the Tribunal's completion of the outstanding
appeals by the projected date in 2015. We expect that
the appointment of Mr. Mandiaye Niang of Senegal
will be of assistance in facilitating the appellate work
of both Tribunals. We also support the efforts of the
ICTR to retain the humanitarian issue of relocating
acquitted persons and those who have already served
their sentences. We hope for an efficient and timely
solution to that problem.

The ICTY still faces various challenges, including
late arrests and staff attrition. Among the implications
for the Tribunal is a delay in its appellate work, which
is estimated to be completed as late as mid-2017. We
urge the Tribunal to do its best to complete its work in
a timely manner without sacrificing the principles of
justice. With the significance of meeting time frames
in mind, we hope that the election of Mr. Koffi Afande
of Togo will aid efforts to complete the remaining cases
expeditiously. In that vein, we further expect that the
extensions requested by the Judges in the ICTY will
duly be considered.

We welcome the Residual Mechanism's
engagement in numerous judicial activities during the
reporting period. That includes the appeal proceedings
in the Augustin Ngirabatware case. Such activities are
evidence that the Mechanism is well on the way towards
fulfilling its mandate. The arrest and prosecution of
nine outstanding fugitives from the ICTR remains a top
priority for the Mechanism. We encourage continuing
efforts to track down the fugitives and to secure the
cooperation of Member States in that regard.

To conclude, we also wish to stress that the Tribunals
have made a significant, lasting contribution to the
development of international justice. Their work has
enriched international humanitarian law and led to the
establishment of the International Criminal Court. The
Republic of Korea is firmly committed to providing our
continuing support to ensure that the Tribunals fulfil
their important mandates.

