Mr. Stier (Croatia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like,
at the outset, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
Bolivia's assumption of the presidency of the Security

Council and towish you a successful month as you fulfil
your mandate.

(spoke in English)
I welcome the Presidents of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
Residual Mechanism, Judges Agius and Meron, as
well as Prosecutor Brammertz. I thank them for
today's briefings and their reports (see S/2017/436 and S/2017/434) and assure them of Croatia's continued
support for their efforts aimed at ensuring accountability.

It is little wonder that, some 25 years ago, Croatia,
at the time under brutal aggression, was one of the
States strongly supporting the establishment of a
tribunal mandated to adjudicate and punish the most
serious violations of international humanitarian
law. The expectations of all those who cried for help
and justice were extremely high. Global television
audiences witnessed appalling scenes of Croatian
towns and Villages being levelled to the ground and
their population savagely "cleansed". One such place
was the village of Skabrnja, the scene of the most
gruesome atrocities committed in 1991, when 84 of
its inhabitants brutally perished. Most of them were
executed on their doorsteps or in their basement
shelters, massacred in the streets or thrown under the
treads of passing tanks. After causing the carnage, the
perpetrators wrote a cynical message on the wall of the
destroyed elementary school in large letters: "Welcome
to a dead village". Although he was not indicted for
the events in this Croatian village, it was in Skabrnja
and the surrounding towns and villages that, in 1991,
Ratko Mladie, whose trial is still pending before the
ICTY, began his warpath, which later continued in
neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The ICTY, whose work we are discussing today,
will soon enter history with a significant legacy, in
particular with its achievements in the fight against
impunity. Equally important is the Tribunal's role
in giving a voice to the thousands of Victims of
horrific crimes.

It could be said that the Tribunal is far from
satisfying the cries of all those who experienced, in the
worst manner possible, the brutality and cruelness ofthe
perpetrators. It might also even seem that the Tribunal
is far from upholding important legal principles and the
mandate it was established to fulfil, that is, proceedings
of reasonable length and the application of existing
rules and principles of international humanitarian and
criminal law. While little can be done about a number
of those complaints, a stringent application of existing
rules and principles, so important for both the legacy of
the Tribunal and international criminal law in general,
must now be our focus.
It is worthwhile repeating that in creating the ICTY,
the Security Council strictly confined the Tribunal to
the application of existing international humanitarian
law and did not in any way authorize the creation of
precedents or "legislation" in that branch of law. Such
an understanding was also clearly expressed in Security
Council members' official statements following
the adoption of resolution 827 (1993), by which the
Tribunal was formally established (see S/PV.3217),
as well as in the report of the Secretary-General on
the establishment and functioning of the ICTY (see S/25704), which explicitly limited the application of
international humanitarian law by the Tribunal to rules
that are beyond any doubt part of customary law.

In that context, let me remind Council members
how, for example, the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, Sir David Hannay, in his discussion
after the adoption of resolution 827 (1993), stated that
"[t]he Statute does not, of course, create new law,
but reflects existing international law in this field".
The Permanent Representative of Spain, Mr. Yafiez
Barnuevo, summarized the Tribunal's role by saying that
it is not established "to create new international law or to
change existing law but to guarantee effectively respect
for that law", while Ambassadors Arria and Sardenberg,
of Venezuela and Brazil, respectively, also voiced their
understanding of the Tribunal's limited jurisdiction to
the application of existing international law.

While completing its task of establishing individual
criminal responsibility in the armed conflict on
the territory of the former Yugoslavia and thereby
contributing to lasting peace and security in the area,
the ICTY must live up to the highest standards with
regard to the scrupulous interpretation and appropriate
application of existing international humanitarian law,
in accordance with its statute. Furthermore, pursuant to
article 6 of the ICTY statute, the Tribunal does not have
the competency to make findings on State responsibility.
Defining the Tribunal's jurisdiction further, articles 6
and 7 are appropriately entitled "Personal jurisdiction"
and "Individual criminal responsibility".

Any attempt to expand beyond the limits I just
mentioned, and especially any attempt to impose
individual criminal responsibility without requiring a
sufficient causal relationship between alleged criminal
purpose and actual crimes, or even without requiring
a specific intent to commit those crimes, which is the
extended form of the joint criminal endeavour, also
known as JCE III, is inconsistent with the current state
of international humanitarian law and has the potential
to seriously damage international criminal law - and
not only international criminal law.

Indeed, if mere foreseeability of illegal violence,
which always and inevitably looms over any military
operation, automatically engages liability of all military
or civilian officials with any kind of authority over the
forces engaged, then all military and civilian officials
with de jure or de facto authority over those forces
would automatically be held liable for all criminal acts
committed by any member of those forces. According
to this concept, State and political leaders could be
held responsible for offences committed by others
who may share their goals, regardless of whether those
leaders shared an intent to commit specific criminal
offences as a means of achieving those goals. This
novum in international criminal law and international
humanitarian law, if confirmed, would seriously
jeopardize, if not disable, States, including those
whose representatives are sitting around this table,
from conducting any kind of legal military operations,
peacekeeping operations included, and would turn
them into unpredictable endeavours.

Allow me to add that this type of liability of
military and civilian officials, based seemingly more on
the conflation of political considerations with criminal
activities than on anything else, was already rightly
rejected by the Tribunal in a number of its cases. It was
also recently rejected by the Extraordinary Chambers
in the Courts of Cambodia and, before that, by the
first permanent criminal court to adjudicate the most
serious international crimes, the International Criminal
Court, and it has never even been contemplated in
national jurisdictions.

Finally, let me stress that Croatia is confident that,
in the last miles of its path, by strictly adhering to the
mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council to apply
the highest standards of international humanitarian
law, the ICTY will make an immense contribution to
international peace and security.

