Mr. Braun (Germany): To begin, let me also
thank Special Representative Yamamoto for his
comprehensive briefing, and the representatives of
Afghanistan who are present here at the table.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later on behalf of the European Union.

In his report (S/2017/189), the Secretary-General
highlights some encouraging political developments.
Germany welcomes the peace agreement with
Hezb-i-Islami and the first steps taken in its
implementation. Successful implementation will be
crucial in convincing other militant groups that lasting
peace is possible in Afghanistan. The precondition, of
course, is that they be willing to pursue their objectives
through political means, cut ties to international
terrorism and respect the universal human rights
enshrined in the Afghan Constitution. I would like
to commend the National Unity Government for
keeping its doors open to peace negotiations with the
Taliban. A comprehensive peace and reconciliation
process remains the only way to long-term stability in
Afghanistan and the region.

Furthermore, like you, Mr. President, we are
encouraged by the progress made in electoral reform,
and particularly the nomination of a Chief Electoral
Officer on 1 March. Afghanistan now has the necessary
institutions in place to hold parliamentary and district
council elections. Next, a clear and realistic timetable
needs to be established for the remaining electoral
reforms and for credible, fair, equal and free elections.

The fragile security situation remains the main
challenge in Afghanistan. As the Secretary-General
notes in his report, the number of armed clashes rose by
5 per cent, the number of civilian casualties continued
to rise and the number of child casualties increased
by 24 per cent. This is far too much. While the vast
majority of those casualties are caused by non-State
actors, the Government can do more to protect, in
particularly children.

As the Secretary-General also reports, the
targeting of health services and health-care workers
also continued. Just two days ago, we witnessed the
horrible attack on a military hospital in Kabul. On
this occasion, we offer our heartfelt condolences to
the Afghan people. Sadly, this tragedy has served to
underline once more the findings of a report entitled
Every Clinic is Now on the Frontline, presented by the
non-governmental organization Watchlist at an event
that Germany co-hosted on 6 March in New York.
Children suffer in particular from a lack of access to
medical treatment. Germany will continue to raise
awareness about the suffering of this most vulnerable
group of victims in its capacity as Chair of the local
Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.

As reported, 1.5 million Afghan individuals were
displaced internally or returned to Afghanistan from
neighbouring countries in 2016. The Government of
Afghanistan will require substantial help from the
international community to deal with that situation.
Germany remains committed to supporting the
Afghan Government's efforts towards a sustainable
reintegration of the returning refugees and internally
displaced persons.

We are currently finalizing financial assistance
agreements with the International Committee of the
Red Cross, the World Food Programme, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Organization for Migration, and
we encourage all Member States to join us in this
endeavour. At the same time, we call upon all parties
to ensure that the return of refugees is conducted in a
dignified manner and takes into account the absorption
capacity of Afghanistan.

Let me conclude by reiterating Germany's full
support for the continued important role played by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and United Nations agencies working in
Afghanistan. As co-Chair of the International Contact
Group for Afghanistan, Germany especially commends
UNAMA's efforts to strengthen cohesion among
international and regional stakeholders for promoting
peace in Afghanistan. It is very important, therefore,
to renew the UNAMA mandate without further delay.
We welcome the strategic review of the Mission, which
the Security Council intends to request. The review
should be conducted in the spirit of optimizing ongoing
activities and strengthening the Mission even further.

Germany remains committed to supporting
Afghanistan in close cooperation with the Afghan
Government and our international partners.

