Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Let me add
our thanks to Special Envoy Griffiths and Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller for their briefings and the
tireless efforts of their teams.

The United States is deeply concerned about the
outbreak of violence and deadly clashes in Aden.
Violence plays into the hands of those who seek to
prolong this conflict, at the cost of the Yemeni people,
and exacerbates the humanitarian crisis that the United
Nations and others are working hard to address. We call
on the parties to respect the rule of law, adhere to the
agreed-upon ceasefire and participate in good faith in
reconciliation talks proposed by Saudi Arabia. Dialogue
represents the only way to achieve a stable, unified and
prosperous Yemen. Resolving the overall conflict and
finishing the work initiated by the National Dialogue
Conference is the best way for Yemenis to shape their
political future.

In addition to maintaining the ceasefire, it is essential
that the parties continue to respect the Government
institutions that underpin economic stability, such as
the Aden branch of the Central Bank of Yemen, and that
they allow humanitarian aid workers unfettered access
to civilians affected by the unrest. We further call on
all parties respect Yemen's territorial integrity.

We are pleased to see a successful resolution to
the negotiations between the Houthis and the World
Food Programme (WFP) that enables the resumption
of general food distribution in Sana'a city and prevents
a worsening food security situation. It is critical that
the WFP and all humanitarian organizations be able
to operate and provide life-saving assistance without
the threat of diversion or corruption. We hope, for the
sake of Yemenis in need, that the Houthis signing of
that agreement means that the delivery of food aid will
continue for the duration of the crisis.

While humanitarian assistance will not solve
the conflict, it is critically important to the millions
of Yemenis whose lives depend on it. The stoppage
and reduction of humanitarian programmes seen this
year, as a result of severe funding gaps, underlines
the need for immediate financial support for the
Yemen response. As one of the largest humanitarian
contributors in Yemen, the United States once again
calls on all donors to step up assistance in Yemen and
fulfil immediately the financial commitments pledged
in Geneva in February.

