Mr. Daou (Mali) (spoke in French): Mr. President,
the delegation of Mali is delighted to see you preside
over the work of the Council in the month of January
and wishes you every success in fulfilling your
mandate. We would like to pay warm tribute to your
great country, Pakistan, and its invaluable contribution
to the strengthening of international peace and security.

I take this opportunity also to thank all of the
members of the Security Council for their solidarity and
their commitment, shoulder to shoulder with the people
and the Government of Mali, during this difficult time.

On 20 January 2012, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2085 (2012),
authorizing, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, the deployment in Mali of an African-
led international support mission for Mali (AFISMA)
so as to assist the Malian Defence and Security Forces
to liberate the northern part of the national territory,
which is controlled by armed extremist and terrorist
groups - the Movement for Unity and Jihad in Western
Africa, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Ansar Dine
and their allies.

At that time the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Mali reiterated
the commitment of the Government of Mali to fully
cooperate with the Security Council and to abide by its
obligations under the resolution, including the holding,
through the auspices of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) facilitator, of talks
with the Malian rebel groups aimed at inducing them
to cut all ties with the terrorists and to recognize the
integrity and sovereignty of the national territory as
well as the republican and secular character of the State
of Mali.

Flouting the spirit and the letter of resolution
2085 (2012), international law, the rule of law and
fundamental human rights, terrorist and extremist
groups, as well as irredentist movements and criminal
networks, continue to defy the international community.
The interim President of Mali, Mr. Dioncounda Traore',
in his speech to the nation on 12 January last, rightly
noted that

"those who are occupying Gao, Timbuktu and
Kidal and who are inflicting such terrible suffering
on the local population have turned a deaf ear to
our request for dialogue. They want to extend their
criminal activities throughout our entire country.
They have proved this by attacking the positions
held by our Defence and Security Forces in Kona,
in the Mopti region".

The highest Malian authorities have tirelessly
advocated a political solution and deployed unflagging
efforts to achieve lasting peace. Unfortunately, driven
by hatred and obscurantism, jihadist extremists and
criminals of all stripes have opted for armed aggression,
the taking of further territories, a scorched-earth policy
and subjugation so as to fulfil their sorry objectives.

Given that critical situation, the interim President of
the Republic issued an appeal for general mobilization
and imposed a state of emergency throughout the
country. In addition, as supreme leader of the armed
forces and in consultation with ECOWAS, he requested
and obtained, in the framework of international law,
the military support of France to halt the advance of
the terrorists, who threaten not only Mali but also other
countries of the Sahelo-Saharan region.

May I, on behalf of the Government of Mali, pay
warm tribute to France, its people and its President,
Mr. Francois Hollande, who, taking stock of the threat
posed by the southward march of the terrorist groups,
immediately granted the Malian President's request,
thereby making it possible to save Mali as a State and
to restore hope to the people and the army of Mali.

Today Malian political circles, civil society,
community and religious leaders, as well as young
people, all aware of the gravity of the situation and
determined to make even the ultimate sacrifice to
defend their homeland, have joined in single-hearted
unity around the President and the institutions of the
Republic, so as to support the Malian army in the combat
against terrorists, rebel forces and drug traffickers.

Even as the Security Council is meeting, the fighting
continues on various fronts. Together, the Malian army
and French troops are continuing to advance.

The sacrifice of the lieutenant helicopter pilot,
Damien Boiteux, who perished on the field of honour
on the first day of the French offensive against the
rebels in the area of Konna, was not in vain. Mali pays
tribute to the memory of that brave combatant and all
the martyrs of the Malian army who have shed their
blood so that the worthy values of human dignity,
freedom and human rights may prevail. Our thoughts
also go out to the oppressed peoples in the north, the
hundreds of thousands of internally displaced persons
and the refugees in neighbouring countries. The time
has come to liberate Mali's northern region. The towns
of Konna, Djabali and Douentza have been retaken and
are now fully under the control of the Malian army,
supported by French forces.

While we commend the Council on its unanimous
commitment to and its support for France's action in
Mali, on behalf of my country's Government, I would
like to make a solemn appeal to the international
community, all friendly countries and all partners to
help to mobilize the financial resources necessary for
the prompt deployment of the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali.

As Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, has just said, an extraordinary
meeting of the ECOWAS Heads of State and
Government, which also included several countries
and organizations, took place on 19 January in
Abidjan to consider the deployment of AFISMA. My
colleague Ambassador Youssoufou Bamba, Permanent
Representative of Cote d'Ivoire and on behalf of the
Chairman of ECOWAS, will inform the Council about
the summit shortly and will report its conclusions.
Meanwhile, for my part, I would like to express
the warm gratitude of the people and Government of
Mali to ECOWAS and to commend the promptness with
which the countries members of that organization, as
well as Chad, offered their troops for early deployment
in Mali. All those countries have already dispatched
advance groups to prepare for the deployment of their
contingents in the coming days.

With regard to the swift deployment of AFISMA,
given all the difficulties faced by troop-contributing
countries, I would once again like to underscore the
urgency of providing international logistical support
to AFISMA. In that respect, I am pleased to relay to
the Council the request made to the United Nations
by the Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS
to immediately provide the necessary logistical
and financial support for AFISMA's deployment.
I would also like to call on the whole international
community to participate in the donors conference on
the mobilization of financial, logistical and material
resources for AFISMA's deployment. That general
mobilization on 29 January in Addis Ababa, which we
very much hope will include the presence of Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, will once again show that what
is at stake today in Mali is nothing less than the defence
of freedom and democracy.

We are certain that military intervention in Mali to
combat the terrorist and rebel groups will promote the
political process leading to normalization. I am pleased
to recall that the Government ofMali is actively working
to simultaneously achieve the transition's two major
goals, namely, the restoration of our territorial integrity
and the organization of free, transparent and credible
elections, in order to bring the transition to an end and
to provide the country with legitimate institutions,
consistent with the spirit of resolution 2085 (2012).

In that regard, a meeting between the Government
of Mali and its technical and financial partners was held
yesterday, 21 January, to consider the recommendations
and conclusions of the United Nations multidisciplinary
assessment mission on Mali's electoral needs, which
visited the country from 19 to 30 November 2012.

In conclusion, I would like to convey the gratitude
of the Malian authorities to ECOWAS, the African
Union, the European Union, the United Nations, our
bilateral and multilateral partners, neighbouring
countries and all countries of the region for their
unwavering support during this difficult time that my
country is experiencing.

