Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this open debate. I
also thank the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Mr. Anthony Lake and Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for
their statements today.

I align myself with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.

I take this opportunity to once again congratulate
Luxembourg on its outstanding work on children in
armed conflict, which led to the adoption of resolution
2143 (2014) today.

For 15 years, the Council has been mobilized
for the protection of children in conflict. From that
mobilization a global system has been born and has
led to the demobilization of tens of thousands of child
soldiers. Today, Ms. Zerrougui and Mr. Lake have
provided evidence that that mobilization continues
apace. Their "Children, not soldiers" campaign
offers us hope for a world where national armies no
longer recruit child soldiers. To achieve that, the full
cooperation of the States concerned will be crucial.
The United Nations has a powerful instrument in that
regard, and one that has shown its effectiveness. The
action plans allowed two States to be removed from the
list of infamy in 2012. In the near future, other States
will hopefully follow the same path. Our procedures
are therefore working.

Children are, unfortunately, still the first victims
in today's conflicts when they are forcibly enlisted as
combatants. In the Central African Republic, as we
know, the armed groups, including the ex-Seleka and
anti-Balaka, have more than 6,000 children among their
ranks. France will shortly present a draft resolution
for the deployment of a peacekeeping operation in
that country. But the seriousness and urgency of
the situation require that the resources of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central
African Republic be enhanced as of now, especially for
the protection of children, as provided for in resolution
2134 (2014).

Children are also at risk when their education is
threatened. Schools are increasingly the target of
intolerable attacks. They are burned, destroyed and
caught in the middle of crossfire. Yet international
humanitarian law sets out a clear rule: schools cannot
be military objectives.

In Syria, this has been the sad reality for children
for three years. The regime's indiscriminate aerial
bombings, which were recently unanimously denounced
by the Security Council in resolution 2139 (2014), have
deprived an entire generation of their right to education.
More than 3,000 schools have been destroyed. More
than 2 million Syrian children no longer attend school.
We also condemn all violations by the armed groups
against children. There is an ongoing dialogue between
the Free Syrian Army and the United Nations on the
issue of child recruitment. We encourage Ms. Zerrougui
to continue that dialogue with a view to signing an
action plan.

The Council recently held an open debate on the
rule of law (see S/PV.7113). Our debate today allows us
to lay out in a concrete manner an essential aspect of
the rule of law - the need for States to keep rigorous
birth records, which is essential to eliminating the
phenomenon of child soldiers as it sheds light on that
practice and allows it to be fully understood. We must
also have in mind the situation in the Central African
Republic, where Sele'ka fighters have systematically
destroyed the country's archives, thereby depriving all
citizens, first and foremost children, of access to the
rule of law.

In the fight for child protection, the fight
against impunity plays a vital role. The fact that the
International Criminal Court issued its first conviction
against Thomas Lubanga Dyilo, who was found guilty
of conscripting and enlisting children under 15 years
of age, was a decisive step. France welcomes the fact
that the resolution adopted today highlights the role of
justice, in particular that of the International Criminal
Court. We all recognize the complementary role of
national courts and want them to further strengthen
their efforts against the most serious crimes. But when
the courts fail, the International Criminal Court is our
guarantee that an independent and permanent remedy
exists.

Our tireless efforts must continue. In that regard, I
would highlight several issues.

First, on the role of the Secretariat, we are aware
of Mr. Ban Ki-Moon's commitment to the Organization
being irreproachable. Security sector reform and
demobilization and reintegration efforts must fully
include the issue of child soldiers. In that respect,
Lieutenant-General Dallaire has become an advocate
of training programmes, and we commend him for that
new commitment, which is reflected in our resolution.

Secondly, on the protection of education in
conflict, France follows with interest the work of
non-governmental organizations to develop guidelines
on the military use ofschools. States mustbe encouraged
to work alongside civil society to develop best practices
that are adapted to the operational realities on the
ground to improve the protection of education in times
of conflict.

Finally, France continues to call on all States to
endorse the Paris Principles, which complement the
work ofthe Security Council. We want to suggest, along
with Ms. Zerrougui, UNICEF and non-governmental
organizations, that a regional seminar on the Paris
Principles be held this summer in Africa to support
Ms. Zerrougui's campaign in the region.

