Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank this month's United
Kingdom presidency for convening this meeting with
the heads of the police components of peacekeeping
missions. We also welcome the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations and the Police
Commissioners present in the Security Council
Chamber today and thank them for their insightful
remarks on the important mission entrusted to them.

In recent years, the police components of
peacekeeping and special political missions have
greatly increased in number and scope - a development
that illustrates the challenges facing missions and that
reflects the changes in the character of conflicts and
the growing number of threats, ranging from traditional
security problems in cases of insurgencies and civil
strife, to combating terrorism and the organized
crime associated with it, to the insidious forms of
asymmetrical conflicts. A common factor in all of them
is that civilians become the main victims, and there has
been an impressive toll of civilian casualties associated
with egregious violations of their fundamental rights.
Under such circumstances, the police components of
peacekeeping operations play a crucial role in assisting
host countries, as do the missions themselves in
protecting civilian populations through the delivery of
police services and in cooperating with, and providing
expertise to, local authorities. They are also crucial in
supporting security-sector reform and in restructuring,
and quite often working to revive, collapsed national
police forces and other law-enforcement structures.
In some cases, namely, in weaker countries with
a devastated social fabric, the rules of engagement of
United Nations police also include law-enforcement
duties. Police components thereby assume even greater
relevance, as in many instances they are the first line
of contact with local populations and play a crucial role
in strengthening local police capacities. In addition to
their mandate to protect civilians and provide security,
United Nations police contribute to restoring trust
between the population and the local police, which
usually is shattered in conflict situations.

In their core mission of protecting civilians, United
Nations police seek to structure their activities around
preventing and, if necessary, responding to situations
where civilians are under the threat of physical violence.
They also focus on creating a protective environment,
which basically involves establishing a relationship of
mutual trust with populations living under stressful
conditions of insecurity, whose cooperation they need
for the establishment of a more secure environment.
Moreover, problems related to public order can ignite
dangerous security situations, especially for women
and children, which calls for special attention to gender
issues by ensuring greater integration of women in
United Nations policing as well as in national police
forces.

The presence ofwomen in the United Nations police
staffincreases the ability of missions to strengthen trust
with communities, especially with women. The role of
police women is essential in creating an environment
in which victims, including victims of rape or sexual
violence, acquire a level of confidence to denounce
crimes and report them. In that regard, we welcome
the establishment of a project for training and selecting
police women and the holding of training courses on
gender.

In conclusion, the extremely complex scenarios
faced by United Nations policing underscores the need
to increase the number of police deployed in order to
implement United Nations peacekeeping mandates
and special political missions in which the protection
of civilians is a central feature. To ensure that
peacekeeping objectives are fully met, it is important
that police-contributing countries pay greater attention
to selection, direction, staff training and skills before
deployment, as all that is vital to establishing feasible
relations between the host nation and United Nations
police.

Iwould like to address two questions to Mr. Gregory
Hinds concerning the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL). Since UNMIL is carrying out its exit
strategy - and Mr. Hinds referred to the need for clarity
between the Government and UNMIL in the transition
period - will it be possible to ensure that police and
law enforcement structures can manage effectively after
the withdrawal of UNMIL? How are things proceeding
with the joint development of a strategy for the reform
of the Liberian police, the benchmarks for the transition
and the exit strategy itself?

