Mr. Majoor (Netherlands): I very much welcome
the opportunity to participate in today's debate on the
Security Council's working methods. I thank you,
Mr. President, having taken the initiative to convene it,
and I thank the representative of Costa Rica for having
proposed it. This debate is timely, even though the
broader subject of Security Council reform has been
actively discussed at various levels since the 2005
World Summit. Many of us have played a role in
moving the issue forward; I had the privilege of taking
up the subject of the Council's working methods as a
facilitator to the President of the General Assembly.
Some members have been particularly active within the
Security Council and deserve to be commended for
their work - notably, the successive Chairs of the
Security Council's relevant Informal Working Group:
the representatives of Japan, Slovakia and now
Panama.

The importance of Security Council reform
cannot be overemphasized, and I believe there is a
broad consensus that, during the sixty-third session of
the General Assembly, we should start negotiations on
the various options and proposals on the table.

Following your suggestion, Mr. President, I will
focus in this debate on the particular aspect of the
Security Council reform that concerns the involvement
of States and other parties not members of the Security
Council in the Council's work. That is merely one
aspect, but an important one nonetheless. Options for
reform in this area should be pursued without delay in
View of their importance to the legitimacy of the
Council's deliberations and decisions in specific cases.
Access to the Security Council by non-members can
ensure an important infusion of credibility.

The group of five small States - the 8-5 - has
made very useful proposals in this regard. Others have
made suggestions as well - some more radical than
others, including by non-governmental organizations,
such as Independent Diplomat, which has called for the
introduction of a universal right of address.

These proposals and suggestions have to be seen
in the light of an already developing practice in the
Security Council to be more accessible to
non-members and their views. For instance - and this
should be recognized - access to the Council for
Member States with specific responsibilities in the
Peacebuilding Commission has considerably improved.
Also, as has been pointed out in the Belgian
presidency's concept paper (S/2008/528, annex), it has
become more common for countries directly concerned
by a particular agenda item to take the floor before
Council members.

But more can be done, and there is a need for
clear guidelines. I would suggest that the Security
Council consider providing increased access to its
work along the following lines. I hope that the Security
Council will be willing to look at these proposals
together with many of the other proposals that are
already on the table.

First, as a general rule, State and non-State
parties to a conflict on the Council's agenda, affected
States, relevant regional organizations and interested
non-governmental actors should have the right to be
heard by the Council whenever it discusses a conflict
and especially in the early stages of its consultations.
"To be heard" should mean, as a minimum, that all of
those entities should have the right to submit their
views to the Council in writing and upon their own
initiative. Such contributions should then be distributed
as Security Council documents.

Secondly, all States parties to or directly affected
by a conflict on the Council's agenda, as well as
relevant regional organizations, should have the right
to speak before the Council. They must be able to
exercise that right by making a simple request to the
Council, as appropriate and subject to the Council's
agenda. Such a request should be granted
automatically. This right should extend beyond the
Council's subsidiary bodies and should include the
Security Council's plenary discussions, either in closed
or open meetings. But this right should not apply in
closed consultations on Council statements or
resolutions.

Thirdly, and similarly, non-State parties to a
conflict should also be given the possibility to address
the Council at their request. However, in these cases, it
must remain the Council's prerogative to decide which
of these requests it is to grant and in which specific
situations. The Council may limit access to its
deliberations to written contributions, which, as
pointed out, should be all parties' basic right. This
basic right can be denied only to those parties that have
been blacklisted by the Council as terrorist
organizations.

With these few measures, my delegation believes
that the Council can ensure the necessary
democratization of its working methods. Most
important, these measures can ensure that all parties
that could be part of a political solution to a particular
conflict are heard.

I am talking explicitly about the right and need to
be heard. It should be clear that the right to decide
must remain exclusively with the members of the
Security Council. But their decisions will gain more
weight and credibility once all relevant parties have
been given the opportunity to make their inputs at the
early stages ofthe decision-making process.

As I said previously, I hope that the Council will
consider these suggestions, together with the many
other ideas and proposals that are already on the table.

