Ms. Mueller: Let me first state the facts regarding
the inter-agency convoys to Rukban. After the second
convoy delivered assistance to the people in Rukban
in February, we requested a third convoy because
that assistance was supposed to last only 30 days. We
requested a third convoy in March and again on 9 May.
Those requests were not approved. Today, I have heard
Council members calling for the approval of the request
for a third convoy to Rukban to provide life-saving
assistance to people while they are still there.

With regard to the question posed by the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, attacks
against medical care are verified by the World Health
Organization by checking against multiple sources.
We will review the press article mentioned by the
Permanent Representative and inform the Council
whether or not such attacks have been confirmed by
the United Nations. As the Permanent Representative
reiterated, medical facilities enjoy special protection
under international humanitarian law, whether or not
they are located in deconflicted zones. I again call for
the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure,
in particular medical facilities.

Concerning the question posed by yourself,
Mr. President, in your capacity as the Permanent
Representative of Indonesia, with respect to the
humanitarian response plan, the 2019 Humanitarian
Needs Overview was published on 1 March. The 2019
humanitarian response plan asks for $3.3 billion to
support 11.7 million people in need. The most recent
update is that the plan has been financed approximately
16 per cent, which is $544 million. I thank those
Member States that have contributed to the plan. The
plan itself is nearly finalized. A few details remain
to be discussed and will be finalized and published
soon. Overall, we believe that the plan is critical to
our response. Support for it is necessary for the United
Nations and its partners. The humanitarian community
stands ready to respond based on the humanitarian
principles of impartiality, neutrality and independence
and on needs.

The meeting rose at 12.25 pm.
