The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Afghanistan, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tanin
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its strong
condemnation of the terrorist attack in Kabul on
28 October 2009 and offers its condolences to the
Secretary-General and the families of the victims.
"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the Taliban, who claimed
responsibility for the attack and continue to
attempt to destabilize the country.

"The Security Council expresses its strong
support for the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative and all United Nations personnel
in fulfilling their difficult but important tasks,
further expresses solidarity with United Nations
staff on the ground, and commends the
determination of the United Nations not to be
deterred by the tragic incident and to carry on its
mission in Afghanistan.

"The Security Council stresses the need to
ensure security of United Nations staff and its
support to this end. The Security Council
expresses support for the measures already taken
by the Secretary-General in this regard and looks
forward to the further detailed proposals by him.

"The Security Council expresses its
solidarity with the people of Afghanistan and its
support for the upcoming run-off presidential
elections, which should be carried out as
scheduled with the continued support of the
United Nations. The Security Council renews its
commitment to assisting Afghanistan on its path
towards peace, democracy and reconstruction."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/28.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.
09-58502

