Mr. De Santa Clara Gomes (Portugal): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report and
Ambassador Sharma for his excellent presentation.

Portugal subscribes entirely to the statement to be
made later by the representative of Italy on behalf of
the European Union. I will add just a few remarks.

First of all, I would like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute again to the remarkable contribution that
was made to Timor-Leste by the former Special
Representative, the late Sergio Vieira de Mello. I
would also like to recognize the dedicated efforts of the
civilian, military and police components of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
and to congratulate them in their many achievements in
Timor-Leste.

Timor-Leste has made outstanding progress in
many fields and can justifiably be called a United
Nations success. I would like in particular to note the
progress made in laying the foundations for a
functioning civil service and police force, as they are
assuming increasing levels of responsibility. It is also
with satisfaction that we note that there was no
repetition during the reporting period of serious
security-related incidents.

The steady and positive development of the
relationship between Timor-Leste and its neighbour
Indonesia should also be highly commended,
particularly regarding the determination of their joint
border. That was largely the result of the stated
commitment by the leadership of both countries.

We congratulate the United Nations and the
Security Council on having contributed to the stability
of Timor-Leste. The report of the Secretary-General,
however, also describes comprehensively the work that
remains to be done by UNMISET - work that cannot
be completed until well after May 2004.

Timor-Leste is in a critical period of the peace-
building process, and the report of the Secretary-
General clearly outlines a number of areas where
international assistance will be required beyond the
mandate of UNMISET. Much work remains to be done
in the area of police training, particularly in the
management of the border, which remains porous and,
therefore, a source of illegal incursions and illegal
trade. But there is still work to do in other areas, too,
such as those relating to professional ethics and respect
for human rights. Security is clearly a key factor for the
political and social stability of any country, and Timor-
Leste is no exception.

Despite the progress already achieved in terms of
the public administration, this will continue to require
support to remedy a shortage of qualified personnel,
and much help will still be needed in areas such as
justice and internal administration. Institution-building
is an area where remarkable success attended
international assistance, but it was only to be expected
that the task would need to be continued and
consolidated in the future.

It is with concern that we note that insufficient
success was reported in terms of the economic and
social development of Timor-Leste. We note that there
was a drop in gross national product last year and that a
further drop is expected for the current year. In that
regard, Portugal believes that the international financial
institutions and bilateral donors should further support
the national development plan, allowing for more
investment in capacity-building and incentives and
opportunities for job creation.

Much has been achieved, but more needs to be
done. We have come a long way and invested much in
Timor-Leste, and we need to preserve and consolidate
the results already obtained. Portugal is more
convinced than ever of the need for a continuing
United Nations presence after the end of the current
mission. We believe that, in order for this presence to
have the necessary credibility, both internally and
externally, it should have a clear mandate from the
Security Council and should be led in the field by a
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We
must pursue, for a further period, a concerted effort to
allow East-Timor to achieve three interrelated goals:
security, institution- and State-building, and sustainable
development. Fortunately, our efforts can be
undertaken at a reduced level, compared with those of
the past.

