The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of Japan.

The Middle East is in turmoil, plagued by a
whole series of challenges, such as terrorism, social
unrest, political turmoil and prolonged conflicts that
are causing the innumerable deaths of innocents and
leading to millions of refugees and internally displaced
persons throughout and beyond the region. The
situation in the Middle East is undoubtedly a crucial
issue that the international community must face up to,
as the region's instability casts a shadow over the entire
world, most notably by triggering and spreading violent
extremism. The menace of terrorism is greater than
ever and crises in Syria, Iraq, Libya and Yemen are
causing intolerable humanitarian situations. The work
of the Security Council has never been as important as
it is today.

Behind all that has been the weakening of - or,
in some cases, the collapse of- governance in recent
years. Most of the problems that the region now faces,
including the conflicts and the spread of violent
extremism, were initiated or exacerbated by the
weakening of governance. Today many views have
been and will be expressed as to what is to be blamed
for the problems or what immediate actions need to be
taken by certain parties. But I would like to focus my
statement on what the international community should
and can do today to deal with the failure of governance,
which is key to solving the problem.

The restoration of governance and strengthening of
social cohesion in the Middle East, whether in Syria,
Iraq, Yemen or Libya, is vital to tackling the spread
of Violent extremism and improving the humanitarian
situation. With regard to Syria, the Security Council
bears a primary responsibility to facilitate a political
transition to establish a credible, inclusive and
non-sectarian Government as stated in resolution 2254
(2015). As for Iraq, we are witnessing the ongoing
operation to counter the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, but much remains to be done to stabilize the
freed areas and achieve national reconciliation. The
utmost efforts must be made to strengthen governance
in the Middle East in order to prevent a cycle of violence
and the growth of violent extremism. The Security
Council must underline this point and encourage efforts
to achieving that objective.

The key factors for a stable society in the Middle
East, a region of remarkable diversity, are inclusiveness
and coexistence. In that regard, the efforts towards
national reconciliation, administrative reform and
fiscal consolidation, such as the efforts pursued in Iraq,
would be an important achievement for creating a form
of governance and society sustained by inclusiveness
and coexistence. Marginalization and exclusion are
what we must strive to eradicate in order to realize
inclusiveness and coexistence.

Two years ago, a Syrian man, Abu Sultan, and his
family escaped from their country and managed to
make their way to a refugee camp in Mafraq, Jordan,
overcoming one hardship after another. For a man
who had been a teacher for 25 years in Syria, it was
disheartening to see how children at the camp were
idling at the camp all day. In a situation where turmoil
and uncertainty weighed heavily on people's minds,
providing education for children was not necessarily
a natural priority for parents. Mr. Abu Sultan, who
managed to find a relatively stable foothold at the camp
after he registered for the World Food Programme,
supported by Japan, decided to give children education
opportunities, starting with teaching them how to
read and write. Education is a great equalizer. It helps
children in conflict zones stand on common ground
with those less affected by the conflict and helps
alleviate the risk of marginalization. We must support
people like Abu Sultan and potential partners like him
to stand up and help others stand on their own.

Under the principle of "the best way is in the
middle", which Prime Minister Abe announced,
Japan is carrying out efforts to contributing to
building a tolerant and stable society in the region.
Our contribution reflects the guiding principles of
inclusiveness and coexistence. We believe that such
efforts should include three primary focal points. First,
we must focus on assistance towards social stability
and enhancing governance in the region. Secondly, we
focus on humanitarian assistance, including supporting
the return and reintegration of refugees and internally
displaced persons and assistance for the social stability
of the neighbouring host countries. In reality, this is
sadly lacking.

Thirdly, we focus on developing human capital which
would contribute to preventing the marginalization of
people caused by unemployment or lack of education.

In concluding, I would like to stress that dialogue
and trust-building are also critical for restoring order
in the region. These include those between Israel and
Palestine, and Iran and Saudi Arabia, as well as cross-
sectarian dialogue at every level of society. There have
been efforts made in this regard. Unfortunately, more
efforts need to be made. The international community
must continue to deploy its utmost efforts in order make
such dialogue possible. Japan is ready and willing to
work to that end.

I would like to reiterate that, as a member of the
Security Council, Japan will vigorously work towards
the peace, stability and prosperity of the Middle East
in close cooperation and coordination with the United
Nations and the international community.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

Iwish to remind all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to
circulate the texts in writing and to deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber. I would like
to appeal to speakers to deliver their statements at a
reasonable speed so that interpretation may be provided
accurately. I wish to inform all concerned that we will
be carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a large number of speakers.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Carlos
Raul Morales Moscoso, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Guatemala.

