The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Canada, Colombia, Georgia, Israel, Japan,
Liechtenstein, Mexico, Myanmar, Nigeria, Norway,
Peru, Qatar, Slovenia, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic and United Arab Emirates, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 21 May
2008 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2008/335 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council regarding
the protection of civilians in armed conflict".

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took the seat reserved for him at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations. At this meeting, we shall hear
a briefing by Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator. I welcome him to the Council and
now give him the floor.


