Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
This meeting to consider the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine, is taking
place in the midst of widespread despair over the
possibility of achieving a negotiated political solution.
In the past 18 months, the situation in the occupied
territories and in Israel has fallen into a spiral of
violence from which there seems to be no way out.

Israel's excessive use of force, which has an
indiscriminate effect on the Palestinian population, as
well as selective murders, are practices that have not
contributed to the cause of peace, nor have they
resolved the security problems of the Israeli people.
Likewise, the terrorist attacks by extremist Palestinian
groups, which have had an indiscriminate effect on the
civilian population of Israel, have not contributed to
resolving the problem of the occupation of Palestinian
territories, nor have they helped meet the major
economic needs of the Palestinian people.

Like many others, we wonder what the right way
is to put an end to that spiral of violence. Of course, we
consider that a large part of the responsibility rests
with Israel and the Palestinian Authority, insofar as it is
they who, by their actions and omissions, determine
the possibilities for a political solution. But in saying
this we must reiterate, as we have on past occasions,
that the international community, including the
Security Council, can have an impact on, and can make
an effective contribution to, bringing the parties back
to the negotiating table.

The responsibility of the parties is therefore
fundamental. In that respect, we share the views
expressed by the Secretary-General in which he made
an appeal to the parties to renew their commitment to
the Madrid and Oslo principles and to return to a real
political dialogue with the goal of achieving a just and
lasting solution to the problem of the Middle East. In
this regard, Colombia considers that any strategy that
seeks to erode the authority of President Arafat and of
the Palestinian Authority will only benefit the
extremists and move us further from the shared
objective of peace. We affirm this while sharing the
conviction that President Arafat can and must do more
to put an end to the wave of terror.

We recognize that there are no magic formulas
for achieving a solution. Even so, we have the Tenet
plan, on the one hand, which contains formulas that
could reduce the violence and, on the other, the

Mitchell report, in which there are bases for a possible
return to the negotiating table. The commitment of the
parties to these road maps for action, which enjoy wide
international support, could allow them,
simultaneously and jointly, to discuss the political
process, the restoration of security and the economic
recovery and development of the Palestinian people.

The international community also has a
responsibility to fulfil. In recent months, the Security
Council has succeeded in inscribing the question of the
Middle East on its regular programme of work,
abandoning the sporadic consideration of the item to
which we had become accustomed and which, for no
good reason, distanced the Security Council from one
of the principal threats to international peace and
security. Colombia firmly believes that, to the extent
possible, the actions of the Council should be linked to
and coordinated with the actions of other international
players with political relevance in the Middle East on
the basis of clear and shared objectives, including the
definitive proclamation of a Palestinian State, the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and the principle of land for
peace.

We recognize that promising initiatives have been
put forward at the international level, including those
recently proposed by Saudi Arabia. Colombia supports
such efforts and welcomes any initiative that might
help to break the cycle of violence and create
conditions conducive to the resumption of negotiations.
Regional or other initiatives that could result
from the activities of the so-called quartet made up of
the representatives of the United States, Russia, the
European Union and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations deserve our support. We encourage
those actors in the international community that are
involved to be tireless in their efforts and to work hand
in hand with the Security Council in the search for
lasting political solutions.

