Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I also thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun and Ambassador
Vieira for their briefings. Although he has left us
because of technical difficulties, I would also like to
thank the Executive Director Fedotov for his briefing.
It was important to hear from him given the specific
threat of organized crime in Guinea-Bissau.

Like others who have spoken so far, the United
Kingdom welcomes the recent progress seen in
Guinea-Bissau. That progress has been considerable.
A consensus Prime Minister after some months of
difficulty, a date for legislative elections and the
formation of an inclusive Government are all signs
that good sense and consideration for Guinea-Bissau's
stability have trumped narrow political interests.
However, I think that we must all witness continued
progress before we are convinced that the current reality
is really a new reality. We need Guinea-Bissau's leaders
to stick to their political agreement. It is an agreement
for their country's future and for their people's future,
and it must not be held hostage to personal disputes.

We need unity behind preparations for elections,
which are now only six months away. We also need
unified steps towards political and constitutional
reform in line with the concrete commitments made
in Conakry. We have already seen how civil society,
whether religious leaders or women mediators, have
acted in the country's long-term interests. We would
urge Guinea-Bissau's leaders to create opportunities
for their meaningful participation in the political
processes. We in the Council know that inclusive
political settlements are those that last.

It is clear we would not be discussing progress
in Guinea-Bissau without the patient leadership
shown by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS). We urge ECOWAS to continue its
engagement to see the political crisis through and, in
return, we in the Council must remain united in our
support for ECOWAS and all of the impressive things
it has been doing.

In February, the Security Council renewed the
mandate ofthe United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), with a narrower
focus on good offices. While the situation on the
ground has changed, the mandate remains just as, if not
more, relevant. In the short term, the priorities must
be consolidating the political settlement and delivering
the elections. Continued good-offices support will be
required in the medium term to see through political
reforms. We also welcome the deepening focus on
transnational organized crime and illicit drugs, which
are security threats not only for the country but for the
region and the international community at large.

We welcome warmly Ambassador Vieira's briefing
and agree with him on the importance of the sustaining
peace approach. Given a changed political environment
on the ground and a refreshed mandate, the appointment
of the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Jose Viegas Filho, is timely and welcome.
He has an opportunity to bring renewed direction and
drive to refocusing and slimming down UNIOGBIS as
per the February mandate and delivering on the priority
tasks at hand.

But let me in the same vein offer the sincere thanks
of the United Kingdom to former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Modibo Toure, Despite the
obstacles that UNIOGBIS has faced, he demonstrated
genuine commitment to Guinea-Bissau through to the
end of his term and helped deliver the positive progress
that we are discussing today.

