Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for the great efforts he is making to
contain the very grave situation in the Middle East, in
the context of the fragile ceasefire in Lebanon provided
by resolution 1701 (2006) on the one hand, and of the
continuous escalation of military operations in
Palestine and their serious repercussions for
international peace and security on the other. I wish
also to thank Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his important briefing
on the events that have been unfolding in the region.

The other day, we reviewed the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006) (S/2006/670) and warned against the
danger of sliding once more into war less than nine
days after the ceasefire went into effect. Recent Israeli
breaches of the ceasefire, which began with the
military land operation last Saturday, and the
continuous Israeli air force sorties over Lebanese
territory are putting the will and credibility of the
international community to the test. Such operations
have been occurring intermittently since last Saturday.

These developments overshadow the encouraging
signs that followed the beginning of compliance with
the cessation of hostilities. It saddens us that these
Violations are taking place as the international
community is making a concerted effort to ensure a
lasting cessation of hostilities, to provide humanitarian
assistance to the targeted population and to returnees,
and to rebuild the infrastructure destroyed by this
asymmetrical war. In that regard, we cannot fail to
state that the ongoing air and sea blockade imposed by
Israel against Lebanon impedes efforts by humanitarian
agencies to deliver supplies to those who are sorely in
need of them. In that light, we call upon the Security
Council to assume its responsibility by obliging Israel
to immediately lift the blockade imposed against
Lebanon. We also call for reinforcement of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) by
increasing its numbers and equipment to enable it to
play the role assigned to it, because this is a vital
element in the process of implementing resolution
1701 (2006).

While we applaud Lebanon's commitment to
begin the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) by
deploying its armed forces in the south, we are gravely
concerned at Israel's deliberate violation of the
provisions of the resolution. This obstructs the
international community's efforts to establish regional
peace and security and to rebuild Lebanon. In spite of
that, we still believe in the Security Council's ability to
preserve the delicate relative calm and to play an
effective and essential role. We will work with all
peace-loving States to continue to address this issue, in
pursuit of security and stability in Lebanon and
throughout the region.

As we seek a permanent solution to the situation
in Lebanon, we must not lose sight of the events taking
place in the occupied Palestinian territories - the core
of the Arab-Israeli conflict in the Middle East -
including the escalation of military operations and the
detention and kidnapping campaigns, whose targets
have included members of the Government and of the
legislature who were elected by the Palestinian people.
This is a blatant Violation of international law,
agreements between the two sides and other
instruments and norms, and it shows disregard for the
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination.
It has repeatedly been made clear that the only
way to put an end to Violence in the Middle East region
is through finding a permanent, comprehensive
solution to the question of Palestine. The failure to deal
objectively and effectively with this crisis and its root

causes has led to a great many disturbances and tension
in the region, which manifested themselves in the
events in Lebanon and those that we are witnessing
today in Gaza.

Believing in peace as the sole option, the Arab
States intend to resubmit the question of the Arab-
Israeli conflict to the Security Council next September.
It is our hope that this will lead to finding a permanent,
comprehensive solution on all tracks, in accordance
with the resolutions of international legitimacy, which
affirm that the only solution that can end the vicious
circle of violence and counter-violence is that of
ending Israel's occupation of the Arab territories
occupied since 1967.

