Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to welcome the Ministers to the Council
today. Like others, I thank Mr. Mbeki for his sustained
efforts and for today's briefing. We commend his
efforts to bring the parties in the Sudan together to
agree on unresolved issues that remain in dispute. I
thank Mr. Karti, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Sudan, for his statement. I also thank Mr. Pagan Amum
for his statement.

The Council is meeting today as the Sudan is at a
decisive juncture that could change the situation in the
region. The region is two months away from the
referendums on the fate of Southern Sudan and the
Abyei region.

Today more than ever before, we must reiterate
the importance of pursuing direct dialogue between the
parties and adopting negotiation as the preferred
manner to resolve disputes and differences. In this
respect, we welcome Mr. Mbeki's briefing, in
particular his statement on a framework agreement
among the parties - the National Congress Party and
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement - providing
for open borders between the North and the South,
whatever the outcome of the vote, in order to facilitate
the free movement of goods and persons and to help
ensure a peaceful transition after the referendum.

The agreement provides for negotiated conditions
to address a broad range of subjects, including wealth-
sharing of the oil revenue, citizenship, water resources
and debt. We are grateful for the commitments of both
parties to implementing the provisions of the CPA and
not to backtrack or return to a climate of civil war. That
is why cooperation and coexistence between the North
and the South is unavoidable, irrespective of the
outcome of the referendum. We hope that the
Presidency will reach an agreement as soon as possible
on the Abyei region.

The referendum must also take place in fair and
peaceful conditions. We must create a peaceful
environment in which to hold the referendum by the
deadline, taking into account the need to make the
choice of unity attractive, whatever apparent
difficulties may be involved, in line with the general
provisions of the CPA. We also welcome the start of
the voter registration process and the launch of the
electoral campaign, as well as the efforts on the ground
of the panel appointed by the Secretary-General to
monitor the referendum.

As for Darfur, we are concerned about the recent
military confrontations that have spread to the
Kordofan region and hope that the efforts of the State
of Qatar and Mr. Djibrill Bassole will lead to a return
of the Justice and Equality Movement and other
movements to the Doha negotiating table. We urge
Abdel Wahid el-Nur, leader of the Sudan Liberation
Movement, to join the negotiations in order to reach an
agreement as soon as possible, given the positive
impact this would have on the situation in the Sudan as
a whole.
We also applaud the improved relations between
the Sudan and Chad, which will help to enhance
stability in the region. We naturally welcome the work
of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur in the Sudan, and in this respect we note that
the agreement of all parties concerned must be
obtained before the number of international
contingents can be increased. We welcome the efforts
of Mr. Gambari, Mr. Menkerios, Mr. Bassole,
Mr. Mbeki and others, including the African Union and
the League of Arab States, to work together in support
of the Sudan during this difficult but fateful time.

