Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): I, too, would like to join
the previous speakers in congratulating and thanking
the Senegalese presidency for organizing this important
debate on water, peace and security, which marks the
first time that the issue has been formally considered
in the Security Council. We appreciate the briefings
that we have heard. Of particular interest to us were
the conclusions presented on the second meeting
of the Global High-Level Panel on Water and Peace,
held in Senegal this year, and the proposals voiced in
connection with advancing hydro-diplomacy.

Georgia aligns itselfwith the statement made earlier
by the delegation of the European Union. I would like
to make the following remarks in my national capacity.

Water is indeed a vital resource and fundamental
pillar of development and security policy. The scarcity
ofwater resources and questions of access, management
and exploitation have the potential to be used as
triggers and methods of war. We need to address those
questions in both security and development contexts.
The linkages between Sustainable Development Goals
6 and 16 are particularly relevant.

We recognize the significance of transboundary
cooperation to restore and prevent the degradation of
damaged aquatic ecosystems. Over the past several
decades, Georgia has concluded a number ofagreements
with neighbouring States regulating the management
of water resources and has participated in numerous
regional projects aimed at developing ecologically
sound and rational water management. To that end,
the sustainable utilization of water resources has been
set as a priority, and national legislation on water
management has been brought into full compliance with
the internationally recognized principles of integrated
water resources management.

Many villages across the occupation line in Georgia
have suffered from water shortages following the 2008
foreign military intervention. The occupation forces
have cut drinking-water supplies and blocked irrigation
channels originating in the occupied Tskhinvali
region. Villagers have been unable to carry out their
agricultural work, which is the main source of income
in those areas. We have managed to resolve the problem
by constructing alternative trunk canals and building
the necessary infrastructure.

Let me also mention a number ofj oint water projects
that have become an instrument for restoring trust
between the war-torn communities. A vivid example
of that successful practice was the project aimed at
improving the security of the Zonkari reservoir. That
project allowed Georgian authorities to ensure a safe
and sufficient water supply for the villages situated
in the occupied region. With the mediation and
financial support of international partners, notably the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
Georgia carried out rehabilitation projects aimed at
ensuring drinking-water supply and the functioning of
irrigation systems in conflict-affected villages across
the occupation line. Those efforts demonstrate that water
has a significant potential for confidence-building. It
also demonstrates the importance of cooperation with
regional organizations on the issue, something that was
rightly emphasized in the concept note (S/2016/969, annex), presented by the Senegalese presidency.

In view of climate change, we have to develop
a comprehensive approach to climate, economic
development and water-security issues. Georgia has
already experienced the devastating effects ofthe deadly
flooding in Tbilisi in 2015, which killed 19 people and
caused mass destruction. Since then, the Government
has broadened its efforts to tackle environmental
threats. We are committed to increasing local resilience,
improving relief capabilities and facilitating relocation
from the most vulnerable areas. With the support of
international partners, we have carried out several
projects aimed at improving the resilience of regions
highly exposed to hydrometeorological threats. Along
with those activities, we have taken the first steps in
establishing a comprehensive early warning system in
the country.

In conclusion, let me reiterate our readiness to
further cooperate on questions related to the water-
security nexus.

