Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate of the Council.
I thank the Secretary-General for his participation and
for his personal presentation of his report on the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2008/354).
My delegation also welcomes the participation of His
Excellency Mr. Boris Tadie, President of the Republic
of Serbia, and Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu in the Council's
meeting today.

The position of the Government of Viet Nam
concerning the issue of Kosovo reflects our respect for
the most fundamental principles of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations. Our principled
position remains unchanged.

My delegation has carefully studied the report of
the Secretary-General. We share his view that recent
events in Kosovo have posed significant challenges to
the ability of UNMIK to exercise its administrative
authority and that there is a pressing need for a
consensual solution that preserves peace and security
in Kosovo.

It is the view of my delegation that, as the legal
framework for the international civil presence in
Kosovo was provided for by resolution 1244 (1999)
and as its format, in the form of UNMIK, was
determined by the Council on the basis of the report of
the Secretary-General contained in document
S/1999/672, any change or reconfiguration of the
international civil presence in Kosovo will require a
new decision of the Council, in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999), as well as the consent of all
parties concerned.

Reaffirming Viet Nam's consistent position that
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States
must be fully respected, we call upon Belgrade and
Pristina to refrain from actions that would endanger
peace and lead to violence or jeopardize security in
Kosovo and in the region. We urge both sides to
resume dialogue and negotiations aimed at achieving a
comprehensive and lasting solution to the issue of
Kosovo in the interest of peace, security and stability
in the Balkan region and in Europe at large.

My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
commend the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-
General and to encourage him, in coordination with
existing mechanisms, to engage both parties in
diplomatic efforts with a view to ensuring the
legitimate rights and interests of all communities in
Kosovo and to facilitate the dignified return of
refugees and internally displaced persons.

Allow me to conclude by reiterating Viet Nam's
support for the central role of the United Nations in
promoting dialogue and the reconciliation process and
in maintaining peace and security in Kosovo and in the
Balkans.

