Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank our briefers for their updates and for their teams' continued and resolute efforts to help resolve these daunting crises. I want to publicly thank Mr. Griffiths, once again, for all of his efforts towards achieving a political solution. We stress our support for his work on the joint declaration. We commit to supporting him in his efforts on this complex endeavour. I also want to acknowledge that he, too, is on the front line. Without his efforts, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) would be even harder to contain. I would like to echo what everybody has said today in their briefings and in their statements - that Yemen is still a country at war. Now they are fighting yet another war - COVID-19. It is important that the parties de-escalate the tensions on the ground and recommit to a United Nations-mediated political settlement. Cross-border Houthi attacks undermine efforts towards a settlement. Those attacks can serve only to prolong the conflict and the suffering of the Yemeni people. As Mr. Lowcock stated today, that is leaving millions of Yemenis without proper health care, clean water or sanitation, which are crucial to preventing the spread of the virus. Turning to the humanitarian situation, I want to stress that, despite some initial improvements, the Houthis' level of interference and hardened positions earlier this month remain unacceptable and, even more, unconscionable, with COVID-19 spreading throughout Yemen. Before COVID-19, the United Nations had declared Yemen the most needy place on Earth, with 24 million people who depend on aid to survive. The Houthis can and must do better, especially on moving forward with biometric registration for the World Food Programme's operations, approving all pending sub-agreements, allowing independent needs assessments, respecting independent procurement and asset management in accordance with donor regulations and facilitating the freedom of movement and humanitarian assistance for aid workers. We remain deeply concerned by the spread of COVID-19 in Yemen and by the fact that cases are vastly underreported, particularly in Houthi-controlled areas. The lack of transparency has resulted in fewer testing kit supplies, which has led to an inaccurate count of the spread of the virus. The virus has clearly shifted to widespread community transmission, and many Yemenis are dying as a result. Humanitarian and health-care workers are vulnerable, lacking personal protective equipment to protect them from the disease. It remains absolutely imperative that all parties facilitate their efforts and not target health-care workers. On 15 July, Secretary Pompeo announced an additional $208 million in new humanitarian and health assistance to bolster ongoing global COVID-19 response efforts, including more than $2.6 million to help refugees, vulnerable migrants, internally displaced persons and host communities in Yemen. Over the past 20 years, the United States has provided nearly $4 billion in total assistance for Yemen's long-term development, including nearly $132 million for health programmes. In the light of the observations offered by our briefers today, the United States expresses its full support for the rights of persons with disabilities, as well as those belonging to other marginalized groups and minority communities in Yemen. We are especially grateful for today's briefings as an example of how we can implement resolution 2475 (2019) in a concrete way, including by inviting briefers to address the issues relating to persons with disabilities. We call on all parties to the conflict, particularly the Houthis, to respect the rights of all members of Yemeni society. Finally, I want to draw the Council's attention to the events of 28 June, when United States and partner forces interdicted a vessel off the coast of Yemen containing Iranian arms bound for the Houthis. The vessel's illicit cargo included 200 rocket-propelled grenade launchers, more than 1,700 AK rifles, 21 surface-to-air and land- attack missiles, several antitank missiles and other advanced weapons and missiles. Yemen does not need more arms. Iran must stop its efforts to arm the Houthis, which only prolong this conflict.
