Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
thanking the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Theodor
Meron; the President of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Carmel Agius;
and the Prosecutor of the ICTY and the Residual
Mechanism, Prosecutor Serge Brammertz. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Elbio Rosselli for his efforts
and leadership as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals.

We believe that the process of truth, justice and
reconciliation is important for peacebuilding, restoring
the rule of law, fighting impunity and ensuring
accountability, as well as for supporting victims in
post-conflict societies. In that regard, we acknowledge
the significant contributions made by ICTY, the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the Residual Mechanism.

In relation to the ICTY, we appreciate the work
undertaken during the reporting period to ensure a
smooth transition from the Tribunal to the Residual
Mechanism, including in the context of liquidation,
downsizing and transferring records to the Residual
Mechanism. We welcome the work of the Tribunal's
Judge and its staff and their dedication to concluding all
judicial activities and complying with the completion
strategy. which outlines its closure by the end of 2017.
We also welcome the resource-sharing arrangement
between the Office of the Prosecutor of ICTY and the
Mechanism under the one-office approach, as it enables
the Tribunals to address their challenges in relation
to staff attrition. Such measures taken by the ICTY
will increase its efficiency and lead to the possible
completion of pending cases, as well as its fulfilment
ofits commitment to ending its work by the end of 2017.
Furthermore, we commend the collaboration between
the Office of the Prosecutor of the Residual Mechanism
and the ICTY, as well as national judicial authorities
in relation to access to information and evidence. Such
collaboration would support the proceeding of the
relevant national courts and enable public prosecutors
to bring to justice persons who have committed serious
crimes under international law.

With regard to the Mechanism, we appreciate its
work in relation to follow-up cases referred to national
courts, as well as the Mechanism's enforcement
of sentences. We have noted from the Prosecutor's
report (see S/2017/434, annex II) that the Mechanism
continued its double-hatting arrangement with the
ICTY during the reporting period. In our view, such
an arrangement will enable it to function as a small,
temporary and efficient tribunal. We also welcome
the cooperation between Senegal and the Mechanism,
which has facilitated the enforcement of sentences
of prisoners of the ICTR, and the work that has been
achieved in relation to that cooperation.

While welcoming the cooperation of Member States
in relation to the relocation of acquitted and released
prisoners, we note with concern the challenges raised
in the report in relation to the lack of comprehensive
solutions regarding the resettlement of released and
acquitted persons. In that regard, we note the reports of
the early release in recent years ofmore than 14 persons
convicted for genocide-related crimes, based on early-
release arrangements without proper consultations with
the Office of the Prosecutor, the victims or the country
concerned. We are of the view that such practices do
not seem to be commensurate with the gravity of the
crimes committed. It may have grave implications
for the victims when, in many cases, the mindset
that gave rise to the crimes committed has not been
abandoned, as indicated in the Prosecutor's report.
Therefore, we would like to encourage the President
of the Residual Mechanism to continue his dialogue
with Member States, including in the context of the
Informal Working Group, to find a durable solution to
the challenge at hand. We have noted that the report
raises the issue related to Judge Akay. We would like to
encourage the Mechanism to work in cooperation with
the Government of Turkey to resolve the matter.

We have noted the challenges raised in the reports of
the ICTY, the Mechanism, as well as the reports of the
Office of the Prosecutors of the ICTY and the Residual
Mechanism in relation to the trafficking of fugitives
and a lack of cooperation. The continued cooperation
and assistance of Member States with the ICTY in its
remaining period is critical for the successful completion
of all cases before the Tribunal and a smooth transition
to the Mechanism. It will also be absolutely necessary
in the conlusion of pending cases with the time frame
outlined in resolution 1966 (2010).

To conclude, I would like to underscore the need
for the Mechanism, the ICTY and the Office of the
Prosecutors of the ICTY and the Residual Mechanism to
continue their dialogue and cooperation with Member
States in fulfillment of their functions and completion
of pending cases, including through tracking the
remaining eight at-large fugitives.

