Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): First of all, we would like to welcome among
us Mr. Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, and we thank him for his
briefing to the Council regarding the overall
humanitarian situation in Chad and in the Sudan. We
also wish to commend him for his praiseworthy efforts
in carrying out his noble mission and for the efforts
made in the region, in particular his most recent on-site
visit to assess the situation of the refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs), as well as the talks
with the parties and the humanitarian organizations
concerned, in order to alleviate humanitarian suffering.
We also welcome our brother Mr. Ahmad Allam-mi,
the Permanent Representative of Chad and thank him
for his briefing.

My Government shares the concerns of the
Under-Secretary-General with regard to the continued
deterioration of the humanitarian situation, due
primarily to the continued acts of violence, which
unfortunately lead to further human suffering of
civilians.

It is regrettable to note, as Mr. Holmes has stated,
that some refugees and IDPs have suffered under
practices which should not take place, such as
recruitment and sexual Violence. We strongly support
his invitation and his appeal to put an end to
recruitment in the camps, on the part of the rebels, and
to end the politicization of the camps. Certainly, that
activity runs counter to any betterment of the situation
of the refugees.

We insist on the importance of continuing to
provide humanitarian assistance and to facilitate access
to the IDPs and refugees, to guarantee protection for
them and thus to encourage them to return to their
villages. It is certain that that will require close
cooperation between the national authorities of the two
countries as well as the international community in
order to guarantee access of humanitarian assistance to
all those who need it. In that regard, we wish to convey
our gratitude to all donor parties and to underscore the
importance of Mr. Holmes' comments on the
importance of insisting on the protection of civilians.

There is only one possible solution - a political
solution. We believe that a political solution to the
conflicts is more pressing today than ever before, as a
condition to put an end to the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the region. Throughout past
years - and I believe everyone realizes that -
military and armed confrontation has only resulted in
greater suffering for civilians and more serious
Violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.

The time has come for all the parties to work
towards a ceasefire and to respond swiftly to peace
initiatives. They must also respect the agreements that
have been ratified among various parties and
implement them. In that connection, we wish to refer to
the factions that are still hesitating to participate in the
political process. Here we tell them that it is their
duty- in all aspects, including religious, political,
humanitarian or other - to join in that political
process.

In any case, we wish to express our satisfaction at
the restoration of normal diplomatic relations between
two brotherly countries, Chad and the Sudan. We hope
that that normalization represents an important step
towards achieving peace in the region. We also express
our satisfaction at Mr. Holmes's statement that he had
returned from Chad with a certain amount of optimism.
We thank him for all his remarks and
recommendations.

