Mrs. Robinson: Thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council today
from London and for the strong support the Council has
given to efforts to bring durable peace and stability to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.

One year after the signing ofthe Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, I remain convinced that
it offers the best prospects and hope for security and
for the improvement of the living conditions of the
people in the region, who continue to bear the brunt of
armed violence and aggression. Indeed, in the last year,
hope has risen with the defeat of the rebel Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) followed by the conclusion of the
Kampala Dialogue Declarations between the parties.
The Forces arme'es de la Republique de'mocratique du
Congo (FARDC), supported by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and its Force
Intervention Brigade, are pursuing its efforts to rid the
east of the country of the armed groups.

Furthermore, despite numerous challenges, hope
for dialogue, trust and regional cooperation - the basis
for peace and security - have appeared stronger in the
past year. By collaborating on the regional benchmarks
and building consensus on the plan of action for the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, countries of the Great Lakes region have
been able to show the possibilities of the framework
of hope, and that durable peace and security for the
region can be within grasp if the current momentum
is sustained. I should, however, stress that the situation
in the eastern parat of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region remains quite precarious and will
require actions at several levels to sustain the current
momentum and to achieve meaningful results.

A good way to sustain the current momentum and
to ensure that the framework of hope delivers on its
promises is to align international actions with emerging
positive regional dynamics that reinforce the objectives
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
Angola's current chairmanship of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) offers
a good opportunity and holds significant prospects for
advancing the cause of peace and stability in the region.

At the latest Summit of the International Conference
on Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in
the Great Lakes Region, held in Luanda in January,
President Dos Santos shared a vision for his tenure
that complements the objectives of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. The President initiated
a political dialogue with Presidents Kagame, Kabila,
Museveni and Zuma on illegal armed groups such as the
Forces de'mocratiques de libe'ration du Rwanda (F DLR)
and the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), during which
they agreed on a plan to tackle the sources of insecurity
in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo and the region.
It was agreed, inter alia, that the military chiefs of staff
of the five countries involved in the dialogue would
come together and examine ways to support the plans
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to address the
FDLR.

I believe that a regional plan borne out of dialogue
holds good prospects, and I am strongly encouraging
the political leadership of President Dos Santos to
ensure coherence and to be a rallying point for the
coordination of efforts in the region. My several
meetings with President Dos Santos have been very
encouraging, and I firmly believe that much progress
can be achieved by Angola's leadership of the ICGLR
in the next two years.

As I was saying earlier, the FARDC, supported
by MONUSCO and its Force Intervention Brigade,
are making significant progress in their operations
against the ADF. Operations have now started against
the FDLR, as the Council has heard. Those are indeed
important developments. However, I believe they should
take into account the regional plan and the steps agreed
in Luanda and align efforts for optimum results. It is
my sincere hope that robust operations against FDLR
elements who refuse to surrender will be vigorously
sustained and concluded speedily. Those who surrender
and who have not been involved in the genocide or
other serious crimes should have the option to return to
Rwanda in dignity through the established processes.

President Kabila's commitments in Luanda to
address the FDLR threat in a comprehensive manner
by the end of the year and his Government's ultimatum
on 24 February to the FDLR, as well as the recent
actions by the FARDC, supported by MONUSCO and
the Force Intervention Brigade, are very encouraging
signs. Tackling the FDLR presence in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo should indeed
go a long way to address Rwanda's concerns and ease
tensions in the region. It would form the building blocks
for trust and mutual confidence, with multiplier effects
to facilitate regional economic and social cooperation.
It would also facilitate efforts for the full restoration
of State authority in the Kivu regions of eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

As we move into the second year of implementation,
it is equally important that we fast-track the social
and economic aspects of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework. As I have always said, peace
cannot take root without tangible evidence on the
ground that jobs and businesses are able to flourish,
with people feeling a difference in their lives.

Following the endorsement by the regional
oversight mechanism of the convening of a private
sector investment conference for the region, I have been
working, together with my team, with the ICGLR, the
African Union (AU), the European Union, the World
Bank, United Nations agencies and with a number of
Member States to hold the conference before the end
of this year. The conference will promote a shared
understanding of the role of the private sector in
advancing the economic pillar of the Framework,
inspire actionable policy recommendations for the
consideration of decision makers and create a venue
for public and private stakeholders of the signatory
countries to identify business and investment
opportunities. It will also create a space for business
leaders to forge relationships, expand their professional
networks and share experiences.

My Office will convene the conference jointly
with the ICGLR, the Southern African Development
Community and the African Union, in close consultation
with other United Nations agencies, countries of
the region and with the support of the bilateral and
multilateral institutions.

The social and economic pillars of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework also recorded
some achievements with the establishment of the
Women's Platform for the Framework, which I had the
privilege to help launch on 28 January in Addis Ababa,
during the AU summit. The ICGLR opened the regional
training facility on sexual and gender-based violence in
Kampala, on 16 February, for the training of security
personnel in the region. Collaboration is ongoing with
the ICGLR and other partners to operationalize those
important mechanisms.

My recent interactions with civil society
organizations from across the region - which took
place in Addis Ababa on the margins of the African
Union January Summit and in follow-up meetings, both
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and lately in
The Hague, during the meeting of the International
Contact Group - have clearly revealed the readiness
of that critical group to play an active role in the
implementation of the Framework. I look to Council
members to lend their support to all of those initiatives,
which would directly impact the lives of the people of
the region.

Related progress has been achieved at national
level, as well since the endorsement of the plan of
action for the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. I commend President
Kabila and the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo for promulgating the amnesty law, in
line with the Kampala Dialogue Declarations, which
formally ended the conflict with the M-23. I think we
must all recognize that it was not an easy step for a
Government to take and that it was a sign of leadership
that the Government was determined that it had to be
part of the process.

The amnesty, as we know, will not be extended to
those responsible for serious crimes and human rights
violations. However, more actions are required to
follow up, particularly on the repatriation from Uganda
and Rwanda of former M-23 combatants and the
beginning of an effective disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) process for eligible members.

During my recent visit in the region, I raised the
issue of the former M-23 combatants with the relevant
authorities. I am glad that some progress is being made
in relation to DDR and that there are active discussions
with international partners. But this is a critical issue
on which more progress is needed, as my colleague and
friend Martin Kobler has emphasized.

I continue to be engaged with Ugandan Minister
of Defence Kiyonga, the ICGLR and the national
oversight mechanism in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to fast track the establishment of the follow-
up mechanism, as agreed under the Kampala Dialogue
Declarations.

Meanwhile, several critical issues remain that
require urgent attention. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, more needs to be done to consolidate
State authority throughout the country, reform the
security sector - again, I agree with Martin Kobler
that this has to be more of a priority, particularly with
regard to the army - and promote good governance,
reconciliation, tolerance and democratization. While
efforts are ongoing to align various national plans with
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, for
optimal results the Democratic Republic of the Congo
national oversight mechanism needs to be further
strengthened to efficiently carry out its mandate.
During my recent visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, I was pleased to learn from both Prime
Minister Matata Ponyo Mapon and the Coordinator of
the national oversight mechanism, Francois Mwamba,
that support to the mechanism and coordination with
the Government was improving.

Despite the modest progress recorded in the
past year, we still have a long way to go to achieve
the objectives of the Framework. The security and
humanitarian situation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains fragile. I
would say it remains unacceptable, because there is still
not the security needed by women and their families
in particular. We must therefore find the means and
courage to address all underlying causes of conflicts,
promote reconciliation and tackle the obstacles that
impede the voluntary return of refugees in safety and in
dignity. Furthermore, efforts should be geared towards
working with the region to build trust, without which
economic and social cooperation cannot thrive.

While efforts should remain focused on stabilizing
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we must equally be mindful of the impact of
developments in the Central African Republic and
South Sudan, also signatories to the Framework and
neighbours to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I am very concerned - as I know members of the
Council are - about continuing reports of gross
violations of human rights in those countries and the
prevailing security situation.

Recently, at a breakfast in Kinshasa on 3 March,
I met Catherine Samba-Panza, interim President of
the Central African Republic. We spoke at length. She
informed me of the urgent need for additional capacity
to be provided by the United Nations to support
peacekeeping in her country and requested that I bring
this dire need to the attention of members of the Council
today.

In addition, and in a way that I think requires our
attention, the growing tensions in another signatory
country, Burundi, are also quite worrisome. I will
travel to Bujumbura on 19 March to engage with the
Government and stakeholders, in close coordination
with Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Parfait Onanga-Anyanga.

Before travelling to Burundi, I will be in Goma, on
18 March, one year to the day from when my mandate
started, for an announcement and press conference
about the "peace one day", 21 September, which will
be celebrated in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
this year. It will be an opportunity for the world to take
stock, in a sense, of both the progress and the needs in
that country.

In the coming months, certain courses of actions
will be critical if further meaningful progress is to be
achieved in the implementation of the Framework. At
the national level, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo needs to quickly implement
the provisions of the Kampala Dialogue Declarations,
including the administrative and technical steps to
facilitate the repatriation of the almost 2,000 former
M-23 combatants who fled to Rwanda and Uganda last
year. Further delay in that process could be costly to
peace and regional stability.

The national DDR programme also needs to gain
immediate traction. It remains stalled due to the lack
of an agreed approach and an agreed funding plan
with international partners. Concrete actions in fair
and independent courts would also be required against
those who have committed serious violations of human
rights and international crimes. I welcome the proposal
for the establishment of mixed courts.

While it is important to hold Member States
accountable for the implementation of their
commitments and to provide support in that regard, we
must not fail to be guided by the fact that achieving
peace and stability in the region will be an incremental
process. The region will therefore require time, as well
as dedicated support, to achieve the objectives of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. More
important, international engagements and messaging
to Member States must be strong, constant, well
coordinated and coherent to achieve the desired results.

Despite the other pressures on members of the
Council - and I know they are very real - I would
plead for the continuation of the strong support that
members have shown for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region.

In the coming months, with the kind support of
the Council, I intend to continue my engagements with
President Dos Santos and Foreign Minister Chikoti
to seek further collaboration in the political dialogue
among leaders ofthe region on sensitive issues. It is my
sincere hope that, beginning with the ongoing dialogue
on illegal armed groups, the process will develop to
include dialogue on other critical issues that would
otherwise severely limit the achievement of the goals
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. I
shall also continue my efforts with the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and will support
the ICGLR secretariat's efforts to ensure the effective
implementation and follow-up of the Kampala Dialogue
Declarations.

Of course, I will continue to work closely with
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Kobler, with whom, as he has also said, I have an
excellent relationship. We work very closely together,
and I think that is a strength. We both understand the
need to complement each other, but also to work very
closely together.

I will also work increasingly with civil society,
including women's groups, and with international
partners, including the team of envoys, with whom
I also have an excellent relationship, to assist the
Government in accelerating the implementation of key
national reforms, including security sector reform,
the consolidation of State authority throughout the
country, national reconciliation and democratization,
particularly as we approach the next election cycle.

Let me conclude with a personal word regarding
a special memorial event that is imminent - the
twentieth anniversary of the genocide that occurred
in Rwanda. As I said to the Council during my first
briefing as Special Envoy, in May 2013 (see S/PV.6960),
I recall vividly my first visit to Rwanda after that tragic
event, and the images of the atrocities remain indelible
in my mind. As we commemorate the genocide, I
would like to encourage all of us to reflect deeply on
the lessons learned from the past work together, to
ensure that the succeeding years - the next 20 years
and well beyond 4 in the Great Lakes region of Africa
will be characterized by tolerance, peace, stability and
development.

