Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We are
all aware of the magnitude of the crisis that the Syrian
people have been facing under the yoke of a conflict
that has now entered its seventh year. The conflict
has claimed hundreds of thousands of victims and left
millions displaced. We all know that achieving swift
justice is an integral part of the efforts to reach a final
settlement and to put an end to the suffering of Syrians,
reuniting them under the flag of a country with control
over its territory and that fulfils the hopes its people
have for freedom and democracy.

That is why Egypt has advocated, and will always
advocate, the notion of accountability in Syria in order
to achieve justice, in particular with regard to crimes
that could be considered war crimes, regardless of their
perpetrators, and to instances in which it has been
proven that chemical weapons have been used against
Syrian civilians by more than one party, as stated in the
report of the Joint Investigative Mechanism, established
pursuant to resolution 2235 (2015). The mandate of the
Mechanism was renewed by resolution 2319 (2016).

The application of the notion of accountability,
in Syria or elsewhere, means having a number of
elements in place. If one or more of those elements is
absent, such accountability would become a politicized
measure that would end up deepening the crisis in
Syria and having an adverse effect on the prospects
for the political process. Despite the fact that the draft
resolution (S/2017/ 172) put before the Security Council
today purports to ensure accountability and achieve
justice, for unknown reasons it ignores one of the main
elements that I have mentioned, that is, evidence.// Let
me remind Council members

Let me remind Council members that the common
practice when introducing sanctions against individuals
or entities implicated in specific crimes as serious
as those we consider today is to establish a sanctions
committee through a Security Council resolution. Such
a committee would evaluate the evidence provided in
connection with the individuals or entities accused of
using chemical weapons. The names of those entities or
individuals would then be included on the sanctions list.
Those steps are aimed at guaranteeing the transparency
of justice.

What we have before us today is supposedly not a
political measure to impose sanctions on a given country,
but rather accountability for explicit accusations
against individuals because of their implication in
clear crimes. Nevertheless, we are surprised that those
usual steps have been skipped. The proposed draft
resolution includes in its annexes a pre-identified list of
individuals and entities that would be subject to those
sanctions and whom the co-sponsors perceive to be
primarily responsible for the use of chemical weapons
in Syria.

We see that as a premature judgment of the reports
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism, which has not
levelled any accusations against the individuals and
entities whose names are included on the annexed list.
The co-sponsors of the draft resolution have also not
provided any evidence whatsoever of that culpability, nor
have they deferred to any sanctions committee, which,
according to the very same draft resolution, ought to
be established to verify such serious accusations. Such
actions run counter to the basic notions of transparency
concerning information and its sources, on the basis of
which names have been included on the annexed list.

We have also noted that the draft resolution
conflates two notions that very clearly are different. We
understand, however, as we all support the imposition
of sanctions against those who have been established to
be implicated in the heinous crime of using chemical
weapons. Nevertheless, the draft resolution went far
beyond by imposing the same sanctions on a matter
that is perceived by many as being very technical: the
relationship between the Government of Syria and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and the assessment of the credibility of the preliminary
Syrian declaration on its chemical-weapon programme.

Over the past couple of months, we have repeatedly
explained our viewpoint regarding the imbalance in
the draft resolution that supposedly seeks to establish
justice, particularly as it relates to the lack of evidence.
Despite our repeated readiness to support Council
sanctions on those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons, through the standard procedures we have
identified, in the interest of ensuring full justice, we
were surprised to see an incomprehensible insistence
on proceeding with the draft resolution without any
modifications to address such imbalances. That is why
we were compelled to abstain in the voting on the draft
resolution today - in order to express that we support
the notion of justice and accountability in general but,
at the same time, oppose the levelling of arbitrary
accusations against specific individuals and entities on
issues that could amount to being war crimes.

In conclusion, allow me to express our regret that the
proposed draft resolution gives the perception that the
Security Council is divided when it comes to the danger
of chemical weapons in Syria. That particular subject
has always enjoyed consensus in the Council since
the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), on the Syrian
chemical-weapon programme. I would also note our
surprise that we must take such a step, but all members
know that the draft resolution is doomed to fail. Such
failure could negatively impact the momentum in the
political process and the prospects for achieving justice
and accountability in Syria in the future.

We therefore call on all the members of the
Council to get back to work as soon as possible in
order to restore mutual trust among members in order
to support the political process in Syria and avoid
any indifference and political convenience, which do
not always convey the real situation in Syria and will
lead only to negative consequences in that country.
We also call on the international community to give
due importance to the establishment of a region free
of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East by
following a comprehensive approach, and to engage
actively in addressing the risk of non-State actors using
and manufacturing such weapons, and sharing that
knowledge with one another.
