Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): I would first
like to congratulate Ambassador Kamau, Permanent
Representative of Kenya, on the strong leadership and
commitment with which he successfully chaired the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) last year, working
tirelessly to lay the ground for a stronger, more
effective and more relevant body. The Commission
made important progress in 2016 in implementing the
various resolutions adopted regarding the review of the
peacebuilding architecture. This year we are building
on those achievements as the PBC continues to promote
an integrated, strategic and coherent approach to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.

In response to the Security Council's January
presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/2) emphasizing
the importance of the PBC's role in convening
peacebuilding efforts, the Commission has been making
an effort to use its convening role, in collaboration with
the United Nations Office in West Africa and the Sahel,
to mobilize a greater commitment and partnership
between the United Nations, the countries of the Sahel
and other international and regional partners with a
View to advancing the implementation of the United

Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. On 6 March,
I convened a PBC meeting in which we were briefed
by Mr. Pierre Buyoya, former President of Burundi
and African Union High Representative for Mali
and the Sahel; Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa and the Sahel; Mr. Najim Elhadj Mohamed,
Permanent Secretary of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-S Sahel); and Mr. Angel Losada, European Union
Special Representative for the Sahel. Representatives
of the countries of the G-5 Sahel also participated in
the meeting. In addition, in my capacity as Chair of
the PBC, together with the Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacebuilding, I also attended last week's meeting
of the Ministerial Coordination Platform for the Sahel
in N'Djamena. The meeting enabled me to identify
opportunities for the PBC to support, on request,
the efforts of the countries of the Sahel to achieve
development and stability. I look forward to discussing
that in more detail at the informal interactive dialogue
to be held later this morning.

The resolutions that I just mentioned called for
the PBC to consider reviewing its working methods
so as to enhance efficiency and flexibility in support
of peacebuilding and sustaining peace. In that regard,
in accordance with its mandate and upon request from
the relevant States, the Commission continues its
consideration of country- and region-specific situations.

At the request of the Gambian Government,
the Commission convened a meeting to discuss the
peacebuilding priorities of The Gambia, following
my visit to the country last March. The meeting
was preceded by developments on the ground and
important regional initiatives in support of the
political situation in The Gambia, strongly supported
by the Secretary-General. At the PBC meeting, the
Permanent Representative of The Gambia provided a
direct account from the perspective of the Government,
while the Commission provided a platform to discuss
international and regional support.

On 7 June, the PBC also convened a meeting on the
situation of the Solomon Islands, upon the request of its
Prime Minister, who presented the key peacebuilding
challenges facing his country at this crucial time, as the
Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands is
expected to withdraw from the country this month.

The Commission not only benefited from the direct
engagement by the Prime Minister, but also heard from
a representative of the Young Women's Parliamentary
Group and key regional partners of the Solomon
Islands, including the members of the Pacific Islands
Forum and the Chair of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations. It was an excellent opportunity for
the Commission to demonstrate its unique value as
a partnership forum for countries to engage with the
international community in connection with challenges
involved in peacebuilding and sustaining peace.

However, a number of priorities remained for the
Commission during its eleventh session, upon which I
will elaborate briefly.

First, concerning the matter of partnerships,
partnerships and cooperation with relevant stakeholders,
both within and outside the United Nations, are
crucial. The Commission should examine all available
opportunities so as to strengthen its collaboration with
international financial institutions, including the World
Bank and the African Development Bank, as well as
with regional and subregional organizations, such as
the African Union (AU). Earlier this month, together
with the group of ambassadors from the PBC, I met
with the President of the World Bank in Washington
DC, a number of executive directors and several other
senior officials. We discussed ways to strengthen the
partnership between the PBC and the Bank in support of
conflict-affected countries that are on the agenda ofboth
the United Nations and the World Bank. That discussion
will continue at the PBC's annual session on 30 June
on the partnership for financing for peacebuilding, at
which Kristalina Georgieva, Chief Executive Officer of
the World Bank Group, has agreed to attend along with
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres.

In connection with the African Union, I intend to
follow up on the work of my predecessor and visit AU
headquarters during the latter part of this year so as
to strengthen collaboration with the African Union,
especially its Peace and Security Council.

Within the United Nations, as well, we need to
further explore ways to improve the quality of the
advice that we provide to the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council.
In recent months, the Security Council called on the
PBC to advise on a number of regional and country-
specific issues, including the Sahel region, the Central
African Republic, Liberia and Guinea-Bissau. Those
are opportunities for the Commission to prove that,
through its convening role, it can provide solid and
comprehensive advice upon request from the principal
organs of the United Nations.

In line with the aforementioned presidential
statement on the Sahel, the PBC intends to propose a
joint meeting with the Economic and Social Council on
the Sahel region on 28 June to look at ways to address
the development challenges in the region, the outcome
of which we will be ready to report to the Security
Council upon request.

Secondly, with regard to coherence, the resolutions
on the review of the peacebuilding architecture
recognize the importance for the Commission to
promote an integrated, strategic and coherent approach
to peacebuilding and bring sustained international
attention to sustaining peace. During the past several
years, the PBC has demonstrated that, by bringing
together various parts of the United Nations system in
one forum, it can induce better integrated and coherent
work in the countries concerned. Through discussing
country-specific and regional peacebuilding issues
with senior representatives of related departments,
the PBC has an opportunity to reinforce that message
and enhance the United Nations coherent approach to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. I am committed to
use the remainder of the current session to work in that
direction so as to engage relevant United Nations actors
and explore ways to work better together.

Thirdly, concerning the issue of gender, in 2016,
the Commission adopted its gender strategy, which is
now being integrated into the work of the PBC. The
Commission will continue to build on past achievements
to promote the gender dimension of peacebuilding and
provide opportunities for the increased participation of
women in peacebuilding and sustaining peace.

Fourthly, and finally, with regard to transparency,
efficiency and flexibility, the Commission will continue
to consider ways to respond in a rapid and effective
manner to requests for advice and support, including
through newly established focal points on gender, youth,
institution-building, financing and national ownership.

The PBC is an intergovernmental advisory body
to the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council. Its relevance depends
upon its capacity to provide the kind of advice that
can enrich the deliberations of its parent bodies. The
PBC remains committed to providing that kind of
advice by fully utilizing its convening role and diverse
membership, while recognizing that peace, development
and human rights are closely linked and mutually
reinforcing. We Stand ready to respond to requests to
contribute to building and searching for peace.

