I would like to congratulate Indonesia for assuming the Security Council presidency for the month of August and for convening this timely meeting today. At the outset, please allow me to say few words about very worrying situation in Belarus. Sunday's presidential elections in Belarus cannot be considered free, fair and democratic. As a result, we are now witnessing unprecedented nationwide protests and the excessive use of force by the Government. Let me underline that violent crackdowns of peaceful protests is unacceptable. We call on Belarus to immediately end its political repression of the opposition, avoid any further violence and uphold respect for human rights. Coming now to the matter of sustaining peace, I agree that the Security Council should not let new challenges to international peace and security slip under the radar. The focus of today's debate on the effects of pandemics, including the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), on conflict prevention, post-conflict recovery and peacebuilding is therefore very pertinent. Conflict prevention ought to be at the core of the work of the United Nations. Estonia has been continuously advocating and contributing to prevention, post- conflict recovery and sustaining peace initiatives. We attach great emphasis to the role of the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund. Estonia has been supporting the Fund's activities since 2013, and we see great added value in its work to ensure favourable conditions for local organizations to play the necessary role in sustaining peace. We welcome the Peacebuilding Commission's renewed focus on conflict prevention, in addition to its more traditional post-conflict recovery analysis and activities. The Commission's advisory role vis-a-vis the Security Council is extremely important and is part of a holistic, cross-United Nations approach to conflict prevention and resolution. With that in mind, we see room for further strengthening the Commission's advisory role to the Council. Analysis provided by the PBC to the Council can play an important part of an informed decision-making process. Undoubtedly, the COVID-19 pandemic puts an additional burden on already fragile situations. Economic, social and development pressures from the pandemic can essentially act as threat multipliers and exacerbate tensions. We have already seen that in the Sahel region, where armed and violent extremist groups are cynically abusing the situation for their own advancement. That, in turn, has multiplied the responsibilities of United Nations peacekeeping missions. Estonia, together with other European Union countries, has pledged its continued commitment to United Nations peacekeeping during the pandemic. We urge others, in particular large troop and financial contributors, to follow suit. Peacekeeping missions require our continued uninterrupted support to remain willing and able to operate during the pandemic in order to deliver on their mandate, promote conflict resolution, support host States and protect civilian populations. While it is important to discuss how United Nations peacekeeping missions could take more pandemic-sensitive approaches, that is only a part of the equation. For peacebuilding and sustaining-peace activities to be truly sustainable, we need political will and a strong sense of ownership from Governments and local communities. Peacebuilding processes need to be inclusive, taking into account the views of local peacebuilders, especially women and youth, who are often at the forefront of such activities and the ones most affected by conflict. There are encouraging examples from Afghanistan, the Niger, Iraq and many other locations where the United Nations has successfully supported local peacebuilding capacities and initiatives, many of them led by women. That is especially important in the context of coronavirus, which has further exacerbated the vulnerability of the least protected in society. I would also like to stress that women's needs have to be factored into the response to the pandemic, and we need to ensure women's equal representation in all coronavirus response planning and decision-making processes. In conclusion, the pandemic will most likely be with us for the foreseeable future. Regardless, we need to continue creative peacebuilding efforts, empowering local level initiatives and actively making sure that the pandemic is not being used as a pretext for restricting human rights, limiting freedom of movement or hampering the Organization's peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.
