Mr. Savua (Fiji): I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to address the Council on this important
issue. Through you, I wish to thank the Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste for the cooperation that
his Government has lent to the United Nations Mission
of Support in East Timor (UNMISET). We also
acknowledge the Secretary-General's report,
introduced by Mr. Karmalesh Sharma, on the progress
of transition of responsibilities in Timor-Leste, but for
some remaining areas of challenge, and on the detailed
military strategy for downsizing the Mission, as
requested in resolution 1473 (2003).

Of the remaining challenges, the one of particular
concern to Fiji is the reported increased activities in
recent months of armed groups and former militia
elements that are intent on destabilizing the country.
With this in mind, the Secretary-General's call for
international military capability is strongly endorsed by
Fiji and we stand ready to boost our present
commitment within our military capability in this area
in order to assist in the timely and peaceful exit of
UNMISET.

We can expect optimism when the
implementation of the Security Council mandate is
reaching milestones. Reality also requires the
Organization to periodically revisit its goalposts. We
have to be cautious and hope that the accelerated pace
of positive developments in all sectors of Timor-Leste
will be synonymous with sustained peace and stability
for the country and that the planned drawdown of the
military security personnel will not be a window of
opportunity for destabilizing elements to re-establish
their interests in Timor-Leste.

We are mindful of the need for caution with
respect to the fragility of any peace-building exercise.
Timor-Leste is no exception. It is also a situation that
has produced results, which are benefits that the
Timorese people deserve and which flow from the
investment of the international community. In Timor-
Leste, we are engaged in a careful balancing of
securing a peaceful setting within which training for
the local police and defence forces can be
accomplished, alongside other public-sector transitions.
In doing so, we are concerned to leave all the decision-
making to the Government and people of Timor-Leste.

In this connection, we recall the Secretary-
General's own caution, expressed in paragraph 35 of
his special report, on the need to execute downsizing
that is sensitive to the Government's desire to assume
responsibility for security issues in a feasible way and
that does not jeopardize its stability. Our primary
concern here is not to compromise the confidence,
capacity and capability of Timor-Leste's fledgling
military and security forces with a rushed time line and
anticipated operational demands. In this, however, we
support the proposal to strengthen the role of the
civilian police in the capacity-building exercise of the
Timor-Leste National Police. We believe that, while the
military can deter further acts of violence, it is the
police that establish the foundations of long-term
peace, stability and law abidance for nations and their
peoples.

We would close, therefore, by endorsing the
Secretary-General's request to this Council in
paragraph 64 of his report to extend the mandate of
UNMISET for a further year, until 20 May 2004. In so
doing, we look forward to the consultation process with
the troop-contributing countries on the options that are
being developed for the operations of and interactions
between each military organization, as the Secretary-
General undertakes in his report.

