Mr. Laassel: I would like to start by Ambassador
Hilale's apologies for his absence today. He was in fact
here in the Chamber earlier this morning, but he was
called to speak at the Fourth Committee. I am therefore
making this statement on his behalf.
I would like to start by congratulating the Russian
Federation on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October, and by thanking
you, Mr. President, for your invitation to speak in the
Security Council today. It is always a pleasure and an
honour for Morocco to brief the Council on behalf of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), in its capacity
as Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the PBC.

I would also like to welcome and support the
comprehensive briefing delivered by the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping, Mr. Herve
Ladsous, on the situation in the Central African
Republic, and commend him for his tireless efforts
aimed at building peace in that country and for the
cooperation of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations with the PBC.

It is my pleasure to brief the members of the Council
on Mr. Hilale's most recent visit to the Central African
Republic, in particular on his participation at the ninth
meeting of the International Contact Group on the
Central African Republic (ICG-CAR). The report of his
mission will be circulated to all members in due course,
following the usual practice.

On the occasion of his second visit to Bangui,
Mr. Hilale was invited to participate at the ninth
meeting of the International Contact Group on the
Central African Republic, co-chaired by the African
Union and the Republic of the Congo. As mentioned
in his report, the meeting was attended by 25 countries
and by representatives of several organizations. Strong
regional mobilization was noted during this meeting
and should be encouraged and welcomed.

The main issues raised during the Bangui meeting
were as follows. The first tier of issues were political
issues; security issues; disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration (DDRR) issues; and
security sector reform (SSR) issues. The second tier
of issues involved justice, reconciliation and the fight
against impunity. The third tier of issues related to
the humanitarian situation, refugees and internally
displaced persons. The fourth tier of issues related
to recovery and peacebuilding. Since each of those
topics are addressed in the report, I will limit myself
to highlighting the main issues discussed during the
Bangui meeting and in Mr. Hilale's various exchanges
throughout his visit. While other issues such as the
humanitarian or the economic situations will not be
addressed in this briefing, they remain of paramount
importance.
The Government expressed its strong commitment to
the success ofthe DDRR, SSR and national reconciliation
programmes based on the recommendations of the
Bangui Forum. Presidential decrees on the coordination
of these three programmes were promulgated in order
to support the efforts of the Government in this regard
in a coordinated manner. Efforts were also made by
the Government in the implementation of the Special
Criminal Court.

With respect to disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration, interlocutors expressed
the need for strong political and financial support.
The main task of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) will be to support the
Government in implementing a DDRR programme. To
date, the World Bank is the main partner, financing
approximately half of the estimated budget. This is
not the first time that a DDRR programme has been
planned for the Central African Republic. It is therefore
important to benefit from the lessons learned from past
DDRR programmes. DDRR is a vast and complex issue
that will have a crucial impact on the stabilization of
the country.

The main problem remains funding, but other
aspects, such as the identification of beneficiaries
or the inclusiveness of the entire process, are also
important and must be dealt with carefully. For its part,
the Government is encouraged to redouble its efforts
and pursue its dialogue in an inclusive manner with
all armed groups. We welcome the fact that dialogue
with the armed groups is scheduled to restart in the
coming days, as Mr. Ladsous mentioned earlier. We
take this opportunity to commend the commitment of
the Government, MINUSCA and the World Bank in
this regard and call upon all involved stakeholders to
increase their efforts aimed at investing in building the
foundation of a successful DDRR process as early as
possible.

Secondly, with respect to security sector reform
in the Central African Republic, SSR is crucial for the
stabilization of the country, in particular with regard
to the extension of State authority. In accordance with
its mandate, MINUSCA, with the backing of other
partners, has the challenging task of supporting the
Government in this critical endeavour. In this regard,
we welcome the involvement of the European Union,
which initiated a military training and advisory
mission with the objective of training two battalions of
the national armed forces with a view to constituting a
republican and professional army under the authority of
the Government.

We also welcome the commitment of the countries
of the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community, announced during the ICG-CAR meeting,
to train one battalion per country. The implementation
of this commitment will be an important step towards
the success of the programme, and further bilateral
support is also encouraged given the important needs of
the country. Based on the draft national security policy,
we note that the SSR programme will also need to
include the reinforcement of the police and gendarmerie,
as well as a clarification of their respective mandates,
with the aim of extending the authority of the State to
the entire territory of the country.

Thirdly, as mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2016/824) and during the ICG-CAR meeting,
national reconciliation remains a matter of concern,
particularly due to the fact that the national reconciliation
strategy has still not been adopted. However, some local
initiatives are encouraging, especially the activities of
the religious platform, which is still playing a vital role
in that area. The PBC, with its experience in this area,
remains committed to supporting all kinds of initiatives
aimed at addressing communal tensions, and welcomes
the Secretary-General's commitment to supporting the
Government in this regard.

Last but not least, there is the issue ofthe rule oflaw.
As has often been mentioned, national reconciliation,
in particular, but also to a certain extent DDRR and
SSR, cannot be successful without addressing the issue
of impunity. I am pleased to report that some key steps
leading to the establishment of the Special Criminal
Court have been taken, thereby allowing for the launch
of the recruitment process for national and international
magistrates.

The Central African Republic has come a long
way since its last relapse into conflict. Since 2012, the
Council has been following closely the development
of the situation in the country and has witnessed the
positive steps achieved recently following the return
of constitutional order. Yet the path to stability is still
being hampered by many challenges, and a risk into
relapse is, unfortunately, still a plausible scenario.
As illustrated by Mr. Ladsous, the security situation
remains volatile. That is probably the main reason that
the support of the international community will be
crucial in the coming months. We are aware that many
situations around the world need the Council's urgent
attention, but the singularity of the situation in the
Central African Republic, its geographical situation,
the impact of the crisis on the region and the relatively
modest investments needed should make the case of the
Central African Republic a priority for the international
community.

For all those reasons, it is our collective duty to
ensure the success of the important next step, which is
the upcoming Donors Conference to be held in Brussels
on 17 November. The national strategy for recovery
and peace consolidation, as well as the framework
for mutual accountability with the international
community, will need to be shared in advance to ensure
an optimal preparation for the Donors Conference. In
the upcoming weeks, the configuration will organize
an event with the main stakeholders in order to inform
PBC members of the specifics of the Conference and
contribute to making it a success. It is time we translate
our efforts into tangible contributions that can improve
the lives of women and men in the Central African
Republic.

I would like to conclude by thanking the Central
African authorities for their hospitality and their
constant support for the activities of the configuration.
I would also like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Onanga-Anyanga and his team for
their assistance and all of their efforts.

