Mr. McLay (New Zealand): As a newly elected
member of the Security Council completing our first
month of service, New Zealand thanks Chile for its
very able stewardship during January, not least in the
thematic debates your promoted, Sir, and the important
visit to Haiti, which you proposed and which give us a
great deal of valuable information. We also commend
your scheduling of meetings at short notice when the
need arose, and your use of the full range of available
tools for members to engage informally in discussions
on critical emerging issues. I would highlight, in that
regard, the informal interactive dialogue on the Central
African Republic Commission of Inquiry and the Arria
formula meeting on human rights and peacekeeping
operations.

In discharging its day-to-day duties, it is very
important that the Council not lose sight of its
responsibility on behalf of the broader United Nations
membership to respond quickly to emerging threats to
peace and security. When urgent matters do require our
attention, New Zealand encourages all members to work
constructively together to reach swift agreement on the
Council's public positioning. If, for example, in just the
past week, we had remained silent on the most clear-cut
issues - and I think in particular of events in Nigeria,
Yemen and Lebanon - and if we had been unable to
agree on even the simplest language of condemnation
or concern, then the Council's relevance could have and
would have been called into question. Acting swiftly
and speaking with unanimity will help ensure that
ongoing relevance. Making that comment, I find myself
very much aligned with the similar comments made by
my colleague, the representative of Angola.

Reflecting on the Council's work in January, New
Zealand has Viewed a number of issues with very
deep concern, not least the continued perpetration of
atrocities by Boko Haram. We welcome the efforts of
Nigeria and the region to combat that threat, including
the establishment of the multinational task force.
Boko Haram is, without a doubt, a significant threat
to international peace and security, and New Zealand
hopes that the Council will support regional efforts to
combat that threat, and extends its hand of support to
Nigeria in its efforts to combat Boko Haram.

In the absence of regular conflict-prevention
briefings, it is very important that the Council take
every other possible opportunity to be briefed by the
Secretariat on emerging issues, including, if necessary,
by doing it under "Any other business". We welcome
such developments during January, in particular in
respect of Yemen, on which we had two such briefings
at short notice. Obviously, the Council, with its very
full agenda, must find a balance between responding
in a timely manner to events through its products
and statements and ensuring that such messaging is
representative of all 15 members.

In that regard, New Zealand thanks its fellow
Council members, both permanent and elected, for
their ongoing work as penholders on particular issues
and situations. That is important work on behalf of
the Council. We do, however, regard it as essential
that all members be given adequate time to consider
both formal and informal texts, particularly when the
relevant timelines are well-known, well-established
and known in advance, such as with dates for the
renewal of mandates, and that, where necessary, there
be adequate time for face-to-face negotiations on the
texts in question.

Wrap-up sessions can be valuable opportunities
for us to reflect on the way we have gone about our
business during the month under review, and to assess
how those methods might be improved. Moreover,
a measure of public and therefore transparent self-
reflection can also provide the broader United Nations
community with some insight into the workings of
the Council, particularly given that so much of our
business is inevitably transacted in the consultations
room, through email exchanges or in small informal
groupings of Council members. While New Zealand
feels that there is real utility in this wrap-up format,
not least from a transparency perspective, we believe
we should make even more efforts to ensure that these
meetings are dynamic and relevant. We specifically
suggest that future presidencies consider recommending
to the Council that these sessions be opened up to allow
representatives of regional groups to participate under
rule 39 and to give us their assessment of the way in
which the Council is going about its work on their
behalf.

