Mr. Choat (South Sudan): I would like to thank
Mr. Herve Ladsous, Mr. Haile Menkerios and
Ms. Hilde Johnson for their statements today.

The Republic of South Sudan is extremely
concerned about the deteriorating security situation in
the border areas of both the Republic of the Sudan and
the Republic of South Sudan. Yesterday, the Sudan
Armed Forces (SAF) bombed Yida refugee camp in
Unity state, South Sudan, and killed 12 people. In
addition, the Sudan Armed Forces attacked the Sudan
People's Liberation Army position in Kwek, Upper
Nile state. There were approximately 20 casualties. The
SAF also bombed Gussa in Maban county, Upper Nile
state, and killed seven people.

We call on the Republic of the Sudan to desist
from further military activity north or south of the
border, and to avoid unnecessary escalation. As stated
by His Excellency Mr. Salva Kiir Mayardit, President
11-58922

of the Republic of South Sudan, during his recent visit
to Khartoum, the Republic of South Sudan is
committed to resolving all outstanding issues
peacefully and through dialogue - the opposite of
what President Al-Bashir has been saying recently in
threatening the South with a return to war. Blaming
others for its own problems has been a feature of the
Sudan's attitude.

We reiterate that the Government of the Republic
of South Sudan's policy is one of total non-interference
in the affairs of other States. All the accusations made
by the Sudan are untrue. Naturally, we are deeply
concerned about the situation in Southern Kordofan
and Blue Nile states, given their geographical
proximity to our country. In particular, we are gravely
concerned about the impact of the ongoing violence on
the civilian populations of those areas.

We remain committed to full implementation of
the provisions of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA) relating to the two areas, not least the holding of
popular consultations. We believe that it is the ongoing
failure to implement the CPA provisions with respect to
the two areas that is one of the main causes of the
current situation.

Lastly, we call on the Council to take up with
urgency the issue of humanitarian access to the two
areas. The Republic of South Sudan stands ready to
assist with the provision of humanitarian relief to all
civilians fleeing conflict areas.

