The President (interpretation from Spanish): At the
outset of this meeting, I should like, on behalf of the
Security Council, to extend deep sympathy to the
Government and people of the United States of America in
connection with the terrible tragedy it has experienced as a
result of the plane crash in Croatia yesterday, which
claimed the lives of 33 persons, including that of the
Secretary of Commerce, the Honourable Mr. Ronald
H. Brown. I request the representative of the United States
of America to convey to his Government and to the
bereaved families our deep condolences.

In saying this, I am merely repeating publicly and
officially what we all said in the consultations room,
especially as their visit was a mission relating to the very
subject of the statement the Council will issue at this
meeting: the transition from war to economic
reconstruction, from a break in relations to the building of
peace and the creation of a better future for the people. I
say to the representative of the United States that we deeply
regret this terrible tragedy that has befallen us.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President (interpretation from Spanish): As this
is the first meeting of the Security Council for the month
of April, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Legwaila Joseph Legwaila, Permanent Representative
of Botswana to the United Nations, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of
March 1996. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Security Council in expressing appreciation to Ambassador
Legwaila for the great diplomatic skill with which he
conducted the Council's business last month.

Again, I echo words spoken in the consultations room
in praising Ambassador Legwaila for his sense of humour
and for the humanity with which he addressed subjects that
were sometimes complex. I also thank the Botswana
Mission for the constant and exceptional utility of its
contribution.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 1035 (1995) (S/1996/210*)

Letter dated 13 March 1996 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1996/190)


The President (interpretation from Spanish): I
should like to inform the Council that I have received a
letter from the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the Council
table.


The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/l996/210*, which contains the report of the Secretary-
General pursuant to resolution 1035 (1995), and document
S/ 1996/ 190, containing the text of a letter dated 13 March
1996 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council, transmitting the report
of the High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/l996/215, letter dated 22 March 1996 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council, conveying a communication from the
Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, to which is attached the fourth report on the
operations of the Implementation Force (IFOR); and
S/l996/220, letter dated 26 March 1996 from the
representatives of France, Germany, Italy, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America

 
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting the text of
the Final Document of the Contact Group Ministerial
Meeting, dated 23 March 1996.

Members of the Council have received photocopies of
a letter dated 4 April 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council,
which will be issued as document S/ 1996/242.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General of 29 March 1996
(S/l996/210*) submitted pursuant to its resolution
1035 (1995) of 21 December 1995, and the report of
the High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
annexed to the letter from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council of 13 March 1996
(S/ 1996/ 190). The Council welcomes both reports.

"The Security Council notes that, on the whole,
the implementation of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Annexes thereto (collectively the Peace Agreement, S/l995/999, annex) is proceeding according to the
timetable established by this Agreement. It also notes,
in general, satisfactory compliance with the military
aspects of the Peace Agreement as confirmed in the
most recent report to the Council on IFOR operations
(S/ 1996/215, annex and appendix) and stresses that
now the main emphasis in implementation efforts by
the international community and the Bosnian parties
themselves should shift to the civil aspects of the
Agreement.

"The Security Council stresses that the
responsibility for implementing the Peace Agreement
rests primarily with the parties to that Agreement. It
demands that they fully implement the Peace
Agreement, and demonstrate a genuine commitment to
confidence and security building measures, regional
arms control, reconciliation and the building of a
common future. In that context, it demands that the
parties comply fully, unconditionally and without any
further delay with their commitments regarding the
release of prisoners, implementation of the
constitutional framework, withdrawal of foreign
forces, ensuring freedom of movement, cooperation

with the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, return of refugees, and respect for
human rights and international humanitarian law. It
calls upon the authorities concerned with the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina to move
forward vigorously on measures to strengthen that
Federation and, to that end, to implement in full the
Sarajevo Agreement concluded on 30 March 1996
(S/l996/244).

"The Security Council is particularly concerned
at the failure to date by all parties to comply fully
with the provisions of the Peace Agreement
concerning the release of prisoners, in spite of the
repeated commitments by the parties to do so. The
Council stresses that the obligation to release the
prisoners is unconditional. Failure to do so
constitutes a serious case of non-compliance. In this
context the Council affirms its support for the
conclusions of the Contact Group Ministerial
Meeting of 23 March 1996 (S/ 1996/220) and notes
the readiness of the High Representative to propose
measures to be taken against any party that fails to
comply.

"The Security Council expresses its full support
for the High Representative, who is in charge of
monitoring the implementation of the Peace
Agreement and mobilizing and, as appropriate,
giving guidance to, and coordinating the activities
of, the civilian organizations and agencies involved,
in accordance with resolution 1031 (1995). It also
expresses its full support for the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), and
other international institutions and organizations
involved in the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. It affirms that the implementation of the
Peace Agreement must be strict, just, and impartial.

"The Security Council expresses its strong
support for the UNMIBH' s International Police Task
Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UN -IPTF). It
notes that an effective United Nations civilian police
operation is vital to the implementation of the Peace
Agreement and encourages the UN -IPTF to
implement its mandate as actively as possible,
consistent with Annex 11 of the Peace Agreement as
referred to in resolution 1035 (1995). The Council,
bearing in mind the agreement of the parties in
Annex 11 of the Peace Agreement not to impede the
movement of the UN-IPTF personnel or in any way
hinder, obstruct or delay UN-IPTF personnel in the

 

performance of their responsibilities, calls upon the
parties to allow UN-IPTF personnel immediate and
complete access to any site, person, activity,
proceeding, record, or other item or event in Bosnia
and Herzegovina as the UN-IPTF may request. It
notes with appreciation the participation of Member
States in the staffing of the UN-IPTF and urges those
Member States which have agreed to provide civilian
police to dispatch expeditiously fully qualified
personnel to enable the UN-IPTF to reach full
deployment by mid-April. It encourages the UN-IPTF
to accelerate the deployment of police monitors,
consistent with maintaining their high quality. The
Council also expresses its strong support for the Mine
Action Centre of UNMIBH and encourages States to
contribute to the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund
for Assistance in Mine Clearance.

"The Security Council recognizes that economic
reconstruction and rehabilitation throughout the
territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina are key factors
for the overall success of the peace implementation
process, reconciliation and reintegration. These tasks
require the political will of and consistent efforts by
the Bosnian parties as well as substantial international
assistance. The Council urges that priority be given to
projects aimed at facilitating the process of
reconciliation and the economic reintegration of the
whole country. It notes with appreciation the resources
that have already been made available in this respect.
It calls upon States and international institutions to
honour fully their commitments regarding economic
and financial assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Council recalls the relationship, as described in
the London Conference, between the fulfilment by the
parties of their commitments in the Peace Agreement
and the readiness of the international community to
commit financial resources for reconstruction and
development. It affirms that it is the parties
themselves that have the most important role in
re-establishing the economy of their country.

"The Security Council expresses its deep concern
over recent developments in the Sarajevo area which
caused thousands of Bosnian Serb civilians to leave
their homes. The Council calls on the parties to make
greater efforts towards reconciliation and the
reconstitution of a multi-cultural and multi-ethnic
Sarajevo, as a city of Bosniacs, Serbs, Croats, and
others, and as the capital and seat of the future
common institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It
further calls on the parties to put in place additional
measures to ensure security, freedom of movement
and conditions for the return of people affected in
Sarajevo and all other transferred areas. The Council
calls on the parties to reverse the trend of population
movements and partition efforts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina along ethnic lines.
"The Security Council pays tribute to all those
who have given their lives in the cause of peace in
the former Yugoslavia and expresses its condolences
to their families, including to the family of the
Secretary of Commerce of the United States of
America.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General and the High Representative to continue to
keep the Council regularly informed on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/ 15.


