Mr. Bing Dai (China) (spoke in Chinese): China thanks the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. James Swan, and the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia, Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose Madeira, for their briefings. Somalia is entering a critical stage in its achievement of peace and reconstruction. Over the past three months, the Somali federal Government has made earnest efforts to advance the national reconstruction process and tackle the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. It has gradually resumed dialogue with leaders of the federal member states. At the same time, the country's security and humanitarian situation has remained fragile, as evidenced by frequent terrorist and other violent incidents. In this regard, I would like to make the following four points. First, efforts to advance Somali's critical process must ensure that it is Somali-owned and Somali-led. China encourages the relevant Somali parties to further build mutual trust and gather momentum for dialogue, enhance federal institutions and move ahead with the constitutional review and other critical reform processes. China supports regional and subregional organizations, such as the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, in playing a mediation role for the political settlement of the Somali issue. The United Nations Mission in Somalia has been actively coordinating the various efforts of the international community and has played a constructive role. China supports the renewal of its mandate for 12 months. Secondly, a critical task of the Somali political process is to hold successful elections. China welcomes the dialogue between the Somali Federal Government and the federal member states on specific electoral arrangements and encourages them to design electoral processes in the light of the situation on the ground and the people's wishes. The international community should respect the leading role of the Somali Government and support full consultation among the Somali parties in order to create conditions favourable to well-run elections. Thirdly, eliminating the threat of terrorism is prerequisite for the long-term peace and stability of Somalia. China strongly condemns terrorist and violent incidents, which often claim innocent civilians as theirvictims. We commend the African Union Mission in Somalia for its important role in maintaining stability. The ability of the Somali security forces to assume primary responsibility for maintaining national security is key to the timely completion of the Somali transition plan. The international community should assist Somalia in capacity-building in the security sector and continue to provide the necessary security support on the basis of a full assessment of local security situations. Fourthly, the triple shock of COVID-19, flooding and locust infestations has had a grave impact on Somalia's economic and social development and aggravated its humanitarian crisis. China welcomes the supplemental financing from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund and calls on the _ international community to step up efforts to help plug the gaps in Somalia's humanitarian aid, enhance its capacity to respond to the pandemics and disasters, and support the advancement of its national development plan. China has always been an active contributor to the Somali peace process and a long-time provider of humanitarian assistance and economic and social development support. This year alone, we have donated two batches of medical supplies to Somalia and will continue to help to the best of our abilities. China stands ready to work with the international community in playing a constructive role in realizing the goal of peace, stability and development in Somalia.
