Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): On behalf of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, I would like to express our
sincere thanks to Kuwait for convening this meeting,
27 years after its liberation. I would particularly like
to thank the Kuwaiti presidency for supplying my
delegation with a number of copies of the Charter of
the United Nations with an orange cover, which is the
national colour of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. We
also want to thank the Secretary-General and former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for their briefings. It
is a great honour, Mr. President, that you, as Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kuwait, are presiding over our meeting.

In 1945, the Charter of the United Nations
established a new international rules-based order. The
Charter protects States against acts of aggression, and
the example ofKuwait is a case in point, and especially
ofthe impact that the Council can have when it is united.
The Charter provides the conditions for security, safety,
human rights and sustainable economic development. It
is the foundation of the international legal order, and
the Constitution of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
obliges our Government to promote the development of
the international legal order.

The Charter came into being in San Francisco
72 years ago. Edward Stettinius, the Secretary of
State of the United States at the time, was one of
the key players in the United Nations Conference on
International Organization. At the first meeting of the
Security Council, he said,

"Whether it succeeds or not, however, depends
upon the manner in which the members of the
Security Council discharge the special obligation
which they have assumed. This is the obligation to
agree so that the Council may be able to act, and act
effectively" (S/PVI, p. 7).

Let me repeat what he said. Security Council members
have the obligation to agree so that the Council can
act effectively, and that obligation is especially for
the permanent members of the Council and their use
of the veto. In the light of that, I will focus on three
important areas where we believe the Council can
act more effectively - effective prevention, effective
peacekeeping and effective accountability. My first
point is about effective prevention.

One of the most effective ways to prevent armed
conflict is through the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Article 33 of the Charter sets out all the mechanisms
at the disposal of the parties to a dispute, including
judicial settlement, arbitration and mediation. I vividly
recall the 2013 event at the Peace Palace in The Hague
on Article 33 in which the Secretary-General at the
time, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, participated. The Hague,
which is the legal capital of the world, is the proud host
of the Peace Palace and home to the Permanent Court
of Arbitration and the International Court of Justice.
The International Court of Justice is the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations. It can achieve
its objectives only when all Member States accept its
compulsory jurisdiction, and they should therefore do
so, especially the permanent members of the Council.
The Council has the tools and responsibility to ensure
that parties effectively settle their disputes peacefully.
Let us use them.

My second point is about effective peacekeeping.
When prevention fails, the Council has the primary
responsibility to restore international peace and
security. The flexibility of the Charter is demonstrated
by the fact that the Council is able to deploy
peacekeeping operations, although it does not mention
the word "peacekeeping", as such. Today's complex
and high-risk environments create new challenges for
peacekeeping operations, as the Secretary-General
indicated this morning. When we assume the presidency
of the Council in March, therefore, we will focus on
collective action to improve peacekeeping operations,
which will be the theme for our high-level debate on
28 March.

All key players in peacekeeping operations
share the responsibility to ensure that peacekeeping
operations become more effective. It is the Council's
responsibility to provide robust mandates that address
the operational challenges in the field. It is also its
responsibility to act effectively when host States renege
on their commitments, undermine the activities of the
United Nations or target their own citizens.

My third point is about effective accountability.
Sustainable peace cannot be built on impunity. The
Council established the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda. It has referred two situations to
the International Criminal Court. It has established an
independent investigative team for crimes committed
in Iraq by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS),
which we welcome. With those actions, it sent a clear
message to victims that justice would be delivered, and
to perpetrators that they would be held accountable.

When national Governments fail to ensure criminal
accountability, it becomes the responsibility of the
Council to provide it. A referral alone is not enough;
the International Criminal Court needs the Council's
enforcement power when States refuse to comply
with its decisions. When large-scale violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
are taking place, Member States expect the Council
to act. Investigations of crimes committed by ISIS
are not enough. The Council must also ensure that the
perpetrators are prosecuted and brought to justice.

When chemicals are used as a weapon, the Council
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons should act. A total of 115 Member States,
including my country, support the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group's code of conduct
regarding Security Council action against genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. Of course,
we also support France and Mexico's initiative on
renouncing the use of the veto by permanent members
when mass atrocities have occurred. It is our view
that Security Council members have an obligation to
agree so the Council can act effectively. That applies
particularly to the current situation in Syria, as the
Secretary-General highlighted today. The human
suffering in Syria, especially in Ghouta, must end. We
need a cessation of hostilities now. We call the Russian
Federation in particular to use its influence and do its
utmost to end the hostilities and enable the Council to
act effectively. I hope that if we do have a meeting on
Ghouta tomorrow, it will lead to effective action by the
Council to end the violence.

In conclusion, today marks the twenty-seventh
year since the liberation of Kuwait from aggression. It
is a powerful example that the Council can be effective
when it is united and determined. It can succeed, but
only if its members fulfil the special obligation they
have assumed. As Ijust said, it is their obligation to
agree so that the Council can act, and act effectively.

Mr. Eelco van Kleffens was head of the Dutch
delegation in San Francisco in 1945. He became
President ofthe General Assembly in 1954. He expressed
the wish that the United Nations should not limit itself
to international peace and security. It should also
create international law, an international legal order.
The Charter, including the Statute of the International
Court of Justice, made his wish come true. The Hague
proudly hosts the International Court of Justice, the
International Criminal Court, the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and many more
international organizations that play a key role in
that international legal order. Those institutions are
based on the Charter. As one of the founding fathers
of the United Nations, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
remains committed to promoting and protecting the
international legal order and the Charter.

