Mrs. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, let
me express our sincere gratitude to the Indonesian
presidency for convening today's open debate.

Georgia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. Let
me add a few remarks in my national capacity.

This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
Security Council's first open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (see S/PV.4046) and adopted
the landmark resolution 1265 (1999). Yet, 20 years
later, civilian populations continue to fall victim to the
devastating impact of armed conflicts, which include
attacks on humanitarian and medical personnel and
the destruction of civilian infrastructure, hospitals and
schools, as well as sexual and gender-based violence.
Especially vulnerable are women, children, refugees
and internally displaced persons.

While we recognize the action taken by the
United Nations over the past 20 years, we believe that
more remains to be done to strengthen the protection
of civilians in armed conflicts, in line with the
recommendations provided in the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/373). Allow me to briefly
outline our national efforts.

First, let me highlight the recent decision of the
Government of Georgia to endorse the French-led
declaration on the protection of humanitarian and
medical personnel in armed conflict. This is particularly
important in view of the more than 700 attacks against
medical facilities and workers that took place in 2018,
as recorded by the World Health Organization. Our
Government attaches utmost importance to ensuring
accountability, particularly when it comes to war
crimes. Georgia therefore fully cooperates with the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and facilitated
the opening of the ICC office in Georgia in order to
conduct investigations into the crimes committed
during the 2008 Russia-Georgia war. However, the
non-cooperation and refusal to allow access to the
occupied regions by the occupying Power further
hinders progress to address the question of impunity.

The four 1949 Geneva Conventions are part
of Georgian legislation. Georgia's Inter-Agency
Commission of International Humanitarian
Law - a standing governmental body - leads efforts
and coordinates the work of relevant entities aimed
at ensuring respect for international humanitarian
law. Among the Commission's main priorities is the
implementation of international humanitarian law
programmes and educational activities, in cooperation
with the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC). Most of the educational training programmes
provided to Georgian military personnel incorporate
special courses on international humanitarian law,
including the key aspects of strengthening the protection
of civilians during armed conflict. Importantly, the
ICRC provides assistance to Georgia in locating
the whereabouts of missing persons, as well as in
identifying and handing over human remains to their
families. Since 2013, with the help of the Committee,
the human remains of nearly 200 people have been
identified and handed over to their families.

Following Russia's full-scale military aggression
in August 2008, we have been continuously prevented
from extending protection to the population residing
in Georgia's occupied regions of Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali, which are deprived of minimal safeguards
for their safety and are stripped of their fundamental
rights and freedoms. The loss of life among Georgian
internally displaced persons (IDPs) on the other side
of the occupation line is one of the most alarming
developments in recent years and, unfortunately, this
year is no exception. Recently, a Georgian IDP named
Irakli Kvaratskhelia died in custody at the illegally
stationed Russian military base in the occupied
Abkhazia region after having been unlawfully detained.

Taking into account the effective control of the
Russian Federation over the two Georgian regions, it is
particularly necessary that international organizations
be firm and vocal on Russia's responsibility in terms
of both human rights violations and of the denial of
access to international human rights mechanisms on
the ground.

Last but not least, over 10 per cent of Georgia's
population who have been expelled from the occupied
regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali as a result of ethnic
cleansing continue to be deprived of their fundamental
right to return to their homes in safety and dignity.
They require firm and lasting international support to
exercise their rights.

We reiterate our full support to the Secretary-
General in his endeavour to mobilize the United
Nations and its Member States to strengthen the
protection of human rights of civilian populations in
armed conflicts. We also call for the implementation of
his recommendations to this end. Georgia stands ready
to contribute to these efforts.

