Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to express my gratitude for the
important statements made this morning, in particular
by the Secretary-General and by Under-Secretaries-
General Alain Le Roy and Susana Malcorra.
Allow me to join others who have preceded me in
thanking you, Mr. President, for this timely initiative.
It is timely, first of all, because of the current situation
on the ground, in which complex scenarios and
missions require integrated approaches and strategies
from the United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding system. Secondly, it is timely precisely
because the link between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding will soon be considered by the entire
membership in two different contexts, namely, the
process of reviewing the Peacebuilding Commission
and at the next session of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.

"No exit without strategy" is the title of a report
on this issue that the Secretary-General prepared in
2001 at the request of this organ (S/2001/394). In our
judgement, several of its recommendations are still
valid, including, for example, the one that says that "a
good exit or transition strategy depends on a good
entrance strategy" (para. 6).

In that regard, it is important to take into
consideration lessons learned in the preparation of such
strategies. The work that the Council's Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations has decided to carry out
on the experiences of various completed missions
therefore seems to us highly relevant. In that
connection, based on our very positive experience as a
troop contributor participating in meetings of the
Working Group in 2009, we reiterate our full readiness
to contribute to that undertaking on the basis of our
experience in a number of peacekeeping missions.

Having said that, however, we believe that there
is no sustainable exit or transition strategy that does
not include a serious and consistent consideration of
the underlying causes of a given conflict - be they
ethnic or political reasons or disputes over territory or
control over natural resources, among others. To that
end, the first step is to thoroughly understand the
causes of a conflict. In that regard, it is worth pointing
out that the change in the focus of many missions in
recent years from inter- to intra-State conflicts makes
the problems we must face even more complex.

A peacekeeping operation is hard pressed to
resolve all the sources of conflict. Nor do we believe
that this should be its purpose or its benchmark in
deciding on the termination or transition of a mission.
What is crucial, however, is that, from the very outset,
a mission work to strengthen national institutions and
capacities so that they can begin to manage these
problems in a peaceful manner, thereby making a
reality of the principle of national ownership, which we
all endorse, and effectively laying the foundations for a
future transition.

In that regard, it is crucial to strengthen
institutional capacities in the areas of security and the
rule of law. We therefore encourage the Council to
continue to incorporate that element in the mandates of
peacekeeping missions. However, that is not the only
area in which peace operations have capabilities and in
which they can have a positive influence.

While taking into consideration the specificities
of each case, it could be very important if, from the
beginning of a mission, emphasis were placed on other
tasks linked to early peacebuilding activities such as,
among others, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, the rebuilding of
infrastructure and quick-impact projects that produce
tangible peace dividends. In addition, actions aimed at
addressing the causes of conflict should not be put off.
These could include, for example, increasing political
participation, electoral system reform, respect for
ethnic identity and agrarian reform.

There certainly seems to be broad consensus on
the benefits that peacekeeping operations can include
in their mandates and early peacebuilding tasks, in
particular in the areas of security sector reform and the
rule of law. However, the same cannot be said of the
role of the peacekeeping system with regard to
socio-economic aspects of peacebuilding. That is true
in particular when it comes to efforts aimed at
medium- and long-term economic recovery, which is
necessary for ensuring that peace and security are
sustainable and that, once a mission comes to an end,
its benefits are not lost and the risks of a relapse are
minimized.

In that regard, it is important to analyse the types
of economic development that provide for a clear exit
strategy and to foster the conditions necessary to a
return to growth from the outset. In general, we must
be cautious and take into account the level of social
and economic devastation in the country or region in
question.

The actions and areas of focus that will promote
sustainable transitions through the different types of
United Nations presence on the ground, ultimately
leading to a complete handover of responsibilities to
the host States, require a serious effort of integration
and coordination, beginning within the United Nations
system. It is essential that there be certainty regarding
the roles that each body and agency must play, as well
as the leadership of these coordination efforts on the
ground.

In this context, we believe that there is an
important role for the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), the body created a few years ago to deal
specifically with post-conflict activities. If it is to play
that role, however, the PBC must be strengthened. This
would call for more resources, which could well give
rise to legitimate doubts as to the advisability of such
an approach and on the true ability of the United
Nations to ensure sustainable transitions.

Fortunately, in the past few years, various studies
have demonstrated the great imbalance between the
costs of conflict without a United Nations presence and
the estimates for a peacekeeping operation that meets
its goals effectively. Conflicts without a United
Nations presence are four times more expensive than
our peacekeeping operations. Moreover, we have all
witnessed successful examples of transition and should
keep those lessons in mind. We therefore believe that it
is worth committing ourselves to peacebuilding from
the outset, providing the system and its entities with
the resources necessary to fulfil its purpose.

Finally, allow me to reiterate three ideas that we
consider to be important in this process. First, there
must be clear objectives and exit strategies from the
beginning of a mandate's discussion. Secondly, there
must be coordination of United Nations action on the
ground under the leadership of a representative,
lending the overall effort coherence and purpose.
Thirdly, peacebuilding tasks must be prioritized with
adequate human and financial resources.

