Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine has
consistently supported the Middle East peace process
and the principle of a two-State solution with Israel and
Palestine coexisting in peace and security. The lack
of direct dialogue and an almost non-existent political
process create an extremely unpredictable and explosive
situation. That deteriorating trend has unfortunately
become a new normal, thereby making an agreement
on the basis of a two-State solution ever more elusive.

On that point we have to state clearly that one of
the strongest drivers contributing to today's status quo
is the Israeli settlement policy. The announcement on
5 October of Israel's intention to build 300 housing
units and to establish an industrial zone in the West
Bank is a clear signal of further intensification of
settlement activities. Linking a string of outposts
in the West Bank, which would effectively divide it,
will undermine and potentially even ruin Palestinian
State-building efforts, which is yet another hard blow
to the peace process.
But terror is not an answer either. Ukraine strongly
condemns the shooting that took place on 8 October
on Jerusalem's Ammunition Hill, which resulted in
Israeli casualties. We are deeply concerned about a
vicious circle of escalation that we constantly witness.
The often repeated pattern of attacks and counter-
attacks demonstrates that the status quo is a road to
nowhere. We strongly believe that the Israeli side
must demonstrate genuine restraint and refrain from
a disproportionate use of force, which could only stir
up violence and lead to increased casualties, whereas
the Palestinian side must condemn any crime and
violent assault perpetrated by Palestinians against
Israelis and apply all possible efforts to prevent them.
The lack of progress on this track will only play into
extremists' hands, who stand to win from a collapse of
the peace process. Therefore, halting the violence and
de-escalating the situation are immediate priorities.
Ukraine reiterates its position that in elaborating a
workable Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement, the
relevant provisions of respective Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles, including land for
peace, the road map and the agreements previously
reached by the parties, as well as the 2002 Arab Peace
Initiative, must be respected.

The Middle East is ablaze and suffering from deep
and entrenched conflicts that are tearing the region apart
and posing a grave danger for the wider international
security system. The conflict in Syria continues to
spiral out of control, despite all the efforts of most
Council members and those of the wider international
community. The conflict-settlement mechanism that
was built during the past 12 months has failed to bring
about the desired result in Syria. The dramatic Security
Council meeting on 8 October (see S/PV.7785), and a
predictable but nevertheless deeply disappointing fifth
use of the veto by the Russian Federation, testify to the
bankruptcy of the veto right.

Outside the United Nations framework, the
International Syria Support Group platform and the
entire Vienna process have not provided the necessary
breakthrough either. As a result, we are practically
back to square one. We believe that only the full
implementation and adherence to the word and spirit of
the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and
resolution 2254 (2015) can lead to the settlement of the
conflict in Syria.

Moving on to other regional threats, there is no
question regarding the urgent need to put an end to the
violence in Yemen. The continued lack of progress in
the intra-Yemeni political process is deeply troubling.
In that regard, we highly value the efforts by Kuwait
and other mediators who are engaged in ongoing efforts
to bring about peace. Taking note of the Special Envoy's
announcement of a nationwide cessation of hostilities
for an initial period 72-hour period, we call on the
parties to resume direct talks without preconditions.

Finally, on the spread of terrorism, Ukraine is
fully committed to eradicating the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) as a global threat. We are
encouraged by the substantial progress achieved by the
coalition against ISIL in Iraq and Syria in the past two
months. The operation to liberate Mosul has a special
significance, given the city's strategic importance. We
hope that the liberation of Mosul will become a turning
point in degrading and ultimately destroying Da'esh.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that,
without a clear way out of the multiple crises that
are tearing apart the Middle East, particularly those
in Syria, Yemen and Iraq, coupled with the ongoing
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, it will be impossible to
contain the growing threat of violent extremism and the
global spread of terrorist groups, as well as to put an
end to the continuing flow of refugees from the region.

