Mr. Reyes Rodriguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba endorses the statement made by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Government of the Republic of Cuba reaffirms
its strongest opposition to all acts, methods and
practices of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
wherever and by whomsoever committed, whatever the
motives, including those in which States are directly or
indirectly involved.

Cuba likewise condemns any action aimed at
encouraging, supporting, financing or covering up any
act, method or practice of terrorism. Our country has
an impeccable record of fighting terrorism and has
never allowed, nor will it ever allow, Cuban territory
to be used to carry out, mastermind or finance terrorist
acts against any country.

Cuba has adopted and implemented legislative,
administrative and institutional measures aimed
at preventing and suppressing all terrorist acts and
activities and others directly or indirectly connected
with them, including those related to the financing of
terrorism, border protection and surveillance, arms
trafficking, judicial cooperation, and adherence to
international legal instruments on the prevention and
suppression of international terrorism.

Cuba has effective legislation against acts of
terrorism - Law 93, adopted by the National Assembly
of People's Power of the Republic - which defines all
acts of international terrorism as serious crimes and
establishes very heavy penalties in accordance with
international obligations.

Cuba is a State party to 14 of the existing
international conventions on terrorism and strictly
complies with its obligations under Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),
and other related resolutions.

Cuba is convinced that the only effective way to
prevent and combat terrorism is through bilateral and
multilateral cooperation among all States on the basis
of mutual respect, non-interference in internal affairs,
and the sovereign equality of States. We also believe
that the international community should not accept
that, under the pretext of the so-called fight against
terrorism, certain States commit acts of aggression
and interference in the internal affairs of other States;
commit or allow flagrant violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law; or carry out unilateral
acts that are contrary to the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles and norms of international
law.

Cuba has been the victim of terrorism. The Cuban
people have lost 3,478 sons and daughters as a result
of terrorist actions committed against our homeland
for half a century. Another 2,099 have been disabled
for life for the same reason. Most of these actions have
been organized, financed and carried out from United
States territory.

The arbitrary and unjustifiable inclusion of Cuba
in an annual list of States that allegedly sponsor
international terrorism, drawn up by the United
States Department of State on groundless pretexts
and without the slightest evidence of the participation
or involvement of our country in any terrorist act, is
a spurious and politically motivated exercise. Cuba
rejects as illegitimate the mechanism whereby the
United States Government arrogates to itself the right
to certify the conduct of other nations in relation to
terrorism and to issue discriminatory and selective lists
for political purposes, while adopting a double standard
by failing to prosecute self-confessed perpetrators
of horrendous terrorist acts against Cuba and other
countries in our hemisphere and allowing them to
remain free. The United States Government has also
spurned the cooperation offered by Cuba and failed
to respond to reiterated Cuban proposals to create a
bilateral cooperation programme to combat terrorism.

Cuba reiterates its denunciation of the most
notorious terrorist of the Western Hemisphere, Luis
Posada Carriles, who moves freely about the United
States under the protection of its authorities. Nothing
justifies the failure of the United States Government
to meet its international obligations to prosecute or
extradite that terrorist for his crimes. In documents
declassified by that Government's Central Intelligence
Agency and Federal Bureau ofInvestigation, he has been
identified as the mastermind ofthe mid-air explosion of
a Cubana de Aviacion airliner on 6 October 1976.

Paradoxically, the United States Government
maintains five innocent Cuban fighters against
terrorism, who have been arbitrarily and unfairly
deprived of their freedom simply for seeking, with
extraordinary altruism and courage, to obtain
information on terrorist groups based in Miami in order
to prevent violent acts and save the lives of Cuban and
United States citizens alike. Therefore, Cuba demands
the immediate release of Gerardo Hernandez Nordelo,
Ramo'n Labafiino Salazar, Fernando Gonzalez Llort,
Rene Gonzalez Sehwerert and Antonio Guerrero
Rodriguez.

The General Assembly is mandated to address
and advance the measures necessary to eliminate
international terrorism and develop effective
international cooperation to combat that phenomenon.
The General Assembly provides the proper framework
for achieving those objectives. Cuba reaffirms the
importance of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, adopted by the General Assembly in
resolution 60/288, as a primary instrument for guiding
States' efforts in the global fight against terrorism.

Cuba endorses the adoption of a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism that defines
terrorism in a clear and comprehensive manner,
including the activities of persons in charge of a
State's armed forces and other acts not regulated by
international humanitarian law, and making a clear
distinction between terrorism and the legitimate fight
of peoples for their independence and in defence of
their right to self-determination. Such a convention
should eliminate the deficiencies and omissions of the
existing legal framework.

At the same time, Cuba confirms its conviction that
terrorism cannot be eradicated through war, selectivity,
impunity and double standards, and that there can be
no effective cooperation if only some terrorist acts
are condemned while others are ignored, tolerated
or justified, or if this issue is simply manipulated for
narrow political benefit.

In conclusion, I reiterate the willingness of the
Cuban Government to cooperate with any State in
preventing and combating international terrorism on
the basis of mutual respect, sovereign equality and the
principles and rules of international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations.

