Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First of all, let me thank
Mr. Roed-Larsen for his very useful and
comprehensive briefing on the latest developments in
the Middle East. I would then like to associate myself
with the statement to be given later in this debate by
the Italian presidency of the European Union.

My Government is deeply concerned with regard
to the latest developments in the Middle East conflict.
The decision by Israel to expel in principle Mr.
Arafat - the democratically elected and legitimate
Chairman of the Palestinian National Authority - is
helpful neither in stabilizing the already volatile
situation nor in strengthening the security of Israel. On
the contrary, the decision adds tension to the situation
and makes a solution to the ongoing conflict more
difficult. Both sides need to show restraint - we have
insisted on that time and again. Also, the remarks made
by the Israeli Vice Prime Minister this weekend on
different options contemplated in dealing with
Chairman Arafat are not helpful. We therefore
welcome the clarification by Foreign Minister Shalom
that these remarks do not reflect the official position of
the Israeli Government. Furthermore, we feel that the
Israeli Government should revoke last week's decision.

Likewise, Hamas suicide bombings and Israeli
counterattacks have led to a spiral of violence and
counter-Violence over the last weeks that is claiming an
intolerable loss of innocent civilian lives. The
deterioration of the situation on the ground has also put
in jeopardy the efforts of the international community
to restore peace in the region.

The peace process is currently in a critical phase,
which could easily turn out to be a turning point for the
worse. It is therefore absolutely vital that all parties
engaged in the road map and in the peace process -
Israel and the Palestinians, as well as the Quartet - do
their utmost to get the road map back on track,
especially as there is no alternative to the road map.

We now call on Palestinians and Israelis to
commit themselves to the road map in both word and
deed. In this regard, we expect from the Palestinian
Authority that a new, empowered Government will be
quickly formed; that the reorganization of security
forces foreseen in the road map will finally be realized;
and that visible efforts will be undertaken to dismantle
all terrorist organizations.

We remind the Israeli Government that it is solely
responsible for its actions. There can be no military,
but only a political solution to this conflict. We believe
that, without a strategy that includes a political
perspective, Israel will not be able to achieve lasting
security. In our View, the following steps should be
taken by the Israeli Government: first, it should revoke
its decision to expel in principle the Chairman of the
Palestinian National Authority; secondly, it should
withdraw the army from the autonomous areas; thirdly,
an end must be put to targeted killings; and fourthly, it
should freeze all settlement activities and the building
of the security wall.

We again call on both parties to exercise utmost
restraint in this crucial time for the Middle East peace
process. We urge Prime Minister Sharon and
designated Prime Minister Qurei to work together in a
constructive spirit to speedily overcome the crisis and
resume the political dialogue.
We welcome the meeting of the Quartet to be held
later this month here in New York, as announced by
Mr. Roed-Larsen. We expect bold steps conducive to
jump-starting the road map process and to opening an
effective way to a lasting and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East.

