Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Madam, for holding this important meeting and
for your useful briefing as the Chair of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, as well as to congratulate
you on the successful Security Council presidency
of Argentina. Our appreciation also goes to other
briefers - Ms. Kimberley Prost, Ombudsperson of
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, and Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Ukraine fully appreciates the emphasis in the concept
paper (S/2014/725, annex) before us on the Council's
cooperation with the ICC and due process in targeted
sanctions. We welcome the contribution of today's
debate to take forward those important issues.

With that in mind, I would like to touch upon some
other aspects of the Council working methods which,
in our View, are of no less relevance to its effectiveness
and efficiency and, therefore, of equal interest to the
wider United Nations membership.

On the issue of procedure of this body, we welcome
continuation of the Council's own efforts aimed at
streamlining and improving its day-to-day operations.
Among such positive steps in 2014, I would like to
point out the further increase in the number of public
meetings; the active use of the practice of wrap-up
sessions, including the first such public session since
2005 organized by Rwanda; monthly informal briefings
at the end of each presidency; and so on. Other welcome
developments are the notes by the President S/2014/368
of 14 April and S/2014/393 of 5 June, encouraging,
respectively, a more inclusive system of penholders
and consultative and earlier appointment process of the
Chairs of the subsidiary bodies.

Let me recall the long-standing position of
Ukraine on the necessity to give a stronger voice in
the Council decision-making processes to those States
Members of the United Nations directly involved in
implementation of its decisions. First and foremost,
it should apply to the troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries (PCCs). As
an active and dedicated participation in United Nations,
peacekeeping efforts Ukraine also sees the continuous
need to adjust the timing of Council decisions on
extensions of mandates of peace operations so as not to
put the relevant TCCs and PCCs in difficult position in
terms of their domestic legislative procedures. Ukraine
encourages Council members to further maintain
and build on the dynamics in streamlining its modus
operandi in line with Article 30 of the Charter of the
United Nations.

Now let me turn to the more complex issues
underlying the Council procedure and bearing direct
impact on the way it functions. External aggression
against Ukraine made my and many other countries
take a deeper look at the Council working methods.
What became even more crystal clear is the direct
linkage between ensuring effective functioning of the
Council and genuine commitment of each and every
of its members - permanent ones above all - to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

In other words, it is impossible to effectively
address the Council's working methods without first
fixing and then preventing the scenario of one of its
permanent members abusing core United Nations
values, going unpunished for it, and continuing to
occupy a permanent seat in this Chamber as if nothing
had happened. That is why we believe that the idea
that the status of permanent member does not provide
immunity from the obligations under the United
Nations Charter should lie at the heart of any concept of
the Council reform, including in terms of the working
methods. We regard the initiative of France for the
permanent members to renounce their veto powers in
the event of mass atrocities as an important first step
in this direction. We welcome the holding last month
in New York of a ministerial meeting on framing the
veto and express our readiness to contribute to this
discussion.

My delegation believes that the elaboration of a
proposed code of good conduct for permanent members
of the Council should also encompass, besides
mentioned genuine commitment to the core values of
the United Nations, such vital aspect as prevention
of the use of the veto power for aggression. It should
also include revitalization and making operational
provision of the Article 27 of the Charter of the United
Nations stating that a party to a dispute shall abstain
from voting in the Council. In conclusion, I would like
to reiterate Ukraine's unwavering commitment to the
strong, effective, efficient and transparent Security
Council - a commitment that was a cornerstone of our
only tenure to date in this body as an independent State
in 2000-2001.

