Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for the timely initiative and the
opportunity to have a fruitful discussion on the flagship
United Nations activity, namely, its peacekeeping
operations. We also commend the Secretary-General
for continuing the practice of personal briefings to
the Security Council on various critical issues of
international peace and security.

It is common wisdom that these days the world is
an increasingly dangerous place to live in, warranting
more and not less engagement of the United Nations in
the area of peace and security. Ukraine, as an active
troop- and police-contributor and a country where a
foreign-led armed conflict continues to rage, views the
issue of maintaining peace and conflict prevention as
the most important task of the Organization.

Over the years, peace operations have proved to be
an adaptive instrument and contributed to the resolution
of numerous conflicts. A number of United Nations
peacekeeping success stories have contributed to an
increase in demand for United Nations peacekeeping
operations, leading to their significant expansion
in size, geography, budget and resources as well as
in mandates.

Following the report (see S/2015/446) of the
High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
various aspects of peacekeeping operations have been
extensively debated both by the General Assembly and
the Security Council. We fully share the view that lasting
peace is achieved not through military but political
solutions. United Nations peacekeeping operations are
merely one of the tools to achieve adequate conditions
on the ground for advancing a respective peace process.

Peacekeeping operations are a tool, and not a
solution, for conflicts. Yet sustainable de-escalation
and progress in peaceful settlement and peacebuilding,
including holding elections, are not possible without
a robust international security presence capable of
ensuring and monitoring implementation of all security-
related provisions until the legitimate security sector
and law-enforcement institutions are established or
restored. That is why today United Nations peacekeepers
are expected to deliver more. That is why the task of
protecting civilians has evolved into an integral part
of United Nations peacekeeping. Performance in this
area is often decisive for the success and legitimacy of
a peace process.

Therefore, even in situations when political
negotiations are in a stalemate, peacekeeping operations
continue to play an important stabilizing role and
should be provided with adequate technical, human and
financial resources. If a peacekeeping operation loses
the trust ofa local population, the political process has
minimal chances of succeeding. In that regard, we fully
agree with the need to identify the missions that are in
need of structural reform and to thoroughly consider
every mission's mandate and monitor the efficiency
of its implementation, with a focus on the protection
of civilians and achieving a political solution. We
believe that missions should be provided with clear,
coherent, achievable and, at the same time, resilient
mandates sufficient to ensure the security and safety of
civilians, including stopping illegal inflows of weapons
and mercenaries.

Taking into account that the security situation
on the ground in conflict areas can change swiftly
and dramatically, such mandates should include
provisions enabling peacekeeping operations to
use force in circumstances of direct threat to its
personnel or civilians, including terrorist threats. The
Security Council as the one and only United Nations
peacekeeping-operations-mandating body should be up
to this task.

Another crucial aspect is the timely transition
from peacekeeping operations to other forms of United
Nations presence. We have witnessed a success story
in the steady restoration of peace in Cote d'lvoire.
Ukraine is proud to be among those troop-contributing
countries that have actively contributed to this
endeavour by supporting the United Nations operation
in that country. In that regard, one can clearly see how
success is achieved through carefully gauging the
nature and strength of United Nations involvement
against progress in consolidating stability and peace.
We also believe the same approach should be applied to
Liberia, which is already on its way forward, assuming
full responsibility for its security from the United
Nations Mission in Liberia.

Speaking of the right toolbox, United Nations
peacekeeping today is trying to address challenges of
the twenty-first century using tools from the twentieth
century. I would not be divulging a big secret ifI
said that sometimes United Nations peacekeepers are
underequipped and poorly informed, and therefore
may refrain from intervening even in the face of
terrible atrocities.

As the world's technological revolution continues,
the cliche image ofa typical United Nations peacekeeper
remains that of a soldier in a blue helmet with
binoculars. It is high time to transition from traditional
peacekeeping to smart, cost-effective peacekeeping by
introducing modern technology, from data-gathering to
remote observation and non-lethal weapons. That could
be of great help with regard to the protection of civilians
and, indeed, the entire scope ofpeacekeeping mandates.

Many of those issues were reflected in the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446) and the report of the
Expert Panel on Technology and Innovation in United
Nations Peacekeeping in 2015. However, besides the
introduction of unmanned aircraft in two missions
and surveillance balloons in one capital, not much has
been implemented since then. Soldiers with binoculars
remain. It would seem appropriate to request of the
Secretary-General to report on the implementation of
the Panels' recommendations and prepare a study on
the comparative cost effectiveness of digital vis-a-vis
traditional peacekeeping. We are confident that the
United Nations could benefit immensely from a
plethora of technologies to assist peace operations.
Missing such opportunities means missing chances
for peace, as has happened far too often in the past
when the United Nations was ill-equipped to carry out
difficult mandates.

One more issue that we should not overlook is
overreliance on United Nations mission support.
However, in that regard as well, we have to implement
a long-term approach. In some cases, host countries are
becoming dependent upon a United Nations presence,
while in others missions's long-lasting life cycles
might be a sign of their indispensable role as a local
and regional factor in security issues. We share the
vision that our main goal should be to ensure that every
United Nations mission is a success story rather than an
endless process with no light at the end of the tunnel.

Last but not least, over the past decade, the role of
the relevant regional arrangements in promoting peace
and security has only expanded. The engagement of the
Economic Community of West African States in the
Gambian post-electoral crisis is the most recent case
in point. The United Nations should therefore build
and enhance its strategic partnership with regional
organizations by working in concert with them and
using the comparative advantage of each actor in
peacekeeping and conflict management. If there is a
conclusion from the open debate on conflicts in Europe
organized by the Ukrainian presidency in February (see S/PV.7886) from which the Council should benefit, it is
that kind of interaction is more important today than
ever before for cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the European Union and NATO.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
commitment of Ukraine to strengthening United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and accordingly its readiness
to work constructively with all parties involved.

