Mr. Christian (Ghana): Allow me to congratulate
the Austrian delegation on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. Ghana welcomes
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/277),
as well as his statement this morning demonstrating his
commitment to addressing the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and with the
statement to be delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Zambia on behalf of the African
Group.

The timing and theme for today's open debate
could not have been more appropriate, considering that
this year marks the tenth anniversary of the Security
Council's initial consideration of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict as a thematic issue under its
resolution 1265 (1999). In the course of the past
decade, Ghana has remained among the 10 top troop-
contributing countries in peacekeeping, and many
Ghanaians peacekeepers are among those who have
made the ultimate sacrifice. Ghana will continue to
cooperate with other Member States in the
implementation of the relevant resolutions adopted by
the United Nations aimed at enhancing the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. As acknowledged in the
valuable concept paper (see S/2009/567) prepared for
this debate, though some modest progress has been
made, more work remains to be done.

As we speak today, millions of innocent people
are suffering in various theatres of conflict and are
denied humanitarian assistance. Many are deliberately
targeted by armed groups and regular forces, in the
face of the inability or unwillingness of their own
Governments to come to their rescue. Children are
being forcefully recruited as child soldiers or sex
slaves; the raping of women and girls as a weapon of
warfare persists; many victims have no access to food,
water or schools, while others have been compelled to
flee their homes, while humanitarian workers and
peacekeeping personnel are deliberately killed or
injured. Such atrocities are being committed in flagrant
violation of the principles of international humanitarian
and human rights law.

The phenomenon of internally displaced persons,
a category of civilians in need of protection in armed
conflict, is of particular concern in Africa, where
millions of people are at present displaced by violent
conflicts. In order to address the gaps and weaknesses
in the existing international legal framework on the
protection of internally displaced persons, in October
African States adopted in Kampala, Uganda, the
African Union (AU) Convention for the Protection and
Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa
with the purpose and objective "to promote and
strengthen regional and national measures to prevent or
mitigate, prohibit and eliminate the root causes of
internal displacement".

The States parties to the Kampala Convention are
not only obligated to respect the right, which the
African Union Constitutive Act confers on the Union
and its member States, to intervene or request
intervention in circumstances of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes, but they also
undertake to prevent other violations of international
humanitarian law against displaced persons.
Furthermore, States parties to the Kampala Convention
are under a general obligation to ensure the
accountability of individuals and non-State actors for
acts of arbitrary displacement, in accordance with
national and international criminal law. It is hoped that
the Council and other United Nations entities with the
mandate to protect internally displaced persons will
cooperate with African States in advancing the
objectives of the Kampala Convention.

In the long run, the protection of civilians must
begin with a culture of prevention encompassing all the
phases of armed conflict. This should include the
strengthening of early warning mechanisms, immediate
or rapid response in the early stages of a conflict to
avert escalation and establishing mechanisms for post-
conflict peacebuilding in order that countries emerging
from conflict do not experience a relapse. Effective
sanctions regimes must be put in place to ensure that
armed groups and their sponsors do not profit from
natural resources they illegally exploit in conflict
zones. Peacekeepers and humanitarian agencies must
be adequately resourced to fulfil their mandate in order
that they can focus on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and not on their own protection and
survival. Therefore, steps being taken to ensure cost-
effectiveness in peacekeeping must not sacrifice the
effectiveness of peacekeeping, peacebuilding and other
peace operations.

There is the need for the international community
to work closely with regional organizations such as the
African Union to strengthen regional mechanisms
designed to enhance the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, to facilitate prevention of violent
conflicts and intervention in them and to avert post-
conflict relapse. To that end, Ghana would reiterate the
need for the United Nations to heed the request by the
African Union for logistical and material support
towards the implementation of the African Standby
Force arrangement. This will enable the AU to give
practical meaning to the relevant articles of its
founding treaty and the Protocol on the establishment
of the African Peace and Security Council, providing
for the right of the Union and its member States to
intervene in circumstances of genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity.

In closing, Ghana wishes to urge that measures to
ensure the protection of civilians in armed conflict
include the prosecution and punishment of
perpetrators, with a view to deterring attacks on
innocent civilians. Indeed, if we are to succeed in
fighting impunity, then it is imperative to promote
universal participation in the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and to strengthen other
international criminal justice mechanisms, bearing in
mind the link between justice and the maintenance of
international peace and security.

