The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

I thank the High Representative and Ms. Korjenie
for their briefings.

I think we take a different View of the importance
of the Office of the High Representative than the
Russian representative has just set out. We believe that
the Office of the High Representative continues to play
an essential role in Bosnia and Herzegovina; it has the
United Kingdom's full support, including, as other
countries around the table have mentioned, for the use
of the Bonn powers if and when the situation requires.
I think that the reason for that is obvious. Some people,
including some leaders, in Bosnia and Herzegovina
want to do all they can to stop Bosnia and Herzegovina
from being a flourishing, normal State.

Dayton requires Bosnia to be an independent
State with two entities, the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Republika Srpska, but it does not place
the entities above the State. Therefore, as long as there
are leaders in Bosnia who refuse to acknowledge or
who work against that very important statehood aspect
of Bosnia and Herzegovina - which is enshrined in
the Dayton agreements, codified by the Council and
implemented for very many years through the Peace
Implementation Council and its Steering Board - and
as long as that antagonistic approach to Bosnia as a
State continues, the Office of the High Representative
will continue to be necessary, as will the Bonn powers.

I therefore want to put on record the United
Kingdom'svery firm support fortheHighRepresentative
and his team. I also want to thank Ms. Korjenie, of
TRIAL International. We in the United Kingdom
support TRIAL's work to secure justice for survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence, and we pay tribute
to all the work that it does; I will come back to that in
a minute, ifI may.

We join other colleagues in welcoming the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2496 (2019), which
authorizes, for a further 12 months, the European Union
to continue Operation Althea. This demonstrates the
continued commitment of the international community
to Bosnia's security and stability, but, as the French
representative said, it also underscores Bosnia's
European and Euro-Atlantic direction and trajectory.

I want to say in that regard that it is my understanding
that there are certain laws in Bosnia and Herzegovina
that codify this Euro-Atlantic integration, both in
respect of the European Union and in respect of NATO,
and there are certainly resolutions of the Council that
codify it as well. There are also numerous decisions by
the Peace Implementation Council and by its Steering
Board that codify such integration. That desire on the
part of the Bosnian people has never been overturned
in law, so while leaders may argue against that because
they have changed their minds or it does not suit their
political rhetoric, the law of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the corpus of decisions supported and adopted by
the international community are in favour of supporting
Bosnia for as long as it wants to go down the road of
Euro-Atlantic integration. These are battles that need to
be fought democratically, not undemocratically through
polemic and demagoguery.

I wish to recall that nearly 30 years ago, Bosnia
and Herzegovina was the big issue for the Council; our
predecessors adopted many resolutions day after day to
try to stop the fighting and restore stability and peace to
the country. The war lasted for four dreadful years and
changed forever the way in which the United Nations
does peacekeeping. As we heard today, in 1995, during
the war, the massacre in Srebrenica claimed the lives
of 9,000 Muslim men and boys, the worst massacre in
Europe since 1945.

These are not insignificant events for Europe
or for Bosnia and the Balkans. The reason why the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) was set up was to try people for
those crimes. We therefore very much agree with
Ms. Korjenie that people should not be trying to
undermine what the ICTY discovered. The ICTY was a
legitimate Tribunal, established by the Council, and its
judgments still stand.

I am running out of time, so I will simply say
that on reconciliation, I endorse what the German and
Indonesian representatives said; that is a very important
part of what is happening. I also want to stress the
vital importance of the rule of law for all Bosnia and
Herzegovina citizens.

Ms. Korj enic' exhorted us not to despair. I do not give
up on Bosnia. I have worked on the issue ofthe Balkans
since 1991. We are not going to despair, because if we
despair of Bosnia, it fundamentally means that the bad
guys have won, and we are not going to let that happen.
So the United Kingdom and Euro-Atlantic institutions
can be relied on to continue to help Bosnia as long as all
of Bosnia's citizens want such help.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I am going to invite the High Representative and
then Ms. Korjenic' to respond to any points they have
heard from Council members. A number of questions
were asked, and then, if the rule 37 or rule 39 speakers
will forgive me, we will come to them in a few moments.

I give the floor to Mr. Inzko.

