Mr. Lacroix: It is my pleasure to open this
Security Council meeting on the occasion of the Head
of Military Components Conference here in New York.
I will be brief, as the purpose of today's meeting is
for the Council to hear from the Force Commanders
about their experiences in implementing the mandates
negotiated and adopted by the Council.

This gathering of the Force Commanders of our
peacekeeping operations has become a yearly occasion,
and it is a very important moment for peacekeeping.
It directly contributes to our efforts to implement
the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. They will hold sessions on many topics of
critical importance to advance the initiative, from
performance to the protection of civilians, from
conduct and discipline to women in peacekeeping,
to name just a few. This week also provides them
with an opportunity to remain closely attuned to the
major discussions happening here in New York on
peacekeeping - in the Security Council, the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the Fifth
Committee and other forums - and, ultimately, to our
common efforts to enhance the impact of peacekeeping
in the field.

I would also like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to Major General Francis Vib Sanziri, Head of
Mission and Force Commander of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF), who passed
away suddenly on 19 April. Through his distinguished
leadership, Major General Vib Sanziri led UNDOF in a
complex and challenging period. His passing away was
a tragic loss for his colleagues and fellow peacekeepers
in UNDOF, and for the whole United Nations family.
I want to thank the Council and all the Member States
that have expressed their solidarity and support in these
difficult times.

And through the Heads of military components, I
want to recognize the work accomplished every day in
very challenging situations by all the women and men
serving under the United Nations flag, for the cause
of peace.

The topic that the Security Council has chosen for
today's discussions, cooperation with host States, is key
for the effectiveness of peace operations. I trust that
this meeting will be most informative and beneficial for
all of us. The Council will shortly hear from the Force
Commander of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, Lieutenant General
Leonard Ngondi; and the Force Commander of the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, Major
General Cheryl Pearce, whose experience, I am certain,
will be most useful to the Council in its work.

