Mr. Lunde (Norway): Norway welcomes the initiative
of Bangladesh in organizing an open debate in the Security
Council on the subject of humanitarian action. This debate
will no doubt serve as a very useful continuation of the
thematic deliberations in the Council on the humanitarian
implications of conflicts.

Humanitarian action will not prevent the recurrence of
mass suffering and cannot be a substitute for political
action. The best remedy to curb the occurrence of conflict
and violence will always be prevention. Norway therefore
fully supports the Security Council's renewed emphasis on
preventive measures. We expect this to increase capability
to prevent violence against civilians and humanitarian
personnel. What the Secretary-General has referred to as a
"culture of prevention" must be instilled.

The Security Council should therefore carefully and
consistently consider measures such as preventive
deployment or other forms of United Nations presence on
the ground. We urge the Secretary-General to make full use
of Article 99 of the Charter, whereby he can bring to the
attention of the Security Council any matter he deems may
threaten the maintenance of international peace and
security. This requires the establishment of mechanisms for
early warning to provide time and opportunity for effective
preventive diplomacy and pre-emptive conflict mediation.
A regional perspective should constitute an integral part of
such efforts.

Internal war typically evolves from a wide or growing
gap in political participation and distribution of economic
assets. Therefore, building formats of governance that
promote tolerance and assure negotiation and compromise
are the best tools we have to prevent violence from
recurring in fragile societies that are in transition from
civil strife to peace. While meeting humanitarian needs,
we must also aim to deal with the underlying causes of
poverty and inequity. This requires us to view our
humanitarian involvement in relation to our other efforts
for peace, human rights, democracy and development. It
implies strengthening systems of governance that are
transparent and accountable and that encourage
participation by an active civil society.

Gross violations of human rights, grave breaches of
international humanitarian law, crimes against humanity
and acts of genocide can threaten international peace and
security and necessitate the attention and action of the
Security Council. Awareness of the vital interplay
between the international protection of human rights and
measures to maintain or restore international peace and
security is gaining ground. The Security Council should
be prepared to contribute to ending violence against
civilians and humanitarian personnel by appropriate
enforcement action. This is already manifest in the
response of the Security Council to the conflicts in the
former Yugoslavia, Somalia, Rwanda and East Timor; the
Council has invoked Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter to react to such situations. The threat or use of
force in international relations must have a legal basis in
the Charter of the United Nations. A difficult
humanitarian situation may be part of the Security
Council's assessment of whether a situation is a threat to
international peace and security. It is not, however, in
itself a sufficient legal basis for the threat or use of force.

The United Nations should develop a united
approach to violations of human rights and humanitarian
crises. This will enable it to meet the immediate human
concerns, to promote the overall credibility of the
Organization and to deter possible future perpetrators
from premeditated action or indifference. A common
international understanding or norm would allow the
United Nations to respond to human rights abuses and
humanitarian crises in a timely and appropriate manner.

By responding with the apposite means and ensuring
judicial follow-up to crimes against humanity, genocide
and violations of international humanitarian law, the
United Nations can provide deterrence against wayward
action and enhance protection of civilians, relief workers
and military personnel. We must ensure that war crimes
and crimes against humanity are prosecuted. The adoption
of the Statute of the International Criminal Court in Rome
in the summer of 1998 was a major achievement. Now,
our efforts must be focused on seeking the speedy entry

 

into force and implementation of that document. Norway
also hopes for the broadest possible acceptance of this new
institution by individual States.

Protection of civilians is a national obligation. States
therefore have a common responsibility to revitalize a
universal commitment to the principles of international
humanitarian law. The Security Council should take all
appropriate measures to ensure safe and unimpeded access
to those in need and to safeguard all personnel involved in
humanitarian assistance. The recommendations made by the
Secretary-General in his report on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/1999/957) should be considered by the
Security Council at the earliest possible juncture.

The uncontrolled, illicit spread of deadly tools of war,
such as small arms and anti-personnel mines, fuels the
horror of conflict. The prevailing effect seems to be the
brutalization of the community at large. The Security
Council should consider appropriate ways to curb the illicit
spread of small arms. International cooperation between the
many international, governmental and non-governmental
organizations involved in humanitarian action is important,
and has significant scope for improvement. A universal
organization such as the United Nations carries a special
responsibility in this regard. Improved cooperation is also
paramount in building a systematic relationship between
humanitarian action and longer-term development assistance
and effective and democratic peace- building. There must
be coherence in international humanitarian action,
peace-building and long-term development efforts.

International sanctions are highly complex and riddled
with dilemmas. The Security Council should continue its
search for more effective sanctions through improved
targeting on a case-by-case basis, while seeking to
minimize the humanitarian impact of sanctions. Targeted
sanctions should also be applied as a component of an
overall comprehensive strategy for conflict resolution.

