Mr. Khan: I would like to begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for having organized today's meeting. I
would also like to express my gratitude for the excellent
leadership shown by the Arab Republic of Egypt of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. I am sincerely grateful
also to Assistant Secretary-General Jean-Paul Laborde,
who has just left the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), for his very effective
stewardship of CTED, with which the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism enjoys an excellent
relationship. We look forward to working closely with
his successor.

As this marks the first occasion on which the Office
is briefing the Security Council since it was established
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 71/291, allow
me to thank all 15 members of the Council for their
strong support for this very first United Nations reform
initiative instituted by the Secretary-General. As the
Council is aware, the Secretary-General has appointed
a highly experienced and very distinguished diplomat,
His Excellency Ambassador Vladimir Voronkov, as
the Under-Secretary-General-designate of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, and we look
forward to working under his leadership. Two weeks
ago Under-Secretary-General Voronkov met with the
President of the Security Council and agreed to work
closely on countering terrorism.

In proposing the establishment of the Office, the
Secretary-General expects that we should strengthen
our coordination efforts, in particular by promoting
the "All-of-UN" approach to countering terrorism.
The Security Council-mandated bodies, specifically
the CTED; the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team concerning the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant/Al-Qaida; and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) Expert Group will need to play a key role if
we are to be successful in supporting Member States
in implementing the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy in a balanced manner.

The spectre of terrorists acquiring lethal
technologies and new weapons, including weapons of
mass destruction, poses a serious threat to international
peace and security. For that reason, we welcome the
consideration of today's draft resolution (S/20l7/659) on
preventing terrorists from acquiring weapons, and we
wish to congratulate the President for putting forward
that initiative. It goes to the heart of the Secretary-
General's efforts to make prevention the core mission
of the United Nations.

If we are to survey the threat, according to
recent assessments made by Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) entities, the Office
for Disarmament Affairs (ODA) and the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team concerning
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Al-Qaida,
the illicit manufacture and uncontrolled flow of arms,
including their parts and ammunition, contribute
significantly to terrorism and armed violence. The
diversion of weapons from Government stockpiles,
either through theft, pilferage or capture of depots,
constitutes an important source of supply of weapons
to terrorist groups and other non-State actors.

In addition, terrorist organizations and foreign
terrorist fighters rely on legal and illegal supply chains
to procure parts, including for improvised explosive
devices (IEDs). The illicit online trade in weapons
through the use of the dark Web on the internet is
particularly worrisome. Over the years, terrorists
have also improved their capabilities to design and
manufacture IEDs out of commercially available
dual-use components. Our focus, therefore, must not
only be on preventing the illicit trade in arms, but
also on ensuring that terrorist organizations cannot
acquire essential components through legal or illegal
commercial channels.

While the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) has experienced challenges in acquiring high-
quality equipment for weaponry because of sustained
military pressure and shrinking income sources, they
maintain some in-house ability to manufacture rocket
launchers and IEDs on a very large scale. ISIL is also
using commercially available drones in a variety of
ways, from filming propaganda videos to observing
targets to drop small-scale ammunitions.

In terms of the United Nations response, a number
of United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force entities - including, as we have just heard
from Under-Secretary-General Yury Fedotov, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
the Counter-Terrosirm Executive Directorate, ODA and
INTERPOL, all of which are members of CTITF - are
implementing valuable programmes to address that
threat. As we also heard from Under-Secretary-General
Fedotov, UNODC is working to address illicit arms
trafficking, the association between terrorism and
different forms of organized crime and the need to
strengthen cross-border cooperation, and soon my
colleague from INTERPOL and CTED will address
members of the Council in regard to that same issue.

Other United Nations entities are also working in
that field. For example, in the Central African Republic,
Cote d'lvoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mali and Somalia the United Nations Mine Action
Service works in partnership with national authorities
to provide training and equipment to mark, register
and store weapons; build or refurbish armouries; and
help clear and destroy explosive remnants of war,
including IEDs. That prevents the potential recovery
and reuse of those weapons by terrorists groups. The
two constituent bodies of the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism - the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force Office and the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre - also help address
that threat through the 12 inter-agency working groups
and targeted capacity-building support of CTITF.

I would like to mention three specific areas through
which the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorim is
making a contribution.

First, effective border control, especially of large,
unmonitored spaces, is critical to preventing the flow
of arms to terrorist groups. To help law enforcement
and border control agencies prioritize, institute and
implement effective measures, the CTITF Working
Group on Border Management and Law Enforcement
related to Counter-Terrorism spearheads a number
of capacity-building projects, including the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre's Border Security
Initiative, which was implemented with the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum.

That project, which developed a number of best
practices, will contribute in its next phase to stronger
border controls through capacity-building exercises
aimed at reducing the risk of arms trafficking across
borders in the Sahel region and the Horn of Africa.
The United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism has
also launched its Integrated Assistance for Counter-
Terrorism (I-ACT) initiative in key regions and countries
where the flow of arms represents a key challenge. The
I-ACT for the Group of Five for the Sahel (G5 Sahel),
as mandated by Security Council presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/24, and the Mali and Nigeria I-ACTS are
based on a mapping of capacity-building needs and,
subsequently, the delivery of tailored capacity-building
assistance against the four pillars of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In the case of the
I-ACT for the G5 Sahel, which includes Mali, border
management and the prevention of trafficking of arms
will be a key component.

Secondly, in the context of addressing the foreign
terrorist fighters threat, United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Centre and the Office of Disarmament
Affairs are implementing a project, co-funded by
Switzerland, which is aimed at helping States in the
Lake Chad basin region address the illicit proliferation
and diversion of small arms, light weapons and
ammunition to non-State armed groups, including
terrorist groups. Additional trainings through the
Office for Disarmament Affairs would help national
authorities develop capacities to identify and interdict
arms flows to foreign terrorist fighters.

The United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre-ODA project that I just mentioned is part of
the Security Council-mandated capacity-building
implementation plan for countering the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters that the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force has developed. Taking an
"All-of-UN" approach, the Office of Counter-Terrorism
has developed the Plan, which currently includes 50
mutually reinforcing capacity-building projects that
address the entire life cycle of the foreign terrorist
fighters, including radicalizing, travelling, financing,
returning, disarming, prosecuting, rehabilitating and
reintegrating. The 13 United Nations CTITF agencies
participate in the plan, and the total of the project
budget is $107 million over five years. Contributions
and pledges currently add up to $44 million, or 41 per
cent of the total, and we encourage more Member States
to contribute to that Plan.

Thirdly, the CTITF is active on addressing the
threat of terrorists acquiring and using weapons of
mass destruction. The recent use of chemical weapons
by terrorist groups in certain regions shows that such
threat is not simply theoretical. The implementation of
the obligations under resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325
(2016) are vital to preventing non-State actors from
acquiring and using nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons. An effective response to a weapons of mass
destruction attack is also crucial.

Through the specialized CTITF Working Group,
United Nations agencies and international organizations
are working to improve their coordination mechanisms
in emergency response to a chemical or biological
weapons attack. That project has completed an analysis
of existing United Nations coordination mechanisms
and made recommendations for improvement, and also
organized a simulation exercise that brought together
16 United Nations agencies to test their coordination
in a hypothetical weapons of mass destruction terrorist
attack situation.

To conclude, General Assembly resolution 70/291,
adopted at the fifth review of the United Nations Global
Counter- Terrorism Strategy, notes that member States
should work together to:
"eliminate the supply of weapons, including small
arms and light weapons, to terrorists, as well as
to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade
in said weapons, including their diversion, to
terrorists" (resolution 70/29], para. 61).

The existing international legal framework against the
flow of weapons to terrorists provides clear guidelines
for all States in that regard.

Today's draft resolution is another step in the right
direction. We at the United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism through the Inter-Agency Working Groups of
CTITF and United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre's
capacity-building assistance, will actively support
its implementation, working closely with member
States and all relevant CTITF entities. As called for
by the Secretary-General in his report (A/71/858),
we are committed to stepping up our United Nations
assistance to member States, and forging a new agenda
for multi-lateral cooperation, including in countering
the flow of weapons to terrorists.

