Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, allow me at the outset to
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the month of July. We are confident that
your wisdom and skills will lead us to the desired
success. I also wish to thank the Permanent
Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic for
successfully conducting the duties of the presidency
last month.

Yesterday at midnight, while people were going
to bed, Sharon gave his orders to drop a one-ton bomb
on a residential building, killing 15, including 9
children, and injuring about 170. Sharon prided himself
on this ugly action, saying that it is one of his most
important successes. What happened in Gaza is by all
standards a flagrant violation of international laws, a
war crime and State terrorism.

This comes at a time when the Israeli occupation
forces claimed that they do not target civilians and a
few hours after news stated that the Palestinian
Authority presented the Israeli authorities with a plan
for a ceasefire between the two parties, on condition
that Israel stops killing Palestinian activists. This also
occurs at a delicate time when intensive international
and Arab efforts are being deployed to defuse the
situation in order to resume the peace process. It is thus
clear that Israel in reality seeks violence and the
exacerbation of the situation and seeks to erode any
attempt to realize permanent and comprehensive peace
that would lead to the establishment of the Palestinian
State.

The condemnation of this flagrant Israeli
aggression is not enough, especially since Israeli
practices are continuing, practices that target civilians,
extrajudicial assassinations, expulsions of families and
the destruction of homes. This means continuation of
violence and instability in the region. It may thus usher
dire consequences into the whole area. These actions
require the Security Council to act promptly and
decisively, as it must assume its full responsibilities for
providing international protection for the Palestinian
people suffering under the occupation.

The Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States calls attention to the fact that this last Israeli
aggression presents a real defiance of the efforts of the
"quartet", which tries to bring the region back to the
political course, and of the Arab efforts to restore peace
in the region. No one, afterward, will have the right to
ask about the reasons for the continuing violence in the
area, or why the international and Arab efforts are not
succeeding in ushering peace to the region.

There is no doubt that the Israeli military actions
in the Palestinian occupied territories have reached a
stage that reflects a dangerous deterioration in the
prospects for peace in the region, an acceptance of the
de facto situation whereby Israel tries to impose its
own policy without paying any attention to the
attempts of the international community to defuse the
tension. This represents a flagrant violation of the
international will, represented in this Council, and a
threat to international peace and security.

The international community is unanimous on the
need for reaching a peace based on comprehensive
justice and on the resolutions of the United Nations, in
addition to the principle of land for peace which took
root in Madrid. Furthermore, it has given its support to
the Arab initiative, which was reflected in the last Arab
Summit in Beirut. This initiative states that the Arabs
are ready to establish normal relations with Israel if
Israel withdraws from the Arab land occupied in 1967.
The initiative also calls for the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. Nonetheless, Israel rejected this initiative,
emphasizing its intention to go against the wishes of
the countries of the region.

The Security Council is requested today to
address send a clear message to Israel, stating that the
policies of aggression, which it is pursuing through
violence, do not achieve peace or security in the
region. Furthermore, the withdrawal from the occupied
Palestinian territories and the return to the borders of
4 June 1967 are the beginning of the road to peace and
security.

The Security Council is also requested to take the
necessary measures that would assure the Palestinians
that they are not alone in facing the brutal Israeli
occupation. The League of Arab States emphasizes that
peace is its strategic choice, and that it remains
committed to cooperate with this Organization, led by
the honourable Security Council, in order to achieve
the peace which all the Arabs believe in and which is
an international goal for all people, so that it is
achieved with justice in the Middle East.

