The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Croatia in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Simonovie
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium, document S/ 1997/ 148.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1997/188, which contains the
text of a letter dated 4 March 1997 from the Charge
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
Yugoslavia to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report

of the Secretary-General of 24 February 1997

(S/l997/148) on the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium (UNTAES) and recent
developments in that region. It recalls the statement
by its President of 31 January 1997 (S/PRST/1997/4)
and reiterates its call on the parties to cooperate
fully with UNTAES and the Transitional
Administrator.

"The Security Council shares the observation
contained in the report of the Secretary-General that,
with the full cooperation of the parties, 13 April
1997 is a realistic and achievable date for the
holding of free and fair elections in the region.

"The Security Council underlines that it is in
the best interests of the members of the Serb
community to collect their citizenship documents, to
participate fully in those elections, and to take part
in Croatian political life as equal citizens on the
basis of the implementation of the rights and
guarantees contained in the letter of 13 January 1997
from the Government of Croatia (S/1997/27, annex).
The Council deplores disruptive activities by some
elements of the Serb community in the region
creating an atmosphere of political agitation and
uncertainty. It calls upon all residents of the region
to follow wise leadership, to stay in the region, and
to take up their future as citizens of the Republic of
Croatia.

"The Security Council stresses that the holding
of the elections will also depend on the readiness of
the Government of Croatia to meet all preconditions,
including the issuance of documents, provision of
data and timely completion of the technical
arrangements required for certification. The Council
acknowledges the encouraging progress the
Government of Croatia is making in this respect. It
is, however, concerned that implementation of these
procedures has been uneven. The Council urges the
Government of Croatia to redouble its efforts to
ensure the completion of the necessary technical
preparations for the holding of elections.

"The Security Council strongly urges the
Croatian Government to issue, as a gesture towards
reassuring the Serb community, formal public
confirmation of the oral guarantees made to
UNTAES as specified by the Secretary-General in
his letter of 21 January 1997 (S/1997/62) and to
reaffirm its obligations as referred to in paragraphs
28 and 29 of the report of the Secretary-General. It
 

also calls upon the Government of Croatia to apply its
amnesty law fairly and consistently to all persons
subject to its jurisdiction. The Council stresses that, to
a large measure, the long-term success of peaceful
reintegration will be determined by the commitment of
the Government of Croatia to reconciliation and to
ensuring that those Serbs who are currently resident in
the region will enjoy equal rights as Croatian citizens.

"The Security Council shares the serious concern,
as stated in the report of the Secretary-General, that
no progress has been made concerning the future of
displaced persons in the region and the establishment
of equal treatment with respect to housing, access to
reconstruction grants and loans and property
compensation, in accordance with the Basic
Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja
and Western Sirmium (S/1995/951) and Croatian law.
The Council reaffirms the right of all refugees and
displaced persons to return to their homes of origin
throughout the Republic of Croatia and to live there in
conditions of security. It welcomes the proposal
elaborated by UNTAES and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) concerning the
return of displaced persons and urges the Government
of Croatia to pursue discussions on that proposal
without delay, to cooperate closely with UNTAES and
UNHCR in implementation, and to make a clear and
unambiguous public statement and undertake concrete
actions confirming the equal rights of all displaced
persons regardless of their ethnicity.

"The Security Council welcomes the
commitment by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and the Republic of Croatia to make progress in
their bilateral relations, in particular with respect to
the permanent demilitarization of the border region
and the abolition of the visa regime, which would
constitute a major contribution to local confidence-
building and the stabilization of the region.

"The Security Council recalls its resolution
1079 (1996) of 15 November 1996 and expresses its
intention to consider recommendations, to be
submitted by the Secretary-General as soon as
possible after the successful holding of elections,
concerning the further United Nations presence
consistent with the fulfilment of the Basic
Agreement.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to keep it regularly informed of the
situation. It will remain actively seized of the
matter."
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/ 10.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.30 pm.

