Ms. Nakamitsu: Mr. President, I thank you very
much for having convened this important open debate
today.

The possibility of non-State actors, including
terrorists, acquiring weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) remains a significant threat to global security,
and the international community must step up its
efforts to ensure that the disastrous scenario of WMD
terrorism is avoided.

Since its adoption in 2004, resolution 1540
(2004) has played and continues to play a vital role
in international efforts to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and its delivery systems
to non-State actors. Substantial progress has been
made over the past years by Member States in their
efforts to minimize proliferation risks; however, we are
increasingly witnessing new and even more complicated
threats in this area.

In my very brief remarks today, let me highlight
three key issues in our joint efforts to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors.

First, we need to closely examine the emerging
nexus between rapidly advancing technologies and
weapons of mass destruction in the globalized and
connected world, and identify actions to grapple with
its impact on non-proliferation. While globalization
obviously brings new opportunities for economic
growth and development around the world, it also
facilitates the rapid movement ofmaterials, technologies
and the latest discoveries in science and technology, as
well as of personnel with relevant expertise to use and
potentially exploit them with malicious intent.

These risks are ever-changing. Terrorist groups
evolve and spread their destructive ideologies in
cyberspace, and illicit networks develop new tactics.
Technology once perceived as the domain of military
experts is now freely available to broader audiences.
Non-State actors, including terrorist organizations,
will exploit any loophole to obtain these technologies.
While there are still significant technical hurdles that
terrorist groups need to overcome to effectively use
weapons of mass destruction, a growing number of
emerging technologies could make that barrier easier
to cross.

Several new areas of concern have emerged, such
as the use of unmanned aerial vehicles, 3D printers
and the exploitation of the so-called dark web. The
global reach and anonymity of dark web provides
non-State actors with new marketplaces to acquire
dual-use equipment and materials. Dual use is further
complicating our efforts to address the risks posed by
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. We
must keep in mind that many of the technologies, goods
and raw materials required for developing weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery derive
from legitimate commercial applications that benefit
many people. Striking the right balance between
commercial opportunity, on the one hand, and our
collective security and the need to prevent proliferation,
on the other, is important.

This brings me to my second point, which is the
importance of international cooperation and the need
for continuous and enhanced dialogue with industry as
well. The emergence of countless suppliers, along with
developments in international trade and sophisticated
procurement networks, make concealment easier,
allowing illicit trafficking networks to circumvent
national and international controls. This means that
better international cooperation is essential if we
are to prevent terrorist access and use of weapons of
mass destruction. In the worst-case scenarios where
these weapons are used, seeking accountability will
be critical. The international community must uphold
the norms that have been established in this area
and prosecute those responsible for committing or
supporting such acts.

My third point relates to the importance of
national capacities in our joint endeavour to prevent
proliferation. Recent terrorist attacks have revealed
shortcomings in interactions among security agencies,
even in countries whose policies are otherwise deeply
integrated. Coordination and information-sharing will
be vital to overcoming these shortcomings. All Member
States should further strengthen export controls, work
to prevent any financing of the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, and ensure the security of sensitive
goods and materials.

It is clear that, despite the undeniable success of the
past 13 years, we must remain vigilant. Much remains
to be done. The United Nations is obviously fully
committed to working with Member States in this area.
I strongly encourage the Council to use today's debate
to be proactive and devise effective solutions to ensure
the full and universal implementation of Member States
disarmament and non-proliferation commitments.

