Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): We are
especially pleased that today's session is in an open
forum, and commend you, Mr. President, for the
initiative, which demonstrates the commitment not only
of the Security Council, but also of the broader
international community, to assist the people of Sierra
Leone to achieve the peace that they so richly deserve.

The United Nations has taken a number of important
steps to assist in the peace process in Sierra Leone. We
appreciate Under-Secretary-General Miyet's briefing on
those efforts this morning and commend the endeavours
of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone to
consolidate the peace process on the ground. The recent
deployment of the Kenyan and Indian troops is most
welcome.

We also welcome the appointment by the Secretary-
General of Ambassador Adeniji as the new Special
Representative. We worked closely with him in the
Central African Republic and are confident he will do an
excellent job in Sierra Leone and continue the very able
efforts of his predecessor, Francis Okelo.

The role of the United Nations in monitoring the
ceasefire and assisting in the implementation of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme
is crucial to the success of the peace process, so we are
pleased that things are under way in Sierra Leone.

It is also important to finalize the arrangements to
"re-hat" up to four battalions of Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) troops mostly from Ghana and Nigeria, who
will be a key element in the United Nations force. It is
also important to commend the very courageous and able
efforts of the ECOMOG troops in what is one of the most
 

difficult areas of the world. They have performed ably in
extremely difficult circumstances. Overall, one must say
that the United Nations is doing its part, but it is important
to remember that United Nations troops cannot impose
peace in Sierra Leone or, for that matter, anywhere else. It
is up to the parties to uphold the peace process by
complying with the terms of the Lome Agreement.

Some progress has been made on that. Certainly the
formation of the Government of National Unity, including
the Revolutionary United Front of Sierra Leone (RUF) and
the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council (AFRC)
representatives, announced on 20 October, is an important
and crucial step forward in that process. There has been
some progress on the disarmament programme, albeit with
a very slow start and difficulties regarding the participation
of the RUF. But I think the programme is finally producing
some positive results in showing the all-important progress
on the ground which will help consolidate the progress.

It is crucial that the international community
underscore the need for all ex-combatants to uphold their
commitments under the Lome Agreement and to disarm as
soon as possible. That certainly involves the leadership of
the combatants, and the role of Mr. Foday Sankoh will be
crucial.

We hope that all leaders in the region will maintain
pressure on Sierra Leone's factional leaders. Certainly some
neighbours have direct responsibility in trying to push
things forward, to move swiftly to disarm and demobilize
as quickly as possible. The annual ECOWAS summit
provides an opportunity for the leaders in the region to
underscore that message.

It is important for all parties to cease hostilities and
guarantee safe, free and unhindered access to the United
Nations and international personnel in all parts of Sierra
Leone. The report of the abduction of several doctors from
Medecins sans Frontieres this morning is deeply troubling.
We join in the international community's call for their
immediate release as well as the release of all abductees
who are being held captive.

We think it is important for all States in the region to
support reintegration and to provide humanitarian
development assistance. The international community has
a crucial role to play in consolidating the peace process.

Finally, I should like to reiterate that we - the United
States and, more broadly, the international community -
stand ready to help the people of Sierra Leone rebuild their
shattered lives. But it is important to remember that this
cannot be possible without the strong commitment of all
parties to the peace process. It is their responsibility to
live up to their commitments, which we can help them
do, but which ultimately they must do themselves.

