The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States.
We appreciate the report of Prosecutor Moreno-
Ocampo. The violence in Darfur must end, and those
who have committed atrocities, genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity in Darfur must be held
accountable and be brought to justice. With that in
mind, I would like to make three points.

First, we share the Prosecutor's assessment that
the situation in Darfur remains alarming and that
accountability for past and present crimes against the
people of Darfur is needed to enhance security and to
send a warning to individuals who might resort to
brutality as a way of achieving their aims.

Secondly, we also share the concern about the
continuation of attacks, not only on displaced persons
and other innocent civilians, but also on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
United Nations personnel and international aid and
relief workers. Violence and criminality against those
who came to help the suffering people of Darfur is
barbaric and intolerable. Impunity for such acts, as the
Prosecutor's report notes, is an element in feeding the
climate of violence, and it must end.

Thirdly, the United States continues to be deeply
committed to peace, stability and the provision of
humanitarian aid for the people of Sudan. Since the
start of the Darfur crisis, the United States has
provided more than $4 billion in humanitarian and
peacekeeping assistance to Sudan, including more than
$400 million to build 34 base camps for peacekeepers
in Darfur and $100 million to train and equip African
peacekeepers in Darfur.

The United States strongly believes that those
responsible for the acts of genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed in Darfur must be
held accountable and be brought to justice. We look
forward to continuing to work with other members of
the Council on necessary steps, including working with
Costa Rica on a draft presidential statement to achieve
that important objective.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.10 pm.
