Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I would like to thank you, Sir, for
convening this open meeting and Assistant Secretary-
General Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing on the
situation in the Middle East.

Over the past six months, the Middle East peace
process has had its ups and downs. Early in the year,
the conflict in Gaza claimed the lives of hundreds of
civilians and caused serious loss of property, making
the original situation more tense and fragile. The
Council adopted resolution 1860 (2009) which led to
an end to hostilities between Israel and Palestine and
created conditions for relaunching the peace process.
However, it is disturbing that the resolution has not
been fully and effectively implemented. The
humanitarian situation in Gaza remains serious and
reconstruction has been slow.

China calls upon all parties concerned to fully
and conscientiously implement resolution 1860 (2009)
and to avoid taking any action that could reignite
tension. China calls on Israel to open all the crossing
points into Gaza and to ensure that reconstruction can
proceed smoothly. The international community should
honour its pledges as soon as possible in order to help
the people of Gaza normalize their lives.

The situation in the other occupied Palestinian
territories is also a source of concern. The situation of
the Palestinian people in the West Bank remains tense
and they cannot enjoy a life of dignity. China expresses
its deep concern and urges Israel to respond
conscientiously to the appeal of the international
community to halt construction of the separation wall
and the settlements.

In the current situation, political negotiation
remains the only viable path towards the achievement
of lasting peace in the Middle East. China believes that
irreversible peace can be achieved only through a
negotiated agreement by all parties. We hope that all
parties will commit themselves to dialogue with the
goal of achieving the comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East that it is in their own interest
and in the interest of regional peace and stability in the
Middle East. We call on all parties to avoid any action
that could exacerbate tensions in the Middle East.

Reconciliation between Palestinians is essential
to safeguarding the interests of the Palestinian people
and to ensuring the resumption of the Middle East
peace process. China appreciates Egypt's efforts to that
end and hopes that the Palestinian parties will set store
by their long-term national interests, resolve their
differences through dialogue, achieve reconciliation
and establish a Government of national unity.

Resolving the issue of Israel and Palestine is the
only way to achieve the peaceful coexistence of the
two States of Palestine and Israel. China supports the
implementation of the two-State solution based on the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the principle of land for peace. That will
require not only the efforts of the parties concerned,
but also the help and support of the international
community. All parties must try their best to encourage
Palestine and Israel to address their challenges
positively and to persevere in their efforts to achieve
the objective of the two States of Palestine and Israel
with the Arab people and Jewish people living in
peace.

Other issues in the Middle East are also important
components of the Middle East peace process. China is
pleased to see that the political and security situation in
Lebanon has improved somewhat and that legislative
elections have been carried out. China hopes that
Lebanon can form a new Government as soon as
possible. We respect the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon and express our concern
about the multiple security incidents that have taken
place recently in southern Lebanon. We call on all
parties concerned to fully implement resolution 1701
(2006) and encourage them to create conditions for the
resumption of negotiations between Syria and Israel.

China has always been committed to the
promotion of the Middle East peace process and
welcomes all initiatives conducive to that end. We
support Russia's initiatives to convene an international
conference on the Middle East in Moscow within the
year. China encourages the Quartet and the Arab
countries to play an important role in persuading the
parties concerned to resume serious and direct
negotiations as soon as possible.

It is China's hope that the Security Council will
address the question of the Middle East more actively.
We are ready to join with the wider international
community in pursuing the unremitting efforts to
achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.

