Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I want to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for all the initiatives that
Equatorial Guinea has taken during its presidency of the
Security Council. I do not want to miss this opportunity
to emphasize the role that your country has played since
its tenure as a member of the Council began. It should
make all Africans very proud. I would also like to thank
you for the work that you have been doing that, proof
of which we saw this morning with the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2457 (2019). Needless to say,
I am also grateful to Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, High
Representative of the African Union for Silencing the
Guns, for his informative briefing and shrewd insights.
My thanks also go to Mr. Vasu Gounden for his valuable
input and work.

We should never forget the simple baseline
proposition that our job, our raison de vivre, in the
Security Council and beyond is to preserve and promote
peace and ensure it is durable and sustainable, but also,
now that awareness is sufficiently high, to prevent
conflicts from occurring. Peace is not an abstract
notion, and its meaning is as simple and as difficult as it
appears - no more deaths, no more suffering or trials
for the people. It demands that we work intensively
and stubbornly together with the tools, methods and
mechanisms that the Charter of the United Nations
and regional organizations such as the African Union
have defined. When they declared 2020 the year for
silencing the guns, the leaders of the African Union
leaders, while having no doubts as to the realities and
possibilities, were well aware of the powerful symbolic
nature of such a target. The message is clear and strong.
Africa wants to take its peace and security challenges
seriously and autonomously, with the uplifting goal
of ensuring that all the ills currently plaguing the
continent will not be bequeathed to the next generation.

Silencing the guns has several meanings and
requirements. First, Africa is doing its long-sought
homework by reshuff ling its overall thinking, resources
and mechanisms. I want to remind the Council that
the starting blocks are the African Peace and Security
Architecture, through which Africa has unleashed new
ideas and new modes of action that are fit for purpose
in every case of conflict in the continent.

Secondly, Africa is regrouping its forces with the
aim of thinking and acting jointly at the regional and
subregional levels in order to confront and deal with its
dire realities. Here I would like to highlight the example
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
whose mandate, nature and significance are to be
commended. By comparison with the many unfulfilled
endeavours of the past, AMISOM. is moving forward in
the face of extraordinary adversities.

Thirdly, silencing the guns is definitely not meant to
eliminate arms, whether they are small or not so small,
but to make sure that all ordnance becomes redundant as
soon as possible. But that will obviously not suffice and
clearly highlights the necessity of tackling root causes.
Africa is not thriving, and the Sisyphean task ahead of
reaching a stage where the guns are silenced means that
we must look at social conditions, governance and the
welfare of our peoples. That does not depend solely on
Africans. Silencing the guns goes beyond this and calls
for the commitment of the international community,
for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the African Union Agenda 2063 and their corollaries.
We need financing for development, disaster risk
management and prevention through the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda.

Fourthly, we must look at the areas of the global
context that are having a direct effect on Africa. Climate
change is one example, and I should remind the Council,
by the way, that Africa has the least responsibility for
the human-induced effects on the climate and yet is
most affected by them. The undue exploitation of its
natural resources and the forced migrations within or
out of the continent, coupled with transnational crime,
terrorism, arms smuggling and money-laundering mean
that the causes and consequences overlap one another
and continue to fuel both old and new conflicts.

I therefore want to conclude by stressing the truth
that must be spoken as long as being candid is not
considered a fault. Through its vow to silence the guns,
Africa took a bold initiative to open a new pathway
to solutions based on ownership and dedication to the
issues that beset peace and security on the continent.
Africa has therefore undertaken the responsibilities of
promoting peace and preventing conflict, something
that will surely benefit not just its own purposes but
those of others, too. Africa needs outside support in
achieving the solution it has arrived at for itself, and
that undoubtedly concerns us all. I should point out
that the pledges that remain unfulfilled with regard to
the mode of financing for African-led peacekeeping
operations already approved by the Security Council
can be viewed as a test that we must pass. At this point
we should not forget the hardships that still linger in
our minds and that resulted in the challenges inflicted
by the solutions imposed on African countries from
outside with catastrophic consequences.

What is needed and long overdue is external
support for African solutions, not just so that Africa's
unrelenting woes can be overcome but for the sake of
the whole world. By extending a hand to Africa when it
is needed, for example by supporting the African Union
Master Roadmap of Practical Steps for Silencing the
Guns in Africa by 2020 from the very beginning, such
efforts will serve as building blocks for the future. The
international community, with the Security Council
at its core, must extend this helping hand for the
preservation of peace and security everywhere.

