Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to thank Malaysia for organizing today's meeting, as
well as to especially thank you, Mr. Hamidi, for being
with us here today. Your presence, Sir, underscores the
significance of the issue.

It is important to recall the achievements
that the Security Council has made in the area of
non-proliferation, including through the framework
of resolution 1540 (2004), which focuses on non-State
actors. But we must also focus on what the Council
must do to confront the proliferation threats that certain
States, including Syria and the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, pose to the international community.

Since 2004, resolution 1540 (2004) has become
the foundation of our global non-State-actor counter-
proliferation architecture. It has helped prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
and the abuse of legitimate trade and scientific
cooperation for such purposes. Nonetheless, the
threat posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery remains real
and continues to evolve, as one of our briefers today,
Mr. Gregory Koblentz, detailed this morning in a very
interesting, but also very sobering, statement.

State and non-State actors continue to use
chemical weapons in the Middle East, and nuclear
and radioactive material has been stolen or appeared
for sale on the black market. Meanwhile, the bright
promise of synthetic biology also comes with attendant
perils, and the increasing availability of drones expands
the potential for their being used to deliver biological,
chemical and radiological materials.

While most countries have taken many steps to
implement their obligations under the resolution,
persistent and important gaps remain. The United States
has strongly supported a robust second comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004), due for completion
at the end of this year. We greatly appreciate Spain's
leadership throughout the review. We believe that
resolution 1540 (2004) is of fundamental importance
to international security. In fact, the United States has
taken the lead and is looking for ways to revitalize the
resolution framework. In our view, it is important for
all countries to engage in that effort.

We have been an active participant throughout the
comprehensive review, submitting 25 proposals during
the open consultations on resolution 1540 (2004)
in June. We believe those proposals will strengthen
resolution 1540 (2004) in the areas of implementation,
assistance, cooperation and outreach. For example, we
have urged the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to share more
openly the information that Member States provide
about non-proliferation efforts. We also want to see the
Committee improve its communication plan to make the
information more accessible to Governments and to the
public. That is especially relevant in today's discussion,
because we hope that, with our combined efforts, we
can work to make resolution 1540 (2004) an even better
vehicle for clamping down on evolving non-State actors
and WMD threats. The WMD proliferation threat
remains ever-present.

The situation in Syria, for example, only underscores
that we need to pay attention to both non-State actors
and States that are operating in defiance of global
non-proliferation norms. In fact, recent events in Syria

highlight that the use of chemical weapons by both
State and non-State actors threatens our collective
security. As we have stated before, the United States
condemns in the strongest terms any use of chemical
weapons. Yesterday in the Council (see S/PV.7757), I
noted that 21 August marked the three-year anniversary
of the gruesome chemical weapons attack in Ghouta,
Syria. The United States remains determined to pursue
accountability for that attack. Syria is a State party to
the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), and the use
of chemical weapons by the Al-Assad regime violates
the Convention, as well as resolution 2118 (2013). We
have made clear our assessment that the Al-Assad
regime has repeatedly used chlorine as a chemical
weapon against the Syrian people. We remain deeply
concerned that such attacks appear to be continuing,
including some this past month that media reporting
indicated involved the use of chlorine dropped from
helicopters. Against that backdrop, we look to the
final report of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism later this month. Those responsible for
the use of chemical weapons in Syria must be held
accountable for their actions.

But Syria is not the only place where we face
non-proliferation challenges with respect to State
actors. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
which has conducted four nuclear tests in this decade
and is the only State to test a nuclear weapon this
century, continues to ignore the Council's repeated
calls to stop such actions - which are without
question a threat to international peace and security.
Just in the past week, a Japanese newspaper reported a
Democratic People's Republic of Korea statement that
they had reprocessed nuclear fuel into plutonium and
were producing the highly enriched uranium necessary
for nuclear weapons.

The Security Council has adopted five resolutions,
most recently resolution 2270 (2016) in March, imposing
sanctions on the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. The full implementation of the resolution
will disrupt the illicit activities of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, including disrupting the
repatriation of currency from prohibited arms sales that
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea uses to fund
its nuclear and ballistic missile programmes.

Despite those challenges, when Member States

have been unified and determined in their efforts, we
have been able to make important progress towards
addressing non-proliferation, including with respect to
non-State actors. More generally, the Nuclear Security
Summits have been key venues for dialogue, where the
United States has led international efforts to improve
nuclear security. From the first summit, in Washington,
DC, in 2010, to the fourth Summit, concluded this
year, more than 50 world leaders and four international
organizations have worked together to prevent nuclear
terrorism and to counter nuclear-material smuggling,
thereby catalysing efforts to secure and eliminate
nuclear and other radioactive material.

We share the concern voiced today about the use
of chemical weapons by Da'esh/ Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant. To combat that threat, the United States
believes we need to apply the multifaceted tools we have
within the existing international framework to include
the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological
Weapons Convention, the International Convention for
the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings and resolution
1540 (2004), which, among other things, obligates
States to secure chemical weapon-related materials.
In addition, we should utilize, and where necessary
bolster, the existing capacities of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to address the
threat from non-State actors' use of chemical weapons.
The universal implementation of, and adherence to, the
CWC, the Biological Weapons Convention, the Terrorist
Bombing Convention and resolution 1540 (2004) is the
best defence against the development of chemical and
biological weapons and their acquisition and use by
non-State actors.

Finally, we fully understand the desire to do
everything we can to combat the spread of chemical
and biological weapons, but we believe that proposals
that call for the establishment of a new convention on
the suppression of chemical and biological terrorism
are misleading and are founded on the false premise
that there are legal gaps in the existing international
framework to combat the use of chemical and biological
weapons by non-State actors.

In conclusion, we look forward to working with
everyone in the coming months to thoroughly evaluate
what more can be done to address the range of the
WMD proliferation challenges we all face, including
proliferation by non-State actors.

