Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): We thank the High
Representative, Lord Ashdown, for his latest report on
the implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina (S/2005/706, annex), pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), as well as for
his briefing to us this morning.

Greece fully associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Great Britain
on behalf of the European Union.

Since the last time - back in March - that we
had the opportunity to discuss Bosnia and Herzegovina
and to listen to Lord Ashdown's report on the situation,
much in the picture has changed, and mostly for the
better. As the tenth anniversary of Dayton draws
nearer, Bosnia and Herzegovina appropriately finds
itself closer than ever to the new era that will see the
country finally become part of the Euro-Atlantic
family.

It is a happy coincidence that our meeting here
today comes only a week after the most recent meeting
of the European Union (EU) General Affairs and
External Relations Council, at which the EU Council
expressed its agreement with the European
Commission's communication on the opening of
negotiations for a stabilization and association
agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
understand that the relevant European bodies are
already working on a draft agreement, and we hope
that the process will be completed in time for a
decision at the next EU Council meeting.

For Bosnia and Herzegovina, the commencement
of the negotiations on a stabilization and association
agreement comes as the pinnacle of arduous efforts
undertaken after successfully tackling a long list of
obstacles. Its significance cannot be stressed enough; it
amounts to a regeneration of the country on the basis
of new foundations. However, even as recently as last
June - as Lord Ashdown amply demonstrated in his
report - today's outcome was far from being
guaranteed.

We warmly welcome the recent developments
that cleared the way for the opening of the stabilization
and association agreement process, specifically the
following ones.

First, we welcome the adoption of the public
broadcasting system law, which sets up one
broadcasting system with three multi-ethnic services,
broadcasting in all three languages of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We are also satisfied at the progress made on
police reform, with the adoption by the Republika
Srpska National Assembly of an agreement which
meets all relevant European Commission conditions.
The agreement creates the basis for an efficient and
modern police force for all citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

From the positive assessments presented in other
areas in the High Representative's report, we must
single out the progress noted in the unification of
Mostar and Brcko. That progress represents a symbol
of hope and encouragement for all those who have
argued and fought for the dream of peacefully
coexisting multi-ethnic societies.

Another noteworthy development is the
completion of defence reform, with the recent adoption
of the Bosnia and Herzegovina defence reform
legislation. Within the framework of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's Euro-Atlantic aspirations, defence
reform will give the country the armed forces required
for it to face the security challenges of our fast-
changing world environment. With the implementation
of the defence reform, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
come very close to its second goal: participation in the
Partnership for Peace programme.

But, as we all know, there still is one outstanding
question which risks undermining all other efforts -
that of full compliance with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). Yet we
cannot but recognize that, in this area too, the year
2005 has seen significant changes. In the first half of
the year, no less than 15 indictees from Bosnia and
Herzegovina were transferred to The Hague Tribunal.
Still, full cooperation with ICTY means just that - full
cooperation. The fact that the protagonists of the war,
Mladic and Karadzic, are still at large poses an
undeniable obstacle to the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It would be a pity if a whole country
were allowed to remain hostage to the present
situation.

We had hoped that the tenth anniversary of the
Dayton accords would give Bosnia and Herzegovina
the necessary impetus to soon become a member of the
Partnership for Peace, with a launched stabilization and
association agreement. There is still some time for that
vision to come true. We continue to hope that this
opportunity will not be missed. The people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina deserve the better future that these
prospects for a new era would bring them.

