Mr. Antonio (Angola) (spoke in French): We too
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today's
meeting on Central Africa. We also thank Mr. Kalomoh
for the briefing he has just given the Council. We
believe that this meeting is being held at a crucial time
and that we should seize the opportunity offered by the
hope for peace in Central Africa.

This meeting is being held not long after we had
the privilege of hearing Mr. Swing brief the Council on
the progress made in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The peace process in that country has now
gained speed: the efforts of the international
community and the political will now being
demonstrated by the transitional Government of
national unity are cause for hope.

Nevertheless, with respect to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as was stated by the
representative of France, there are still some grey areas
that are cause for concern. I refer to areas in the east of
the country, where there is still instability, violence,
human rights violations and violations of the rights of
women in particular. I think many of us have seen
reports in the press about the situation of women in the
eastern part of the country. We think that this very
important, even crucial question requires our further
attention.

As the representative of France stated, we need to
see how to stop this violence, which could jeopardize a
process that is moving in a positive direction. The
representative of France mentioned the murder of a
Kenyan observer. We think all these elements require
us to formulate a strategy with respect to the armed
groups in the east of the country. Perhaps the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo (MONUC) should focus on this,
as was done in Ituri and, in West Africa, in Cote
d'Ivoire. There, a strategy had to be designed for a
given area in order to provide the proper response to a
specific situation.

The arms embargo is another aspect deserving the
Council's attention. We know that weapons are not
free; they are bought with the very resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Those two aspects
are closely linked and deserve the Council's attention.

When the Council adopted resolution 1522
(2004), it stated that reform of the security and defence
sectors was crucial to the process. We welcome that
fact that some countries are already extending
assistance. We also welcome the efforts of MONUC.
We think that this question as well is decisive for the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

With respect to Burundi, we all recall the appeal
made in the Council Chamber by Deputy President
Zuma of South Africa. We recall that he specifically
requested the deployment of a United Nations force to
Burundi. We think that such a proposal is of interest at
a time when we are overseeing this risk-filled
transitional period. Such support is crucial.

We welcome the fact that the Council mission
visited Burundi, and hope that it will now make
recommendations that can respond to all the questions
we are now asking with respect to the deployment of a
United Nations force. But at the same time, we need to
remember that the African Union force has confronted
enormous problems - without the support of the
international community. The difficulties encountered
by the force could have a negative impact on the
process itself.

As is always the case with regard to situations of
conflict, the return of peace to Burundi has given rise
to new economic and social problems. We again call
upon the international community to ensure that the
appeal that has been launched is properly supported
and that resources are provided to the Government of
Burundi. We must also encourage a positive attitude on
the part of the Bretton Woods institutions and the non-
governmental organizations and United Nations
agencies which are currently involved in seeking
solutions in Burundi.

With regard to coordination within the United
Nations, we believe that the question of Burundi still
merits attention and that cooperation between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
could make a difference there. Such was the case in
Guinea-Bissau, and we believe that we could take
advantage of the efforts of the Economic and Social
Council, which has set up an Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Burundi, chaired by the representative of South
Africa. We believe that that is an important instrument.
It, too, carried out a mission to the region and made
some important recommendations. Instruments such as
the Advisory Group and the Security Council Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa could prove useful in this situation.

Members may recall that when it analysed the
interim report of the multidisciplinary assessment
mission to Central Africa headed by Assistant
Secretary-General Kalomoh (S/2003/1077), the
Council concluded that a regional approach was
important with regard to Central Africa. Thus, our
ongoing discussions about West Africa are of
importance as we consider the question of Central
Africa. It is a region where the majority of countries
are in a post-conflict situation - or have experienced
conflict fairly recently - and thus need an appropriate
approach to be taken. That said, however, our
discussions, and the recommendations of the Security
Council mission, should not be isolated from the
recommendations made by the multidisciplinary
mission headed by Mr. Kalomoh.
Furthermore, regional efforts are under way with
regard to integration and the quest for political
solutions. The eleventh summit meeting of the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) was held last month in Brazzaville. That
summit was seen as a turning point for the revival of
ECCAS. We believe that the summit took some
important steps, including the establishment of a free
trade zone. It also decided to establish a regional
brigade to tackle threats to peace. The implementation
of that decision will be carried out by Angola, Gabon,
the Congo and Sao Tome and Principe. We believe that
those initiatives need our support.

We also welcome the preparations for an
international conference on the Great Lakes region. As
is well known, Zambia has been admitted as the
seventh core country and Angola, the Central African
Republic and the Republic of the Congo have been
admitted as co-opted countries, while Egypt has been
admitted as an observer country. We continue to hope
that the neighbouring countries of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi will play an active
role with regard to the conference.

At this stage, we believe that, in the light of the
conclusions that have been arrived at through the
regional approach and given the link between
development and the quest for peace, United Nations
attention to the question of Central Africa is of great
importance. During the public debate that was held on
the interim report of the multidisciplinary mission to
Central Africa (see S/PV.4871), the representative of
ECCAS welcomed the proposal to appoint a special
representative for the region and expressed the hope
that discussions would continue, that the time would
come when the United Nations presence would be
strengthened in the region - for all the reasons we
have outlined, taking advantage of the window of
opportunity - and that such discussions would lead to
the establishment of a United Nations office there.

Those are some of the points that we wanted to
share with the Council at this stage. We have spoken at
some length, but we have been speaking from our heart
as well as from our head. We share in the problems of
the region - we are a member of the Economic
Community of Central African States - so our
statement today has been somewhat longer than those
of other speakers.

