Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I would like to
preface our statement by expressing appreciation to the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. John Holmes, for his
statement earlier and of course to you, Mr. President,
for convening our deliberations this morning.

Every day, news of civilians falling victim to
armed conflict feeds the discussion in the Council. In
many instances, the intensity of violence is shocking.
However, the most tragic situation is when we are
immune to the suffering of civilians, when we fail to
cope with it or when we consciously decide to ignore
it. The Council has an imperative duty to stand for
those who are defenceless and in need of protection in
times of conflict. Today's meeting will serve to further
address the issues surrounding the protection of
civilians in a comprehensive and resolute manner.

It is our shared responsibility to alleviate the
suffering of victims wherever and whenever it occurs.
The specific needs and protection of women and
children need to be particularly highlighted.
The safety and security of civilians must be
prioritized when security matters are addressed through
military measures or military operations. Parties
engaged in situations of armed conflict must respect
the letter and the spirit of international humanitarian

08-3528]
law. Those universal instruments are one of the
foundations of the international system.

However, that alone is insufficient. A
comprehensive perspective on this issue entails the
relevance of issues of gender and cultural diversity as
well, along with an approach that is sensitive to the
needs of local populations. All peacekeeping and
military operations must be exceptionally mindful of
local beliefs, traditions and values. Lack of respect can
trigger violence and serious repercussions, which can
undo peace processes or operations.

Ending the cycle of violence on the ground is key
to the full achievement of any peace process. That can
be attained only when all parties concerned on the
ground exercise restraint and refrain from any actions
that could undermine those efforts. Thus, we are
particularly concerned over the continued civilian
casualties among Palestinians, including children and
women, caused by the indiscriminate and excessive use
of force in Israeli military operations in the Gaza Strip.
That must immediately come to an end.

We cannot fail to stress the importance of a total
ban on cluster munitions and landmines. Those
indiscriminate weapons not only have a gruesome
impact on the victims; beyond their immediate impact,
they damage the environment and the economy of a
region. We witness this in many parts of the Middle
East and other regions, where the widespread use of
cluster munitions has turned arable land into a
wasteland. Civilians, including farmers and
schoolchildren in over 60 countries, remain under the
threat of those inhumane weapons. The affected
countries bear a costly burden, and their citizens have
to deal with potential death or injury every time they
take a step. Indonesia therefore underlines the
paramount importance of a total ban of those heinous
types of munitions.

With regard to anti-personnel landmines, we
welcome the mine action activities of the United
Nations, in collaboration with Governments and other
international organizations. We underline the
importance of mine clearance, victim assistance, mine-
risk education and the destruction of stockpiled
landmines as part of mine action. We urge countries
that hold information about the sites of the mines and
other munitions they deployed during a war to share
that information, especially with the United Nations, as
a basis for further action.

With the growing complexity and intricacy of
world matters, the United Nations is surely not in
position to tackle all of the issues related to the
protection of civilians. Regional organizations have an
important role to play in the protection of civilians. It
is important to remember that the best preventive
medicine for war is fruitful negotiation and dialogue,
which is often achieved by inviting the participation of
regionally relevant players.

In addition, we are witnessing the increasing role
of non-State actors in addressing the plight of civilians
in armed conflict situations. We have on many
occasions noted with appreciation the role of
non-governmental organizations and other civil society
organizations.

In that regard, we believe that private aid is also a
critical component of a solution to armed conflict and
of the attenuation of the suffering of civilians. This can
originate from private organizations or philanthropic
organizations which have gathered the funds available
to those in need. In many cases, they also have the
necessary expertise in various fields. That, I believe,
would further strengthen our global efforts.

Humanitarian assistance is essential to addressing
the plight of civilians in armed conflict. It is therefore
very deplorable that irresponsible acts taken against
relief workers, humanitarian aid convoys and others
engaged in humanitarian assistance to shield the
population from the effects of war continue to happen.
The deliberate targeting of those individuals is a crime,
and we should invoke the relevant international laws,
including the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel and its Optional
Protocol, for that purpose.

Finally, let me reiterate that our efforts should be
focused on maintaining momentum by strengthening
the efforts of the United Nations system, Member
States and other stakeholders working as a whole in a
coordinated, coherent, comprehensive and cooperative
manner. An approach that includes development and
humanitarian dimensions is required and should be
supported by the political will of States to ensure that
civilians are protected in times of war and in times of
peace.

