Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the President for
convening today's important debate. I would also like
to thank Japan and the many preceding Chairs of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions for their efforts. The work of
the Working Group and the consolidated presidential
note 507 are extremely helpful, both to those of us who
are in the Council - particularly, perhaps, elected
members - but also to those who follow our work from
outside. I also want to thank Security Council Report
and Ian Martin for their important work and briefing.
I believe that the insightful and scrutinizing reporting
that they do on a regular basis is a very useful way of
pushing the Security Council to always try to deliver
better results.

Working methods are a means to an end, not an
end in themselves. Nonetheless, getting them right is
essential to the work of the Council. They create the
framework that enables each and every member of the
Council to be fully involved, contribute to informed
discussions and play a full and meaningful role in the
Council's work. This is about every member having
ownership of the issues on the agenda and meeting our
respective responsibilities to our own peoples and to
the wider membership. The working methods also seek
to ensure that the conflicts on the Council's agenda, as
well as emerging threats, are addressed with the right
timing, and that the formats and focuses of meetings
are tailored to ensure the best chance of a meaningful
outcome from the Council's deliberations. Getting this
right requires leadership, with active members and an
active Secretariat constantly questioning why and how
we do things, for the sake of efficiency, transparency
and, ultimately, accountability. My comments will
focus on how the Council informs itself, on input to
the Council and on how the Council takes action
and becomes more effective - which is, of course,
the output.

Several useful tools, introduced and supported,
included by my own country, have now been codified in
the note 507. Sincejoining the Council last year, we have
called for a minimum outcome from all consultations in
the form of agreed messages to the wider membership
and the media. That is not only to increase transparency,
but it also helps to bring a focus to the work of the
Council. I am pleased to note that the practice now
seems to have become more and more established. It
is now also a general rule that there should be at least
one round of negotiations with all Council members
for each resolution or presidential statement. The logic
behind that rule goes without saying. It is not just a
question of courtesy. It is about getting real buy-in, and
therefore ensuring the effectiveness of our actions.

Looking ahead, there is much more that can be done
in order to further enhance transparency, accountability
and efficiency. We need to have an honest conversation
about the system of so-ca11ed penholders. If that system
is to continue, such responsibility should be evenly
distributed between both permanent, elected members
and among members from different regions. We are all
accountable for the maintenance of international peace
and security, and note 507 stresses that any member
may be a penholder. Similarly, there is no reason that
both permanent and elected members should not serve
as Chairs of the subsidiary bodies and have an equal
say in the selection of those Chairs.

Briefings and interactions with representatives
of civil society are now a mainstay of the Council's
work. They must be continued and enhanced. Hearing
the voices of those most affected by our decisions will
broaden our understanding of the situations under
discussion, and, by including women and youth, make
us more effective.

For the sake of efficiency, we must continue to
improve our interaction in informal consultations.
Those meetings are not primarily a way for the Council
to meet behind closed doors, but they provide an
opportunity for Council members to engage informally,
with the aim always of achieving concrete results.
Briefings to the press and the wider membership after
such meetings enhance transparency and push us all to
try to come together in a way that is both responsible
and meaningful.

The interaction with the broader membership has
to be further improved and enhanced. The Council and
its members need to talk with countries, and not only
about them. I think the same is true for briefers coming
to brief the Council, including from regions, such as
the African Union and others. That point has been
mentioned. We must think about how to make better use
of the open debates as a means for a genuine dialogue
between the Council and the broader membership.
Should we allow for open debates where Security
Council members do not speak at all, but just listen to
the broader membership in preparation for subsequent
decisions by the Council? In addition, the relationship
between the Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
should become a closer and more strategic one.

As we have discussed previously, we have to
actively operationalize the Council's preventive role,
as foreseen in the sustaining peace resolutions, and I
would also argue in the Charter of the United Nations.
That includes the Secretary-General using mediation,
good offices and his full powers under article 99 of
the Charter, and the Council being very supportive
towards him and responding to his calls. Better and
more frequent use should be made of the situational
awareness briefings. We hope that, with the reformed
Secretariat, the input from the Secretary-General can
be more holistic as regards peace and security. Note
507 further points out the preventive role of Security
Council missions, which should be further explored,
including through the use ofmini-missions by a smaller
number of Council members. I think this morning Ian
Martin raised one very concrete example ofa successful
such mission from the late 19905.

As a final point, and as a member of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group, I
would like to touch briefly on the use of the veto. As
a collective security body, we have a duty under the
Charter of the United Nations to shoulder our primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The veto is not a right, but a
responsibility. The use, or rather misuse, of the veto
to protect narrow national interests against the will of
the broad majority of the membership diminishes the
Council's efficiency and credibility. It is only when the
Council comes together and works as a whole that we
are able to do ourjob.

In conclusion, improving the working methods of
the Security Council serves the purpose of creating an
environment that allows the Council to take meaningful
action in an effective, efficient, results-oriented and
accountable way. We will continue to work to ensure
that elected and non-elected members have equal means
to shoulder their responsibility under the Charter. In
that vein, the elected members recently requested that
their representatives be invited to participate in the
missions of the Military Staff Committee.

We look forward to cooperating actively with
Kuwait and other partners, both inside and outside
the Council, to continue making the Council more
efficient, transparent and accountable. We very much
look forward to hearing from the broader membership,
our constituency, about their expectations from
the Council.

