Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic of
Korea congratulates Japan on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council this month and appreciates its
important initiative in convening today's open debate
entitled "Peacebuilding in Africa". I thank Foreign
Minister Fumio Kishida for coming to New York to
preside over this debate. I also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his earlier briefing.

Since the last open debate on the topic of
peacebuilding held in February (see S/PV.7629),
resolution 2282 (2016) was adopted on 27 April,
thereby concluding the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. Along with the substantially
identical General Assembly resolution 70/262, it
defined, for the first time, the concept of "sustaining
peace," which established prevention as the core
function of the United Nations work in the maintenance
of peace and security. Furthermore, those resolutions
clarified that the aim of peacebuilding is to prevent
the outbreak, continuation, escalation, and recurrence
of conflict. That new and ambitious approach to
peacebuilding has been welcomed by many who face
peace and security challenges, Africa in particular.

My delegation can attest to that reaction, as the
Republic ofKorea, in our capacity as Vice-Chair, joined
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) on
his recent trip to West Africa. Throughout the tour of
the region, we heard at first hand from Government
officials and civil society the high expectations that
they had of the United Nations renewed approach to
peacebuilding. Allow me to briefly outline a few points
that may help us chart our way forward.

First, priority shouldbe given to institution-building,
as was highlighted in the concept note circulated by
the President (8/2016/586, annex). The Republic of
Korea can be said to be one of the early recipients of
United Nations post-conflict support - even before
the concept of peacekeeping or peacebuilding had
come into existence. In the immediate aftermath of the
Korean War, in order to extricate the Republic of Korea
from the dire circumstances that it found itself in,
including extreme poverty, the United Nations Korean
Reconstruction Agency was established to implement a
range of projects aimed at restoring stability and laying
the foundation for economic development. Early on in
that process, we identified institution-building - in
particular in the area ofeducation - as a national priority
that would supply the much-needed human resources for
returning the country to normalcy. Drawing in part from
our experience, President Park Geun-Hye underscored
the importance of education as a core component of the
Blueprint for Comprehensive Cooperation with Africa,
unveiled during her address to the African Union (AU)
on 28 May.

Secondly, a sustained and enduring commitment on
the part of international partners is essential. Often in
post-conflict environments, there is a prevailing general
lack of trust among the many stakeholders ~ between
the Government and its people, and among the different
regions of the country. Under such circumstances,
the prospects of a long-term engagement with the
international community can act as a stabilizing agent,
facilitating national cohesion.

In Africa, we view the African Union's African
peace and security architecture framework- consisting
of the African Union Commission, the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the African Union
Peace Fund, among others - as a natural complement
to the United Nations peacebuilding architecture and a
mechanism through which the international community
can signal its strong commitment. In order to support
our partners in Africa, the Republic of Korea has
committed to increasing our financial contribution to
the African Union Peace Fund. In that regard, we also
welcome the recent decision at the AU Kigali Summit
to revamp the Fund.

Finally, national ownership is of paramount
importance. Governments in transition must play
a leading role in identifying investment priorities,
drawing up development strategies and carrying out
their implementation. From our own experience, the
sense of ownership, along with the spirit of self-help
and cooperation, is what ignited the tapping of the
potential of all, notjust some, of our people.

I would like to reiterate the Republic of Korea's
commitment to partnering with Africa in the cause of
peace and stability. As our President promised a few
months ago in Addis Ababa, Korea will travel together
with Africa along the path towards a prosperous future.

