Mr. Fall (spoke in French): Mr. President, may I
first of all congratulate your country on the dynamism
and the spirit of innovation with which it has
contributed to the work of the Security Council in the
year and a half that your country has served on the
Council. The team of Singapore, under the leadership
of Ambassador Mahbubani, has made a remarkable
contribution, first of all to greater openness and
interactive exchange in the work of the Security
Council, but also to promoting targeted Security
Council sanctions aimed at minimizing the impact on
civilian populations. The organization of these
consultations in May, which is an auspicious month for
Africa because it marks the birth of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), is another contribution to this
effort that has been developed over the past year and a
half.

I would also like to pay a well-deserved tribute to
the Permanent Representative of Mauritius,
Ambassador Koonjul, the Chairman of the ad hoc
Working Group on Africa, for having proposed during
his presidency of the Council the establishment of such
an ad hoc group, which was really a missing link in the
work of the Security Council, and for having since then
devoted much time and effort to making this Working
Group operational. The statement that he has just
made, which has painted a picture of the mission as
well as the objectives and achievements ofthe Working
Group that he presides over, demonstrates his
commitment.

In an international environment of great
pessimism, we might tend to underestimate the work of
the United Nations in general and that of the Security
Council, in particular regarding the positive
contributions being made to solve conflicts in Africa.
Since I have had the privilege both of overseeing the
Secretariat services relating to the Security Council and
also of being directly responsible for African questions
within the Secretariat, I must say that that kind of an
assessment is not only superficial but unjust. Indeed,
the Council has devoted time, effort and considerable
resources over the past five years in order to gain a
closer understanding of African realities, their nuances
and their complexities, and, above all, to try to make a
contribution to lasting solutions.

In that regard, the Council's visit three years in a
row, precisely in the month of May, to the Great Lakes
region to examine more closely the crisis in the region
and try to move the various peace processes forward
regarding the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Burundi and other countries is an illustration of this, as
is the visit organized by the Council recently to
Ethiopia and Eritrea, again to move the peace process
forward.

Lastly, I cannot fail to mention the different
meetings that have been devoted to African questions,
including issues not initially considered to be questions
of peace and security, such as AIDS, but that, because
of the magnitude of the pandemics, have a negative
impact on peace and security in Africa.

The members of the Security Council therefore
deserve to be commended for the work that has been
accomplished. I am also delighted at the fact that
during this period the Security Council has dedicated
itself to strengthening bilateral cooperation between the
United Nations and African organizations, be they pan-
African in nature, such as the OAU, or subregional
organizations. In that respect, the contacts that you
have had with the different players involved in the
peace agreements - such as the Lusaka Agreement in
respect of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Arusha Agreement in respect of Burundi, or the Algiers
Agreement in connection with the conflict between
Ethiopia and Eritrea - all illustrate fairly well the will
of the Security Council to be involved in a positive
way in conflict settlement, but also in conflict
prevention.

Naturally these consultations between the
Security Council and African organizations have not
always led to agreement between the Security Council
and the different African organizations. But the
Council has displayed greater resolve to be involved in
conflict prevention and settlement, and also in
peacekeeping operations, as is shown by the fact that
today the largest peacekeeping operation in the world
is in Africa, in Sierra Leone to be more exact.

The programme of work of the ad hoc Working
Group presided over by Ambassador Koonjul reflects
precisely the priorities and approach of the Secretariat
regarding cooperation between the United Nations and
African organizations. The Secretary-General, acting
on the basis of the report that he submitted on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of sustainable
peace and development, has devoted himself during the
past five years to considerably strengthening
cooperation with the Organization of African Unity.
Recently, he held particularly important discussions
with the objective of seeing all the recommendations
that were made in that report truly implemented.

The meeting today is multifaceted. I would
therefore like to briefly say a few words about some of
its various aspects. As for cooperation with regional
organizations and consultations with regional and
subregional organizations ~ which the ad hoc Working
Group is counting on - I must say that this has
become current practice at the level of the Secretariat
between the United Nations and the OAU and also
between the United Nations and African subregional
organizations. Not only does the Secretary-General
have periodic consultations twice a year during the
General Assembly here in New York and at the OAU
Summit elsewhere with the Secretary-General of the
OAU, but in addition the two secretariats for some
years now have been establishing a framework for
cooperation, accompanied by a biennial programme of
work, which is implemented both by the Secretariat
and the agencies of the United Nations that are in
Addis Ababa. That programme of work is evaluated
every two years and has constant follow-up within the
Secretariat.

Along the same lines, several subregional
organizations have also developed relationships with
the Secretariat. These include ECOWAS, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and other international organizations. Just recently, we
held consultations with the OAU on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and on the Central African
Republic in the light of the conclusions of the
Khartoum meeting held by the Community of Sahel-
Saharan States (CENSAD), as well as on Madagascar;
the two secretariats sent a joint mission to Madagascar
and participated in the Dakar negotiations and placed
them under their auspices. There have also been talks
on Burundi and other matters. Only yesterday, in fact,
we were talking with the OAU about the timeliness of
having the OAU Central Organ devote its attention to
Madagascar.

The same could be said for IGAD on Somalia,
and for the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) on Madagascar and other countries of the
subregion, including the Comoros.

The second point for today's meeting relates to
subregional consultations. The Council has already had
a wide range of consultations with ECOWAS about the
implementation of the Lome agreement on Sierra
Leone. In that framework, I would like to make the
following suggestions.

I would like to propose the rationalization of the
system of international exchanges between the Security
Council and the Central Organ of the OAU for periodic
discussion of questions on the agenda of the two
organizations that could have an impact on peace and
security in Africa. This would be in addition to the
decision taken by the ad hoc Working Group to hold
consultations on a regular basis with Ambassador Kebe
in his capacity as permanent Observer of the OAU here
in New York.

I would also suggest that such consultations be
extended to all subregional African organizations. In
the case of ECOWAS, that is already the case. But
other organizations should also have such
consultations, such as CENSAD, IGAD, the Economic
Community of Central African States, SADC, the
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
(COMESA) and the Arab Maghreb Union. Such
consultations with the subregional bodies that cover all
of Africa would make it possible for whatever
conclusions are drawn from discussions with the OAU
Central Organ to become operational and to be adapted
to the subregional context. They would also make it
possible to reduce the risk of either divergence or
contradiction between the positions of the Security
Council and those of African subregional bodies.

It is no secret that when it comes to political
governance, the OAU has for several years been
determined to take vigorous measures to exclude
anyone who has taken power by force from its organs
and deliberations. It may be desirable, in this regard,
that the Security Council examine ways and means of
better adapting the positions of the United Nations to
that fundamental principle of the OAU. It is hard to
understand that heads of Government who came to
power through a coup d'etat, who cannot participate in
OAU deliberations, should be allowed to participate in
such discussions in the United Nations.

In the same context, and still with a View to
greater symbiosis between OAU and United Nations
positions, the OAU decision to exclude anyone who
takes power by force should be examined by the
Security Council to see to what extent this principle
could be applied not only to African States Members of
the United Nations, but also to those from other
regions. In this way, the condemnation of coups d'etat
would not be selectively addressed to African
countries.

In order to be productive in terms of follow-up of
the situations in African countries, it is desirable that
such consultations should take place with the
participation of Africa's development partners. It is
obvious, for example, that consultations with the many
African countries afflicted with problems of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration as they
emerge from conflicts should also include development
partners, such as the Bretton Woods institutions. In that
regard, cooperation with the Economic and Social
Council should also be central.

Finally, the Council has evolved a great deal with
regard to sanctions, particularly regarding Africa.
Nonetheless, we must note that, with Libya, Sudan,
Liberia, Somalia and Angola with respect to UNITA,
Africa is undeniably the continent most affected by
Security Council sanctions. The measures taken to
adjust these sanctions and the discussions that have
taken place to find some exit strategy for sanctions
have contributed a great deal to adapting the sanctions
and to making them much more appropriate to their
objective. But the time may have come for a much
more thorough and certainly much more critical
consideration by the Council of the extent to which an
exit strategy for sanctions could be far better targeted.

I would like to take up another question which is
also on the agenda for today's discussion: the problems
of small arms and light weapons and of the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. These are questions
to which the Council has certainly devoted a great deal
of attention over the past years. The Council has
managed to find ways and means to improve the
implementation of its decisions in this regard.
Nonetheless, it remains a fact that in this field there is
a missing link: the fact that the recommendations,
resolutions and declarations of the Council are not
sufficiently implemented. Above all, there is a lack of
effective coordination between the work of the Council
and the work of African organizations.

To give just one example, Africa has already
adopted, in South Africa, a strategy on small arms and
light weapons, implemented specifically in West Africa
following the adoption ofthe ECOWAS moratorium on
small arms. It must be noted that while the Council has
adopted effective measures in order to better contribute
to the implementation of the ECOWAS moratorium on
small arms, further efforts must be undertaken to
address the network of light-weapons sales in Africa;
these should not be confined to those who use weapons
for commercial or military purposes in Africa. Work
must be done to identify the countries that produce
weapons and the companies that sell those weapons in
Africa. Also, measures must be taken to compel them
to respect the arms moratorium and to respect Council
resolutions.

In that regard, the Council could ask the ad hoc
Working Group, for example, to examine the feasibility
of applying the recommendations of various United
Nations expert panels on Angola, Liberia and Sierra
Leone to this arms trafficking problem. The Council
could also mandate its President to be in contact with
the Permanent Representatives of the States that
harbour illicit traffic or those in which those weapons
are produced, in order to ask them to make a positive
contribution to the Council's commitment to the
struggle against arms trafficking. The Council could
also strengthen its own operational cooperation with
the agencies whose work concerns illicit trafficking.

I have mentioned a few ideas that I wished to
contribute to today's debate. They are not, strictly
speaking, views sanctioned by the Secretariat. I wanted
to take advantage of the open nature of this debate to
express myself informally, freely and candidly in order
to make a contribution to the debate.

I should like to conclude by saying how moved I
was by the kind words of the Chairman of the ad hoc
Working Group and of the Permanent Observer of the
OAU to the United Nations. I thank them, and I thank
you, Mr. President, for your patience.

