Mr. Butagira (Uganda): First of all, let me,
Madam President, congratulate you on the able manner
in which you are chairing this meeting and congratulate
the Philippines presidency on organizing this important
debate.

Uganda joins you, Madam President, and the
members of the Security Council in expressing disgust
and shock at the death of the national of the Republic
of Korea, and especially at the brutal way he was
killed. Terrorism is a menace to the international
community, and the international community must join
hands in fighting this menace. Whatever political
motivation the terrorists have, the end does not justify
the means.

In 2001, I was a member of the mediation team in
the peace talks between the Government of the Sudan
and the Sudanese People's Liberation Movement and
Army. We visited southern Sudan to assess the conflict
on the ground. We visited an area called Thiet. The
effect of merciless wars was evident. There were no
services, schools or health centres to speak of. There
was no government. The surviving population was
hungry, and children were undernourished and in rags.
In that desolate situation there was a ray of hope, and
that was the limited service provided by a non-
governmental organization, World Vision. They
provided water by sinking boreholes and digging dams.
They built health centres. In fact, we stayed overnight
in their camp. They cooperated with the Sudanese
People's Liberation Army, which had an effective
presence on the ground. The officials of the
organization lived in fear of aerial bombardment, and
all around their camps they had dug shelters. Yet,
because of their call to serve humanity, they risked
their lives to work in southern Sudan. I have given this
example to illustrate the important role played by civil
society in conflict areas.

The United Nations and, indeed, the Security
Council have recognized the important role played by
civil society organizations in post-conflict peace-
building and reconstruction. Their role in providing
humanitarian assistance and relief is well known. They
have provided social infrastructure such as schools,
dispensaries and sanitation.

However, to be successful in post-conflict
situations, civil society organizations must be partners
with Governments. Their role should be
complementary to that of Governments. They should
not engage in activities that would undermine their
impartiality and thus be seen in some quarters as spies
or as siding with subversive elements.

Civil society organizations should engage in
activities that would promote reconciliation, peace and
stability. For instance, their role in promoting good
governance and the observance of human rights can be
crucial, such as their participation in election
monitoring, illiteracy campaigns and civic education.
More attention should be paid to the role of women in
post-conflict peace-building. Civil society
organizations can organize women's groups and set up
micro-financing institutions to finance women's
enterprises in agriculture and industry in the
developing countries. They could also organize
vocational training.

However, a proliferation of civil society
organizations should be avoided. In some cases, post-
conflict peace-building has become an industry. All
manner of civil society organizations have sprung up,
some with dubious credentials. There should be
coherence and relevancy. To achieve this, concerned
countries should put in place a regulatory framework
which would provide harmonization and effectiveness
without interfering in the internal structure of such
organizations. Non-governmental organizations should
not behave as if they were governments unto
themselves. They can play a vital role in providing
useful information and advice to Governments in
fashioning effective post-conflict policies. For that
purpose, there should be a forum in which
Governments and civil society organizations can
exchange ideas. The results of those exchanges could
lead to informed decisions, including legislation.

Aside from partnering with Governments, civil
society organizations should work closely with United
Nations agencies in the field in building post-conflict
institutions. It would be useful, for example, to have a
dialogue with the relevant civil society organizations
before peacekeeping missions are sent into the field, in
order to work out effective programmes.

Before I conclude, I would like to thank civil
society organizations for their role in providing
humanitarian assistance to the people displaced in
northern Uganda as a result of the untold atrocities
visited on the population by Joseph Kony's murderous
rebel group.

Once again, we call on the international
community to rein in Mr. Kony and his gang so that
their crimes do not go unpunished. The Government of
Uganda has provided substantial resources for post-
conflict reconstruction in northern Uganda as it closes
in on Mr. Kony and his bandits. For instance, all
children going to secondary school whose parents are
in displaced persons camps are to have free education.
Children in primary schools in the area, and indeed
throughout the country, are to be provided with a free
lunch of porridge and milk. Money has been set aside
for renting tractors to engage in agricultural
production. The Government invites civil society
organizations to take part in those and other
reconstruction programmes by providing personnel and
funds.

