Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand thanks
India and you, Sir, personally for convening this debate
and for the concept note (S/2012/853, annex), and
we compliment the Ambassador for Portugal on his
presentation.

This is an important debate. It is vital that the
Council be both efficient and effective in discharging
its responsibilities on our behalf, and to do that the
Council must be alert to opportunities to improve
its processes. We accept that most improvements to
Council working methods will be incremental and that
individual cases will often steer the nature and pace of
reform. But it is also true that this Council has often
been slow to adapt to the changing nature of the issues
it must address.

For example, much ofthe Council's work is focused
on Africa, and yet the quality of the Council's interaction
with the African Union's Peace and Security Council
is still much less than it could be and is certainly still
much less than it should be. There is a general need for
effective interaction with regional organizations, but,
given the number of African issues on the Council's
agenda, that need is particularly acute with respect to
the Peace and Security Council. We echo the comments
in that regard by South Africa and others because,
despite the excellent work of South Africa and other
African Council members, there is still much work to
be done. Resolution 2033 (2012) was only achieved
after several years of effort. It was an important step,
but its implementation is now critical and will require
innovative Council working methods.

Many United Nations Members are concerned that
the Security Council fails to achieve optimum outcomes
because it does not give due weight to the mechanisms
available under Chapter VI of the Charter - a point
also made by you, Mr. President. Mediation, conflict
prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes are
not only efficient in that they are much less expensive
than costly peacekeeping and peace enforcement
operations, but many of us also believe that they deliver
more sustainable outcomes over the longer term. But
again, the Council's working methods are not well
adapted to Chapter VI.

We admire South Africa's efforts and determination
to transform the output of the Ad Hoc Working Group

on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa from
the theoretical to the practical, but despite those efforts,
the Working Group's potential is still not being realized.
Indeed, we would like to see a full-scale review of
the structure and functioning of all the Council's
standing and ad hoc committees, working groups and
commissions. We believe that much of their work could
be greatly improved.

Likewise, we welcome the United Kingdom's
initiative to use horizon-scanning to improve Council
capacity for Chapter VI action. But that has largely
fallen by the wayside - so much so that in 2012 this
Council is much less systematically briefed by the
Secretariat on developing situations than it was in
the past. We consider that horizon-scanning briefings
should be a regular feature of the Council's programme
of work.

Past Council members have raised the important
issue of the interdependence between security and
development and the overlap between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. We commend Brazil, South Africa,
Nigeria, Turkey and others for keeping those discussions
before the Council. But despite their best efforts, the
Council's outcome documents rarely get past the point
of problem definition.

Everyone seems to agree that there is a problem,
but the working methods reforms required for the
Security Council to work in partnership with others and
to implement solutions are still not being addressed.
Likewise, despite concerns expressed over many
years, there is still the problem of participation in the
Council's work by those with a real interest in the issues
under discussion. The Arria Formula and interactive
dialogues are useful formats to extend participation, so
their use should be commonplace and not an exception.
As another way of extending participation, we would
urge the Council to consider, adapting as appropriate,
the Peacebuilding Commission's (PBC) example of
country-specific configurations. The PBC precedent as
a whole probably is not applicable to Security Council
processes, but there is still much that could be learned
from that model.

The legal responsibility for adapting the Council's
working methods rests, of course, with the Council
itself, but the wider United Nations membership has a
strong political, moral and often financial interest in
how well the Council functions. As the concept note
says, these matters concern the United Nations Member
States as a whole. And so, with such engagement
in mind, we propose that in 2013 there should be an
open Security Council debate focused on options
for improving the Council's working methodologies
under Chapter VI. That debate could be preceded by
an informal interactive dialogue with non-Council
members, which would better inform the open debate
and could also result in an outcome document that
the Council itself could adopt. After that debate, the
Council and interested non-members might consider
establishing a dialogue group to address this and other
procedural issues on an ongoing basis.

We offer this as a constructive, practical proposal
for engaging the wider United Nations membership in
this important issue, while at the same time leaving
the ultimate decisions to the Council itself. We make
that proposal - indeed, all the suggestions we have
offered - in recognition and acknowledgement of the
open and constructive spirit in which you, Mr. President,
have convened this debate.

