Mr. Niang: On behalf of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
people, I would like to commend the professionalism
with which the delegation of Peru has conducted the
work of the Security Council this month.

While welcoming the holding of this open debate,
which provides a renewed opportunity to consider the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, I reiterate the deep concern of the Committee
about the recent developments on the ground that
continue to undermine hope for a peaceful settlement
to the question of Palestine. In that same spirit, the
Committee strongly deplores and condemns yesterday
morning's demolition of houses by Israel in the
Palestinian community of Sur Baher and calls for an
end to those violations of international law.

Indeed, as we gather in the Council, the cycle of
violence, dispossession, expansion of settlements,
evictions and demolitions, together with the
deteriorating human rights, humanitarian and economic
situation, all in the context of Israel's occupation of
the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
continues unabated. We are at a critical juncture owing
to a series of deliberate, unilateral and unlawful actions
aimed at negating many of the final-status issues,
including settlements, the status of Jerusalem and the
return of refugees. The threat of de facto annexation of
the Palestinian territory is more worrisome than ever.

In response to the Peace to Prosperity workshop
held on 25 June in Manama, Bahrain, the international
community has made it clear that, without a political
initiative that addresses that historic injustice with the
fulfilment of their inalienable rights, including the
rights to self-determination and independence, as well
as the realization ofthe two-State solution, an economic
initiative for the Palestinian people cannot succeed.

While humanitarian and economic support for
the Palestinian people is very important and is indeed
an urgent matter, the solution to the conflict remains
political. The only viable andjust solution to the conflict
remains that based on the long-standing parameters of
two States living side by side in peace and security,
based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as the capital of the State of Palestine and negotiated
outcomes for all final-status issues, as per international
law, the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles and the Arab Peace Initiative.

By and large, the international community is
still upholding those parameters, as witnessed in the
declarations and outcomes adopted at recent summits
of the African Union, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the League of Arab States and the
ministerial meeting of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. During recent visits ofCommittee delegations
to Brussels and Berlin, Government and European
Union interlocutors also reaffirmed their ongoing and
strong commitment to the two-State solution.

Such support must translate into concrete actions,
including the formal recognition of the State of
Palestine and support for its full membership of the
United Nations. In addition, the Committee continues
to emphasize the importance ofa collective approach to
revive and promote the long-stalled peace process and
calls for the strengthening of the Middle East Quartet
and immediate efforts to that end.

The international community must also support the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in order for it to continue its
crucial operations. Despite the additional $60 million
raised at the 25 June Pledging Conference, the Agency's
2019 budget shortfall remains at $151 million. That
is why the Committee calls on all donors to continue
to ensure reliable and sustainable funding for the
Agency's core programmes and life-saving services and
to continue to strongly support its General Assembly
mandate, which is due to be renewed at the Assembly's
seventy-fourth session.

Allow me to reiterate that settlements are illegal
under international law and remain a substantial
obstacle to peace. The Committee appreciates that some
reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016) are now provided in writing
and it expects future reports to incorporate text on
compliance with the resolution, including its operative
paragraph 5 requiring Member States to distinguish
in their dealings between Israel and the Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. That is imperative
to ensure accountability as a central contribution to the
search forjustice and peace.

The Committee is also encouraged by the steps taken
by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to publish in the coming months a database
on companies operating in Israeli settlements in the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. That
will be an important tool to ensure the accountability
of private sector companies engaged in illegal business
activities in the occupied territory and will represent
a significant step towards the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016).

The situation in Jerusalem also remains of
utmost concern, as discussed at the latest conference
convened by the Committee on 27 and 28 June in
Geneva, which focused on preserving the cultural and
religious character of Jerusalem. The Committee again
calls on all Member States to comply, inter alia, with
resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980) and to refrain
from establishing diplomatic missions in Jerusalem.
The sanctity and historic status quo of the holy sites
of Jerusalem must furthermore be respected and
their preservation is the international community's
shared responsibility.

The security situation on the ground, particularly
in Gaza, has remained tense in recent weeks. Weekly
demonstrations have continued at the fence, where the
lives of Palestinians, including children, have been
taken, while rockets continue to be fired into Israel.
The Committee reiterates its condemnation of all acts
of violence and terror against civilians and stresses the
need to ensure the protection of civilians, in accordance
with international humanitarian law and Council
resolutions. The Committee also reiterates its call for
the lifting of the illegal blockade on the Gaza Strip.

Regrettably, there has also been no resolution
to the Palestinian Government's serious financial
crisis, which has been caused by Israel's withholding
of Palestinian tax revenues. The Committee calls for
an end to those punitive measures and for respect
for international law and all signed agreements. It is
crucial that the financial crisis, as well as Palestinian
reconciliation, with the support of Egypt and others, be
positively resolved in order to facilitate the creation of
an environment conducive to the pursuit of peace.

In conclusion, the Committee again calls on all
Member States to remain committed to the two-State
solution as the only way to end the 52-year-old Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territory and to achieve the
peaceful, just, lasting and comprehensive peace that has
been called for by the Council and the General Assembly
for so long. For the very future of our collective action,
we need to do more to close the gap between words
and deeds. We cannot stand idle as the Palestinian
people continue to suffer a terrible historical injustice .
We must become the actors that achieve the two-State
solution and make a just peace a reality.

