Mr. N'tungamulongo (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would first like
to undertake the pleasant duty of expressing my
delegation's satisfaction at seeing the Security Council
presided over during this month of August 2014 by the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
a country with which we have excellent relations,
characterized by mutual trust and respect. I would
also like to thank you, Mr. President, for holding this
important meeting of the Council on the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, giving us the
opportunity to assess together the progress that is under
way and to agree on the measures needed to put the
Great Lakes region irreversibly on the road to peace,
stability, economic recovery and lasting development.

I commend the report of the Secretary-General
submitted pursuant to resolution 2147 (2014)
(S/2014/450), which discusses the implementation of
the commitments made under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as well as the progress made by the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in
implementing its mandate. I also welcome the statements
just made by Mr. Martin Kobler, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and by Mrs. Mary Robinson, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region
of Africa, on the current situation in the region - the
problems that persist, the difficulties and obstacles
that must be overcome and the immense opportunities
for peace that the Security Council and all the parties
involved must take advantage of so that all the peoples
of the Great Lakes region can enjoy the fruits of the
peaceful coexistence they have been deprived of for too
long.

Regarding my country, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, it should be noted that, generally speaking,
remarkable efforts have been made and significant
results achieved in normalizing the domestic political
landscape, implementing the institutional reforms
necessary for strong, lasting and socially shared
growth, as well as in improving relations with our
neighbours. This is true in all sectors and aligns with
all of my country's national and regional commitments
under the provisions of the Framework agreement.

With regard to the security sector, it should be noted
that in terms of the army, the recruitment and training
of new units to form the rapid-reaction force is in most
part under way and progressing satisfactorily. The same
is true regarding the police, including restructuring
and setting up new command posts subsequent to
the December 2013 orders, the community policing
experiment and the adoption of the law on the police
reform programme.

In view of the neutralizing of armed groups and
other negative entities that have been the cause of
20 years of sorrow in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, fraught relations among regional States
and the reintegration of their ex-combatants to the
benefit of the general DDR III plan approved by Cabinet
ministers in December 2013, the following significant
advances deserve to be mentioned.

First, pre-disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) operations that are entirely
funded by the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
under way. The identification and assessing of former
combatants from most of the national armed groups is
taking place in reception centres, followed by transfer
to an evaluation centre; those efforts should accelerate
in the weeks to come.

Second, the final version of the unique,
comprehensive DDR III plan was presented to partners
and donors on 11 July, with a view to closing out the
fund.

Third, the identified rehabilitation centres will
soon be operationalized.

Fourth, having refused voluntary disarmament
under the ultimatum presented to them and to all of the
other negative forces by His Excellency Joseph Kabila
Kabange, President of the Republic, or disarmament
by force, the Ugandan rebels Allied Democratic
Forces - National Army for the Liberation of Uganda
were targeted by military operations and removed, at
great cost, from the area they had occupied for decades.
The FARDC is continuing the final phase of search
operations with a view to completely eradicating that
negative force.

Fifth, the Forces democratiques de liberation du
Rwanda (FDLR), which remains a major concern to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other countries
in the region, instead responded to the ultimatum by
choosing voluntary disarmament, which they solemnly
announced in a letter addressed to most ofthe signatories
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
They then began the voluntary disarmament process as
of the date announced, that is, 30 May. To date, 250
FDLR forces have been disarmed - out of the 1,400 to
1,500 that remain active - accompanied by over 400
family members, including women and children. They
have deposited weapons and assembled in regroupment
sites secured by the FARDC and MONUSCO, and

await transfer to temporary relocation sites far from our
border with Rwanda, from where they will eventually
be repatriated to their country of origin or channelled
to third countries outside of the Great Lakes region.
The non-negotiable option is that they cannot
return home; in the interest of regional peace and
to build confidence among the States of the region,
FDLR elements, once disarmed and demobilized must
leave Congolese territory and find refuge in a distant
country where they could not reasonably be considered
a serious security threat to Rwanda, and thus will cease
to provide a pretext for destabilizing activities in the
Democratic Republic of Congo.

Sixth, the Ministers of Defence and Foreign Affairs
at the joint meeting of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) and the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) held on
2 July in Luanda were conscious of the enormous risks
to which all military operations - particularly one
against the FDLR, who live with their families among
the Congolese population - would expose civilians.
They viewed that as much from a moral point ofview as
from an international law perspective, as it is improper
to engage in military operations against people
unless they are criminals - as in the case of FDLR
members - or those who wave a white flag and have
chosen voluntary disarmament and started to carry it
out. The Ministers therefore decided to give a chance
to the FDLR voluntary disarmament option. They set
a date of six months from 2 July 2014, by which time
the FDLR must voluntarily disarm or risk military
action and forced disarmament. Under the time frame
it could be completed earlier, however the maximum
time cannot exceed six months. The Ministers also
decided that an interim assessment would take place in
October, at the initiative and on the part of the ICGLR
and SADC, two regional entities that, together with
the United Nations and the African Union, form the
guarantors of the Addis Ababa Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region.

Seventh, to ensure consistent and efficient monitoring
of the FDLR voluntary disarmament process, it is
important to ensure credibility by generating tangible
results. We have launched a monitoring mechanism
that includes representatives of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO, the
ICGLR and SADC. It is responsible in North Kivu and
South Kivu, just as well as in Kinshasa - for ensuring

an effective disarmament process and taking corrective
measures as necessary to achieve success. Meetings
of the mechanism occur almost daily in the field, in
the form of ongoing constructive engagement with the
FDLR leadership to accelerate their disarmament and
demobilization. Weekly meetings take place in Kinshasa
between our colleagues in charge of operations, while
monthly meetings are held at the strategic and policy
levels. I preside in person over the monthly meetings,
which in addition to Government representatives
include all ICGLR and SADC ambassadors and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. The
first such meeting took place on 14 July, less than two
weeks after the Luanda decision. The second took
place on 2 August, while the next one is scheduled for
2 September. I can assure the members of the Council
that the FDLR has nothing to fear. They should look
forward to the holding of those meetings, where the
voluntary disarmament process is regularly evaluated
without any hesitation.

It should be noted that at the end of the 2 August
meeting, as a specific response to the stagnation we
seem to have observed, we decided to send a delegation
of representatives from the coordination mechanism
to evaluate the process at this stage, to encourage the
FDLR to move quickly to generate greater numbers
and to firmly remind them that the military option
remained on the table and could be activated at any
moment if their conduct did not lend credibility to
the voluntary disarmament process and that they had
no other option but to disarm voluntarily or face the
FARDC and the Intervention Brigade. We also charged
our respective experts with developing indicators of
progress - or benchmarks - that could objectively
measure credibility and effectiveness of the FDLR
voluntary disarmament process.

Similarly, to conclude with the important issue of
neutralizing the FDLR, allow me to say that there is
no State or people more aware than the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its people of the urgent
need to neutralize the FDLR, since it is the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its people that have suffered
the most from the activism of that negative force since
its arrival on Congolese territory. It is a group that
arrived in our country without our having invited it in,
and our decision to push it back over the border was
in response to the international community's pressing
demand.

Allow me also to remind the Council that more
than any other State of the region, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was in the frontline for making
the principle of the creation of a neutral international

force acceptable, for making such a force operational by
accepting its transformation into the Force Intervention
Brigade within MONUSCO, and for convincing the
Security Council of the need to give the Intervention
Brigade an unprecedented aggressive mandate, with the
explicit objective of driving out all the negative forces,
including specifically the FDLR. Let us be reassured
that we will not stop before we have been successful in
that endeavour.

On another level, pursuant to the Nairobi
declaration, an amnesty law was promulgated on
11 February 2014 by our Head of State. To date, several
decrees on amnesty have been published by the Ministry
of Justice, and hundreds of prisoners who qualified
for the amnesty, including former members of the
Mouvement du 23 Mars (M-23), were in fact released.
The result for that group would have been even more
remarkable were it not for the initial lack of cooperation
of one of the countries where they had sought refuge,
namely, Rwanda, which for months had refused to allow
Government envoys from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to have any contact with former M-23
members on its territory and prevented them from
filling out the individual commitment forms required
by law for them to be eligible for amnesty. I must say,
however, that the situation was recently corrected,
thanks to the intervention of the Special Envoys, and
that our envoys recently travelled to Rwanda and were
able to start the work. Progress should therefore be
made in the coming weeks in terms of recognizing the
amnesty of former M-23 member located in Rwanda.

With respect to the justice sector, reforms are
also under way, including the establishment of the
Constitutional Court and the appointment of its
members. The same is the case with regard to the
fight against sexual violence and child recruitment,
which is of primary concern to the Head of State and
the Government of my country. That is the reasoning
behind the recent appointment by the President of an
adviser on sexual violence and child recruitment.

With regard to the strengthening of State authority,
the implementation of State administrative instruments
continues in the territories taken back from former
M-23 fighters and other armed groups. Furthermore,
skills and resources will gradually be transferred to
the provinces and decentralized territorial entities,
especially in such leading sectors for development as
primary and secondary education, health, agriculture
and rural development. Finally, the progress in the
decentralization process should be included in the
calendar for the next parliamentary session.

The Democratic Republic of Congo is entering a
new phase that is characterized by the elections cycle
scheduled to take place in 2015-2016. The draft law on
the organization of the elections has been submitted
to Parliament. The schedule for municipal, urban and
local elections was published on 26 May, while that of
other elections will be passed on by the sole competent
authority, the Independent National Electoral
Commission.

In accordance with the tradition that is today
well established in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, my Government intends to promote a political
dialogue open to all and transparent for all Congolese
stakeholders. We are counting on the widest possible
support for the electoral process, as well as the expected
assistance from the United Nations and the international
community, in order to hold free, transparent and
democratic elections that take into account the country's
stability and security requirements.

We are aware that the need to consolidate peace
and stability in our country goes hand in hand with
that of the entire African subregion to which we
belong, in particular those that are close to us in the
Great Lakes region. We must therefore look for a new
momentum based on a new regional security order,
on the enlargement and integration of economic and
commercial space, on democracy and good governance
and on stabilizing and improving the collective
management of social and humanitarian problems. It is
clear that there is still some way to go and that efforts
will be required from all, with each of our countries
making internal adjustments and adapting to the rules
of peaceful coexistence between States. I want to
reiterate once again the unwavering commitment of my
country to follow those rules and work tirelessly for
peace and stability in the Great Lakes region.

In that regard, I would also like to affirm once again
before all present in this Chamber that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is more determined than ever to
neutralize the FDLR by any means necessary. However,
as it did for the M-23 and the Allied Democratic
Forces-National Army for the Liberation of Uganda,
military force - necessary but insufficient - only
makes sense as a last resort solution.

That being the case, n view of lower security risks
and the progress made in strengthening national capacity
in all sectors, I appeal on behalf of the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for a substantial
scaling down of the strength of MONUSCO. The
Council should agree that it would provide significant
savings for the benefit of maintaining peace in other
theatres in Africa and in the rest of the world, which
today have greater need of United Nations forces than
we do.

I cannot conclude without paying glowing
tribute to Mrs. Mary Robinson, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region of
Africa, and to express to her all the gratitude of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the excellent
work done during her term, which we would have liked
to see continue, as well as for her total dedication to
the cause of peace in our country and the subregion.
We console ourselves by noting that her new functions
will address an area - climate change - that will
keep her in contact with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which is known for its extraordinary biological
diversity, so essential for the future of humankind and
which is, as Council members know, the world's second
set of lungs.

I would also like to welcome the fact that the
Secretary-General found her a worthy successor in the
person of Mr. Said Djinnit, whom we know well from
his time at the African Union. He has perfect knowledge
of region, and I do not doubt for a moment that he will
live up to the hopes for peace, security and shared
prosperity of the populations of the long-suffering
Great Lakes region. We wish him every success in his
work and promise him the unreserved support of the
Democratic Republic of Congo.

