The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Afghanistan, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhadi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, taking note of the
decision announced by the Joint Electoral
Management Body (JEMB) established by the
Afghan authorities, welcomes and supports the
holding of the presidential election in
Afghanistan on 9 October 2004. This election is a
key requirement under the Bonn Agreement of
December 2001 and represents a new milestone in
the process of constructing a democratic, stable
and prosperous Afghanistan.

"The Council further takes note of the
decision of the JEMB to hold parliamentary
elections in April 2005. The Council understands
that technical and logistical reasons made it
impossible, as reported by the Secretariat, to hold
simultaneous presidential and parliamentary
elections by September of this year. The Council
stresses the importance of using the remaining
months to ensure that the necessary preparations

are completed and the conditions met for free and
fair elections according to the JEMB'S timetables.
"The Council calls upon the Afghan
Government and the international community to
maintain and intensify, ahead of the presidential
and parliamentary elections, their efforts to
strengthen the national army and national police,
to accelerate the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) process, and to support
the Afghan Government in its strategy to
eliminate opium production. The Council stresses
the importance of accelerated progress on DDR in
order to create a safer environment for the
election process, including security for electoral
staff and Afghan voters, to help ensure a free and
credible outcome to the electoral process, and
otherwise to help create a secure environment in
which the rule of law is respected. The Council
reiterates its call upon all eligible Afghans to
fully participate in the registration and electoral
processes for the presidential and parliamentary
elections.

"The Security Council encourages Afghan
authorities to enable an electoral process to
provide for voter participation that is
representative of the national demographics
including women and refugees and, in this regard,
calls for the determination of practical modalities
for the registration and participation of the
Afghan refugees in Iran and Pakistan in the
ongoing Afghan electoral process.

"The Council acknowledges the
commitment by NATO, Operation Enduring
Freedom and Member States to assist in
establishing a secure environment for the conduct
of elections and calls upon the international
community to further increase its security
assistance to Afghanistan. The Council also
acknowledges the intention of the European
Union and bilateral donors to contribute to the
conduct of free and fair elections and notes
ongoing discussions within the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe on a possible
contribution in that context.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of providing the necessary funding
for the timely implementation of the JEMB'S
timetables. It acknowledges the contribution of

the international donor community in support of
the elections, calls upon donors to implement
their pledges and encourages the international
community to consider further commitments to
meet the costs for elections as inclusive as
the

possible.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and reiterates
the central and impartial role of the United
Nations in the international efforts to assist the
Afghan people in consolidating peace in
Afghanistan and rebuilding their country.

"The Security Council will remain seized of
the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2004/25 .

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.

