Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
welcoming Foreign Minister Bocchit Edmond of Haiti
and by saying, Let there be light in this Chamber and in
Haiti. Indonesia is pleased to hear about the continuing
progress on peace and stability in Haiti despite the
challenges on the ground, especially during the recent
violent protests in several parts of Haiti in February.
We appreciate the efforts of the Haitian National
Police to manage those violent situations. It is very
important to ensure that they do not escalate in any
way, since we cannot afford such setbacks or the related
humanitarian consequences.

I would like to thank the Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations for the
United Nations Mission in Support of Justice in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) dashboard, which certainly brings the
Council into the twenty-first century of infographics
and millennial thinking. There are still some targets to
be reached, and I also have some questions about the
targets for numbers of kidnappings and other crimes,
which I think should be zero rather than any other
figures, but perhaps that can be clarified later. I would
like to highlight three points.

First, like other members, Indonesia is deeply
concerned about the humanitarian situation in Haiti,
and we urge that the suffering of people in need be
promptly addressed and alleviated, considering that
27 per cent of the population is still in a crisis phase and
5.5 per cent in an emergency phase where food security
is concerned. The Government of Haiti should take the
lead and work together with all stakeholders to address
those issues.

Secondly, the rule of law remains key to
accelerating structural reforms and improving the
people's living conditions. The Government should
take concrete measures to investigate high-profile cases
in order to gain public trust. We share the Secretary-
General's view of the importance of a national
dialogue for underpinning longer-term stability. It is
the responsibility of all Haitian leaders, whether in the
Government, the opposition or other sectors of society,
to support this. In addition, the political process for the
upcoming election should help to strengthen Haitian
democracy. Stability and security in Haiti must be
maintained at this critical moment.

Thirdly, for its part, Indonesia will fully support
the implementation of the MINUJUSTH mandate, in
accordance with resolution 2410 (2018), in order to help
establish a more stable and secure environment. On
3 March Indonesia sent two women individual police
officers (IPOs) to Haiti, to be followed by eight more
IPOs. We believe that MINUJUSTH should continue
its community violence reduction programme with a
view to mitigating violence and promoting dialogue,
and that the Mission's peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts should make community engagement a priority,
promoting dialogue among local communities and
including the participation of women and young people.
We also support the recommendation of the Secretary-
General on the deployment ofa special political mission
mandated to provide its good offices and advise the
Government of Haiti on specific areas.

In conclusion, Indonesia would also like to emphasize
its appreciation for the work that MINUJUSTH has
done and encourage it to continue creating a propitious
environment, providing capacity-building and helping
to strengthen governance and reform. We believe that
the people and the Government of Haiti know what
is best for them and that the Council should listen to
their wishes. We look forward to a successful transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding with the aim of
achieving a peaceful and prosperous Haiti. We have
confidence in the country's Government and people,
and the international community should continue to
support Haiti in its development process.

Since I still have several grains of sand remaining
in the hourglass, I will donate them to my colleague
from Equatorial Guinea.

