Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like, at the outset, to welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and to thank him for his comprehensive report (see S/2012/813) on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina for the period
21 April to 26 October. We share his assessment and we
wholeheartedly endorse the recommendations he made
at the end of his briefing.

The report before us, while providing new
information on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
clearly reports a break in the progress achieved during
the previous period. It raises serious concern about
the breakdown of relations among the partners in
the Federation. After a promising beginning to this
year marked by encouraging political dialogue, the
concluding of an important agreement that led to the
formation of a State Council of Ministers and of a new
Government and the adoption ofthe 2012 budget, a series
of unilateral pronouncements and actions on the part of
politicians have undermined the very foundations of the
Dayton Accords, and even the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and unity of the Federation.

Those Accords undeniably brough peace and
stability to a region in turmoil, one that has suffered
more than others from war and its humanitarian
consequences for the people of the region. Their
implentation to date has given reason for hope about
Bosnia and Herzegovina recovering its proud identity in
its diversity and has opened the way for integration into
the Euro-Atlantic community. No one denies the difficult
challenges in effectively implementing the Dayton
Accords. Still, the agreed constitutional mechanisms
and the arrangements safeguarding compliance with
commitments and promoting cooperation and dialogue
within the Federation remain the sole means to protect
the interests of all Bosniaks.

Building the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
such that all its constituents can take ownership of it is
a long-term project. It requires patience, courage and,
especially, the political will to work together for peace
in the present and for prosperity for future generations.
To that end, all domestic and international efforts
should come together for pacification and responsible
behaviour on the part of all politicians in the country,
so that they can overcome their differences and put the

interests of their citizens first in their thoughts and
actions, where they belong. As the High Representative's
report points out, the backsliding visible in political
life in Bosnia and Herzegoina and the quasi-paralysis
of the Government have had a negative impact on the
country's economy and on the citizens' ability to meet
basic needs.

We are all aware of the tragic conditions and suffering
borne by the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are
pleased that peace and security nevertheless continue
to prevail, despite internal political problems. We must
do all we can to remedy the situation. My country is
happy to have contributed to efforts to stabilize Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We continue to uphold its sovereignty
and territorial integrity, and we call on the leaders of
factions to renounce provocation and confrontation.
The Security Council should send that message clearly
today to all those who strive to undermine Bosnia and
Herzegovina's stability and the ability of its Dayton
Accords institutions to function.

My country greatly appreciates the efforts of the
High Representative. Despite the many frustrations
he must certainly feel, we encourage him to persevere
in the help and good offices he lends to the cause of
stability and coexistence in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We call on all parties to re-engage in political dialogue
and to do all they can to re-establish trust and consensus
and to work towards outcomes acceptable to all.

The High Representive and our friends the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina can trust in Morocco's
engagement and support in safeguarding the country's
sovereignty and territorial integrity, including our
commitment to contribute to a prosperous future for all
elements of its population.

