Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): The
United States thanks Mr. Verbeke for his report on the
recent activities of the Iran sanctions Committee. He
leads the Committee with distinction, and we are
grateful for his service.

The 90-day report makes clear that Iran is not
complying with its Security Council obligations. That
is an issue of fundamental importance to the Council,
and we must remain seized of the matter until all
concerns with Iran's nuclear programme have been
addressed.

As Mr. ElBaradei, the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), has
stated on three occasions since resolution 1747 (2007)
was adopted in March, Iran has failed to comply with
its obligations to suspend all proliferation-sensitive
nuclear activity. Although very limited progress has
been made on the Iran/lAEA workplan, Iran is still
failing to cooperate fully and transparently with the
lAEA in its investigation.
07-64858

Iran must first suspend its proliferation-sensitive

nuclear activities without delay, which would then

allow negotiations within the framework of the

Permanent Five (P-S) plus one, and, secondly, give

lAEA its full cooperation in implementing the
workplan.

The United States remains deeply troubled by
Iran's non-compliance. The P-5 plus one continue their
consultations in capitals, and we hope to have a text of
a new draft resolution on sanctions before the full
Council as soon as possible.

In closing, allow me to say a few words about the
recent announcement by the Russian Federation on
sending to Iran enriched uranium for use in the nuclear
power plant being constructed at Bushehr. Resolution
1737 (2006), while prohibiting States from assisting
Iran with sensitive elements of the nuclear fuel cycle,
makes an exception for providing Iran with assistance
and fuel for light water reactors such as Bushehr. As
President Bush has noted, while he supports Russia's
decision, Russia's arrangement to supply nuclear fuel
for the entire period of Bushehr's operation
demonstrates one thing: Iran does not need to pursue
uranium enrichment and other sensitive aspects of the
nuclear fuel cycle to have access to nuclear power.

We have joined Russia and other members of the
P-5 plus one in offering Iran, if it complies with the
requirements of the Council, cooperation in the
development of a civil nuclear power programme. That
includes active international support in building state-
of-the-art light water power reactors and reliable
access to nuclear fuel. If Iran is in fact serious about
using nuclear power to meet its energy needs, the best
way for it to proceed is to suspend its proliferation-
sensitive nuclear activities and accept the P-5 plus one
offer. We await Iran's answer.

