Mr. Ryan (Ireland): Ireland associates itself with
the statement that will be made later in the present
meeting by the representative of Denmark on behalf of
the member States of the European Union.

Today's meeting takes place in the shadow of a
further act of gross brutality and disregard for human
life, of a kind which increasingly characterizes the
situation in the Middle East.

As Ireland's Foreign Minister stated yesterday, we
fully accept the right of Israel to defend itself and to
take necessary measures against those who plan or
execute terrorist attacks. We reiterate here again our
utter condemnation of such attacks on Israeli civilians.
Our hearts go out when we see the bodies of innocents
torn apart in this way.

However, as Foreign Minister Cowen stated,
yesterday's attack in Gaza was not a reasoned or
proportionate response to the threat of terrorism. The
use of air-launched, high-calibre missiles in densely
populated areas can only result in large-scale civilian
casualties. To suggest anything otherwise is
disingenuous.

The political and military leadership of a Member
State of this Organization that decided upon yesterday's
action in Gaza are fully familiar both with the
destructive capacity of the ordnance used and the high
density of civilian habitation in the precise location
that was targeted.

It behoves none of us to temper our outright
condemnation of such actions.

We extend our deepest condolences to the
families of the innocent victims of yesterday's attack
and our profound sympathy to the many injured.

There is no military solution to this conflict. It
can be resolved only through dialogue and renewed
negotiation, with appropriate international support.
This international support can best be offered on the
basis of the steps identified in successive statements of
the "quartet", including the statement issued after the
recent meeting in New York.
There must in our View be parallel progress on
the political, security, humanitarian and institution-
building tracks. This progress must lead to a two-State
solution through the establishment of a Palestinian
State within the three-year period mentioned by the
"quartet". Clearly defined steps will be needed to make
this goal a reality within the time frame.

As the "quartet" stated on 2 May of this year, we
believe that an international conference should be
convened as soon as is feasible to give structure to the
ongoing effort towards the objective set by the

"quartet": that is, a just, comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the entire Middle East conflict.

It is a harsh reality that Israel's occupation of the
Palestinian territories has had appalling consequences
for the Palestinian population. This situation has been
developing rapidly into a humanitarian catastrophe. As
the occupying Power, Israel cannot shrug off its
responsibility for this catastrophe.

We welcome the proposed release by Israel of a
small part of the revenues due to the Palestinian
Authority and the re-admittance of a small number of
Palestinian workers to employment in Israel, but much,
much more needs to be done.

The international community can play a crucial
part in relieving the suffering of the Palestinian people
caused by the closures. But this should not be seen as a
substitute for substantive, meaningful action on the
political and economic tracks.

Palestinian reform of institutions and security
services must continue with international support as
well as the necessary support of the Government of
Israel, as outlined in the "quartet" statement. However,
neither can progress on Palestinian reform be seen as a
substitute for advances on the political and economic
tracks.

Ireland believes that the parameters for a
settlement to the Middle East conflict were well
described by the European Council in Seville on 21
June of this year:

"A settlement can be achieved through
negotiation, and only through negotiation. The
objective is an end to the occupation and the early
establishment of a democratic, viable, peaceful
and sovereign State of Palestine, on the basis of
the 1967 borders, if necessary with minor
adjustments agreed by the parties. The end result
should be two States living side by side within
secure and recognized borders enjoying normal
relations with their neighbours. In this context, a
fair solution should be found to the complex issue
of Jerusalem, and a just, viable and agreed
solution to the problem of the Palestinian
refugees."

This View is echoed in the most recent "quartet"
statement and also finds support in the comprehensive
peace initiative advanced by the Government of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and endorsed by the Summit
Meeting of the League of Arab States in Beirut in
March of this year.

The Palestinian and Israeli peoples are both
suffering grievously from the present cycle of
retaliatory violence. Leadership is required on all sides
to break this vicious circle. Ireland appeals for no
retaliation to yesterday's action and for no further
actions of violence. No more innocent lives should be
sacrificed in a conflict that neither side - let me
stress, neither side - can win.

