Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Envoy. I also thank John Ging very much, as well as
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait for
being here with us today.

This is a terrible situation. I think that what we are
hearing today is very strong support for the primacy
of the political process, as well as a very strong appeal
for there not to be an all-out military offensive against
civilians in Idlib. I would just like to echo those two
things right out front before I go into the bulk of my
remarks. I think the French representative put it very
well when he talked about the importance of this issue
for international peace and security.

I want to begin by again thanking the Special Envoy
and his team for everything they do, and obviously
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. We are very grateful to those
humanitarian organizations and workers who are making
tireless efforts in the most difficult circumstances to
provide aid to people across Idlib. Once again, we are
reminded of the importance of cross-border assistance
as a critical lifeline for civilians who otherwise cannot
be reached.

We very much support the urgent diplomatic
efforts being made by Turkey and the United Nations
to deal with Idlib, both on the civilian side and on the
humanitarian side. The fate ofnearly 3 million people is
at stake, and we would very much appreciate a briefing
on Astana. I suspect that is not possible today, but if it
were possible we would appreciate a briefing from the
Department of Political Affairs. We hope that Russia
and Iran will use their influence to live up to their
commitments to uphold the de-escalation arrangements
that they have agreed, and we urge them to do so and
to reach a negotiated way forward with Turkey. If there
is anything that my Government can do to assist in that
process, we will happily do it.

On the military situation, like other speakers we
are very concerned at the reports in the past few days of
dozens ofRussian air strikes against areas ofIdlib. Local
monitoring organizations have reported 38 civilian
casualties as a result of the strikes on 4 September
alone. I have already said that nearly 3 million civilians
are at risk of their lives in Idlib. The United Nations
estimates that there are at a maximum 15,000 fighters
for the terrorist groups, which is 0.5 per cent of the total
population. We too in Britain know what it is like to
suffer from terrorism, but those figures are very stark.
I would just like to echo what the Minister said about
the doctrine of proportionality, discrimination and
precaution.

The Secretary-General has been clear that the
systematic use of indiscriminate weapons in populated
areas may amount to war crimes. We should be crystal
clear about that. There are more babies in Idlib than
there are terrorists, and I think that should give those
engaging in military action pause for thought. The
last time we discussed the issue of the military side,
we were in the consultations room and I read out our
understanding of which Syrian military units were in
the vicinity of Idlib. In echoing the Secretary-General's
call, I would like to read those units out in the Chamber.
1 would like to make very clear that if there is a major
offensive against civilians, with mass civilian casualties
in Idlib, then those are the people that the international
community will be holding accountable for those
abuses and violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.

Our understanding is that the overall head of the
Syrian army is the Minister of Defence, General Ali
Abdullah Ayyoub, but the primary unit deployed to the
Idlib area is the 4th Armoured Division to the west side of
Idlib. Maher Al-Assad is the overall commander of that
unit, but we believe that Major General Ali Mahmoud is
the Deputy Commander. We understand that the Syrian
Republican Guard is probably deployed to the east
side, around Abu Al-Duhur, and that its commander is
Major General Talal Makhlouf. Tiger Forces are likely
deployed to the south-east side, and their commander is
Brigadier General Suheil "The Tiger" Al-Hassan. Then
we think that there are also Second Corps and Fifth
Corps units in the area, and the commander we know
about for that is Major General Aous Aslan. As I say, if
there is a major offensive against Idlib, then, in addition
to the Syrian regime, those commanders and units will
be held accountable by the international community.

If I may, I would like to say a word about the aid
package for Idlib. The United Kingdom has announced
an additional aid package to ensure that the most
vulnerable receive the medical treatment, food, water
and support they desperately need. The $15 million in
new aid includes support to medical centres and mobile
clinics and psychological support. We are also backing
new technology that provides civilians with early
warnings, in the hope of saving lives in communities
bombarded by air strikes. Thanks to that, we believe we
have been able to warn more than 2 million people and
have reduced casualties by up to 27 per cent in areas
under heavy bombardment. However, donors should
not have to do that. Donors are not a substitute for
the Syrian regime, with Russian support, stopping the
campaign against their own civilians.

I would like to conclude by reiterating that we
support Turkey's efforts to reach a peaceful solution and
avert a humanitarian catastrophe. We call on Russia to
do more to restrain the Syrian authorities from attacking
Idlib and to bring about de-escalation. We also call on
all parties to respect international humanitarian law.
I will not touch on the issue of chemical weapons
because we addressed it in the Chamber yesterday
(see S/PV.8344). I would like to end by echoing the
comments made by the representative of Equatorial
Guinea with regard to the primary importance of the
political process and bringing an end to this cruel war.

