Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his

thorough analysis of the situation in Afghanistan. We
greatly value the work of Mr. De Mistura and the
Mission he heads.

The Kabul process is at a watershed point in the
continuing tense conditions in the country's military
and political situation. The main source of the threat to
Afghanistan and the region as a whole remains the
terrorist activity of the Taliban and Al-Qaida,
witnessed by the increase in their targeted acts of
violence against the civilian population and United
Nations personnel.

We note the successes of the international
military presence in southern Afghanistan. So far,
unfortunately, they are not part of a long-term positive
trend. At the same time, extremists have been
considerably more active in the north and north-east of
the country. The Afghan security forces and the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) must
step up their activity to counter the spread of instability
to the north of the country and across its borders,
jointly resolving the complex tasks involved in
normalizing the situation in Afghanistan.

The withdrawal of ISAF will be possibly only
once it has discharged its Security Council mandate.
That will require the formation of multilaterally trained
national armed forces capable of combating terrorism,
banditry and drug-related crime on their own and of
stabilizing the overall situation in Afghanistan.

We support the policy of the leadership of
Afghanistan aimed at national reconciliation. Its
cornerstone is the recognition by anti-Government
forces of the Afghan Constitution, the cessation of their
armed struggle, and their cutting ties with Al-Qaida
and other terrorist groups. Any other interpretation of
national reconciliation would be perceived
unequivocally by extremists as a signal of the
international community's readiness to compromise on
the conditions. We reaffirm the imperative need to back
the effective sanctions regime imposed under
resolution 1267 (1999).

We view the very holding of parliamentary
elections as an achievement of the Afghan Government
and expect the country's new Parliament, in
cooperation with the President and other branches of
authority, to promote the building of a peaceful,
independent, prosperous and neutral State in
Afghanistan.

One pressing issue on the agenda is the
intensification of international counter-narcotics
efforts. We note the growing attention devoted to that
problem in the report. Drugs proceeds fuel the Taliban
war machine, corrupt Government structures and
impede the building of a healthy economy. Having
merged with terrorism, Afghan drug trafficking now
threatens international peace and stability.

It has so far proven impossible to reverse the
trend of growing volumes of opiates emanating from
Afghanistan. The sharp reduction in this year's harvest
of opium poppies was the result of crop disease.
According to the recent data of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the surface area
of drug crops eradicated in 2010 was the lowest of the
past five years.

On the basis of the Secretary-General's data on
the growing divide between the prices for opiates and
other agricultural products, one can conclude that the
attraction of investing in drug manufacturing and
trafficking is growing. We again underscore the need
for more active steps to physically eradiate drug crops
and laboratories. At next year's third international
conference on combating Afghan narcotics within the
framework of the Paris-Moscow process, we expect the
adoption of serious decisions that will allow the
deployment of comprehensive efforts along the entire
chain of narcotics manufacturing and supply, from the
eradication of drug crops and infrastructure and the
marking of precursors to including drug lords on
sanctions lists.

The Russian Federation intends to substantially
increase its contribution to implementing UNODC's
special narcotics programme for Afghanistan. At the
Russia-NATO summit held in Lisbon, President of the
Russian Federation Dmitry Medvedev again drew
attention to our long-standing proposal to establish
cooperation to counter Afghan narcotics between
NATO and the Collective Security Treaty Organization,
which is actively combating drug trafficking in the
framework of Operation Channel. Indeed, many NATO
members are participating as national observers in the
Operation.
Russia lends the international military presence
real support in its efforts to stabilize the situation in
Afghanistan. At the Russia-NATO summit in Lisbon,
agreement was reached whereby transit conditions
provided by Russia to NATO for shipments of cargo to
Afghanistan will also now cover return transit. We
intend to expand the training of personnel of law
enforcement structures in Afghanistan, Central Asia
and Pakistan, first and foremost in the field of counter-
narcotics. A so-called helicopter package has been
approved to train Afghan pilots and to supply and
service Russian helicopter hardware to meet the needs
of Afghanistan's security forces.

We also assist Afghanistan bilaterally. We supply
small arms and light weapons and related ammunition
to law enforcement authorities. We are currently
training Afghan police and civilian affairs specialists,
including by increasing the number of our grants. We
stand ready to rehabilitate facilities that were built with
the assistance of the Soviet Union and are extremely
necessary to rehabilitating the Afghan economy.

We endorse the Secretary-General's intention to
assist in developing effective regional cooperation to
resolve Afghanistan's problems. Contributions to that
common effort are made by many regional
organizations and configurations, including the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. We generally
endorse the report's conclusions and proposals, but
should like to see the analysis of the impact of the
situation in Afghanistan on international peace and
security become more substantive.

