Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, and ask you to
convey our gratitude to Secretary of State John Kerry
for having emphasized the importance of this meeting
by his presence. I also thank the delegation ofthe United
States for placing this matter at the heart ofthe Council's
consideration and its efforts and responsibilities. It is
also encouraging to see the participation of ministers
and other officials from the region, as well as that of
the international community. We also welcome the
participation of the Secretary-General, the President of
the World Bank and the United Nations Special Envoy
for the Great Lakes Region, Ms. Mary Robinson.

Argentina believes that the first steps towards the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes Region, signed in February,
constitute an opportunity to comprehensively consider
the underlying causes of the region's problems, to
establish the bases for sustainable political, social
and economic development and achieve lasting peace.
The principle of shared responsibility, on which the
Framework is based, certainly involves the countries of
the region; but is also an ethical and political call to the

international community in terms of their participation,
cooperation and follow-up to the implementation of the
Framework.

We reiterate our support for United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in its task of
protecting civilians with full respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law. Argentina
understands that the Intervention Brigade, as the
Secretary-General has said, constitutes yet another
aspect of a broad, long-term solution to the situation
in the region, but that the primary responsibility for
protecting civilians and the territorial integrity of
States lies with Governments and their armed forces.

Argentina believes that it is an absolute priority
for the Governments and peoples of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region to affirm and
translate into action the words "never again" in the
face of the continuing violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights committed in the
region by armed groups of various affiliations.

We are particularly concerned by reports to the
effect that some ofthose violations have been committed
by some members of Government security forces. We
urge the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to expand the institutionally urgent democratic
transformations of the security, justice and defence
sectors.

We call on the States parties to fully fufil their
commitment to not tolerate or provide support to any
armed group and not to offer protection to those whom
the commisison has accused of war crimes, crimes
against humanity, acts of genocide of aggression or
those who violate the sanctions regime of the United
Nations. The fight against impunity is a necessary
condition for lasting peace.

We believe that the vulnerable situation of
displaced persons and refugees requires immediate
humanitarian action. But the right of all men and
women to a dignified life will come about only through
initiatives such as that led by the Governments of the
region, the United Nations, the World Bank and other
partners and donors that will contribute to setting in
motion infrastructure and development projects and
projects that advance sustainable economic growth
and social inclusion that will include, as Ms. Robinson
remarked, include human rights, gender perspectives,
the integration of youth and child protection. By the
same token, the legal, legitimate, just, responsible and
transparent management and exploitation of natural
resources is key for peace and sustainable development.

A few days ago we received a report from the
distinguished organization Human Rights Watch that
included the testimony of a 12-year old girl who had
gone to buy sugar with her friends:

"I saw a soldier of the M-23. I began to run. The
soldier grabbed me and said that he was going to
kill me for trying to escape. I stayed quiet. I was
very scared. Then he raped me. I screamed but he
covered my mouth."

Argentina and the international community believe
that we will have defeated poverty, fear, insecurity and
violence when we no longer hear - and the annals
of human history, including those of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the countries of the region
are devoid - of such testimonies. We hope that this
meeting, convoked by your delegation, Sir, will move
us in that direction.

