Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): At the outset, I
should like to thank Ambassador Sharma for his
introductory comments on the report (S/2002/1223)
and also to compliment Ambassador Guterres on his
first statement before the Council.

The Secretary-General's report on the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
is comprehensive and forward-looking. It usefully
covers the challenges of nation-building, including the
formidable task of developing a sustainable economy. I
should like to associate New Zealand with the
statement made by Fiji on behalf of the Pacific Islands
Forum, and I should like to make a few additional
comments from a purely New Zealand perspective.

Such stock-taking is timely and of special interest
to New Zealand, particularly given this week's
withdrawal of the New Zealand battalion and aviation
detachment, in line with the Council's schedule for
downsizing the United Nations presence in Timor-
Leste. The New Zealand Defence Force battalion and
aviation detachment have been part of the United
Nations peacekeeping force since 1999. New Zealand's
experience of working in a coalition battalion group
during the past three years has been overwhelmingly
positive, and it has been enriching and rewarding for
our military personnel. I should like to take this
opportunity to thank the countries that have served
alongside us for their cooperation and support. These
include Fiji and Nepal, and two members of the
Council, Ireland and Singapore.
Although New Zealand's military presence in
Timor-Leste will greatly reduce this month, our
involvement in Timor-Leste will certainly continue.
New Zealand is committed to contributing further to
Timor-Leste's nation-building, and to maintaining a
secure and stable environment in which this can take
place.

Up to 26 New Zealand Defence Force personnel
will remain in the country as United Nations Military
Observers, headquarters staff officers and bilateral
training support to the Timor-Leste defence force. We
will also continue to provide targeted development
assistance, focussed primarily on community and
natural resource development, basic education and
governance and institution capacity-building.

I would like briefly to comment on a few areas of
the Secretary General's report. Revenue should begin
to flow from the country's petroleum and gas reserves
in the Timor Sea in the next 2 to 4 years, following the
ratification and implementation of the Timor Sea
Treaty. We welcome Timor-Leste's efforts at promoting
sound and transparent development planning and
budgeting, and believe that this will serve the country
well when the revenues become available for use.

Timor-Leste's future prosperity will depend much
on the strength of its bilateral and regional relations.
The bilateral relationship between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia will be especially important and indeed
Ambassador Guterres has highlighted this in his
statement before the Council this morning. In this
respect, we welcome the many positive developments
that have occurred in this regard, particularly the
formation of the Joint Commission for Bilateral Co-
operation between Timor-Leste and Indonesia. At its
first meeting last month, the Commission announced
initiatives to resolve residual issues like the
demarcation of a common land border. Having had
troops deployed in a border area, New Zealand fully
appreciates the importance of agreement on
demarcation of the land border between Timor-Leste
and West Timor for maintaining a sound security
environment in the region as a whole.

It is also encouraging that other regional
countries have increased their engagement with Timor-
Leste in various areas. This augurs well for Timor-
Leste's integration within the region.

New Zealand shares other donors' concerns about
the current weaknesses of the justice sector in Timor-
Leste, which lacks both physical and human resources.
We have seen reports, for example, that people are
being held for long periods in prison on remand, and in
some cases without adequate warrant. We endorse the
Secretary-General's recommendation that international
donors should focus on this sector.

With regard to the corrections system, New
Zealand has supported the establishment of the Timor-
Leste Prison Service since early 2000. We will
continue working with the Government, the United
Nations and other donors to further strengthen and
develop the capacity in corrections management,
consistent with international best practice.

We note the Secretary-General's recommendations
that the Timor-Leste Police Force needs more resources
in order to carry out its mandate effectively,
particularly in the outer districts. The rule of law is of
utmost importance and, indeed, Ambassador Sharma
highlighted that in his statement to the Council this
morning. Clearly, people need to have faith in the
ability of the police force and the justice system as a
whole to provide a safe and protective environment
and, again, the international community needs to assist
in this respect as well.

Timor-Leste's security will also be underpinned
by further progress in addressing the legacy of the
violence committed in 1999. This includes the truth-
telling process being carried out by the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation, as well as the
effective prosecution of major human rights crimes by
the Serious Crimes Panel in the Dili District Court. We
fully support United Nations assistance to the Serious
Crimes Unit. Equally important are the ad hoc tribunals
currently under way in Jakarta. New Zealand was
extremely disappointed at the first verdicts in those
trials and has a number of concerns about that process,
which to be credible, must be robust.

We agree with the report's assessment that
progress has been steady, but that international support
remains vital to strengthen the still fragile institutions
of Timor-Leste. New Zealand remains committed to
playing its part in this effort.

