Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
update on recent developments in the Middle East. We
also thank the Permanent Representative of Israel and
the Permanent Observer of Palestine for their presence
and their contribution to our debate.

Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to be
concerned about the absence of any progress in the
Middle East peace process. We strongly believe that
time is not on the side of the parties concerned and fear
that the prolonged impasse is making the necessary
positive breakthrough more difficult.

Our concerns are further heightened by reports of
the latest escalation in violence, which we condemn in
the strongest possible terms. We fully concur with the
Secretary-General's call for respect for international
humanitarian law, de-escalation and calm to prevent
any further bloodshed.

We cannot but underscore the fact that the
scheduled time frame for the conclusion of peace
negotiations is rapidly approaching, while the Israelis
and Palestinians appear to be no closer to even the
resumption of direct talks. In such circumstances, it is
perfectly clear that urgent, bold and responsible moves
are needed in order to end the ongoing erosion in the
Middle East peace process.

We would like to recall that it is also the
responsibility of the Security Council, the Quartet, the
League of Arab States and other international and
regional actors to help the parties transform this
deplorable state of affairs into a politically sustainable
negotiating process.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is deeply disappointed
by the approval of 942 new housing units in Israel's
settlement in Gilo, East Jerusalem, and the upcoming
plans for new settlements. We reiterate that all
settlement activities on occupied land are illegal under
international law and contrary to Israel's obligations
under the Road Map. These activities therefore
represent an obstacle on the road to comprehensive
peace. Bosnia and Herzegovina calls upon Israel to
respond positively to appeals by the international
community and end all settlement activities in
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem.

Furthermore, Bosnia and Herzegovina does not
recognize the annexation of East Jerusalem, and
underlines that the status of Jerusalem is a permanent
status issue that must be resolved through negotiations
between the parties.

I would like to stress once again that, for my
country, any act of violence against civilians is
unacceptable, wherever it originates. We would also
like to reiterate that civilian populations must be
protected. All violence must stop immediately, in
particular terrorist attacks and mortar and rocket fire.
Therefore, we urge the parties to observe restraint and
make every effort to avoid further escalation.

Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that securing
lasting peace and stability in the region of the Middle
East is possible only through diplomatic efforts and
full commitment to the peace process. We therefore
urge both Israelis and Palestinians to immediately start
the unconditional implementation of their obligations
as stipulated by the relevant resolutions, the Madrid
principles, including land for peace, the Road Map and
the agreements previously reached by the parties, as
well as the Arab Peace Initiative.

With regard to the situation in the Gaza Strip,
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to call for the
immediate, sustained and unconditional opening of
crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial
goods and persons to and from Gaza, in accordance
with resolution 1860 (2009). Israeli security concerns,
including a complete stop to all violence and arms
smuggling into Gaza, must also be addressed.

In conclusion, allow me to emphasize that Bosnia
and Herzegovina will remain committed to the two-
State solution, with the State of Israel and an
independent, democratic and viable State of Palestine
living side by side in peace and security. In order to
achieve this goal of fundamental interest to all parties
in the Middle East, the Israelis and Palestinians have to
make the decisions necessary to overcome this
extremely worrisome impasse and return to direct talks
without delay. Bosnia and Herzegovina urges them to
do so.
