Mr. Palous (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Armenia, align themselves
with this statement.

Terrorism knows no boundaries and requires
global action. The work of the three Committees we
are discussing today is a valuable part of such a global
response. The European Union welcomes today's
briefings and the present debate as an opportunity for
exchange of information and views between the
Committees and Member States. We would like to use
this occasion to reiterate that upholding human rights
and the rule of law is an essential element in our
struggle to combat terrorism. Any measure that we
undertake to prevent and combat terrorism must
comply with our obligations under international law, in
particular human rights law, refugee law and
international humanitarian law. We fully support the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
believe that its four pillars need to be implemented in a
balanced and holistic manner.

Let me first address some common aspects of the
work of the three counter-terrorism Committees, and
subsequently cover each of those subsidiary bodies of
the Council individually. The 1373, 1267 and 1540
Committees have recently worked more closely
together. The European Union welcomes this trend
towards a more coherent and integrated
implementation of United Nations counter-terrorism
policies. In this context, we would like to highlight
especially the importance of cooperation among the
Committees' expert groups. The common strategy to
engage with international, regional and subregional
organizations is another important step in this
direction. The European Union commends the practice
of joint visits to countries, reiterates its call for
effective follow-up and encourages further deepening
of the human rights element in those visits. We also
welcome the participation of the three Committees in
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, of whose efforts the European Union has
been a staunch supporter.

As for the monitoring and promotion of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), we value highly
the ongoing practice of making Preliminary
Implementation Assessments (PIAs) and the exercise
of taking stock of the progress made by Member States
in implementation. The European Union encourages
deeper integration of human rights elements in the
work of the CTC and the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED) with Member States, especially
with regard to PIAs. We call on all States to reply to
the CTC in a timely manner, enter into dialogue with it
and follow up on its recommendations. We note that
the interim review of the CTED is to be conducted by
the Security Council by 30 June 2009, and we look

forward to it. The European Union welcomes the
CTC's revised technical assistance strategy, which is
aimed at improving match-making between potential
donors or providers of assistance and recipients. Both
the European Union and its member States have been
among the main assistance providers. We have
contributed through the CTC and CTED channels as
well as through other United Nations bodies such as
the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. The European Union
recently decided to extend its cooperation with CTED
in the framework of the global counter-terrorism
outreach component under its Instrument for Stability
for the period 2009-2011. In January 2009, during the
visit of the CTED delegation to the European Union
Council's Counter-Terrorism Working Party meeting,
we committed ourselves to further support the CTC.
We likewise appreciate the intensified cooperation with
relevant regional and subregional organizations and, in
that context, the preparation of regional workshops.

Let me now turn to the 1267 Committee. The
European Union fully supports the Al-Qaida and
Taliban sanctions regime. We welcome the fact that
through the 1267 Committee, the Security Council has
strengthened human rights and due process
considerations in United Nations sanctions regimes,
and we hope that that trend will continue. The adoption
of resolution 1822 (2008) last June was an important
step in improving fair and clear procedures for the
imposition of sanctions and for the listing and
de-listing of individuals and entities. Last year, the
Belgian Chair successfully paved the way for
implementation of the resolution 1822 (2008) by
developing concrete modalities and reflecting them in
updated Committee guidelines, and launched the
review process. Under its present Austrian
chairmanship, the Committee has started reviewing the
names on the consolidated list and has published on the
Committee's website the first narrative summaries of
reasons for listing. The European Union is pleased to
see that the implementation of resolution 1822 (2008)
is being actively and efficiently carried out, with some
concrete results having already been achieved. For
their part, European Union member States are
committed to contributing to this process and
encourage all other Member States to do the same.

As members know, recent European Union court
cases on the Union's measures to implement the
Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime have brought
new challenges. The European Union is currently
adapting its procedures for implementing the 1267
sanctions, in order to accommodate the requirements of
both the 1267 sanctions regime, in particular resolution
1822 (2008), and the European Court of Justice. The
European Union considers that the transparency and
procedures of the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regime need to be further enhanced and welcomes all
efforts in that regard. We are of the view that the draft
resolution to be adopted by the end of December 2009
will offer the right opportunity in that respect.
European Union member States are ready to
constructively contribute to this process.

Lastly, I would like to address the work of the
1540 Committee. The European Union considers it to
be an essential tool, complementary to existing
multilateral non-proliferation instruments, in
countering the threat that weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery could fall into the hands of
non-State actors, including terrorists. We reiterate the
importance of full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and in that context welcome the Committee's
report on modalities for considering a comprehensive
review of its implementation by Member States. We
further welcome the convening of an open-ended
meeting of the Committee this autumn, enabling
Member States to exchange views and share best
national practices ahead of the review. We express our
hope that the review will produce concrete and action-
oriented recommendations.

The European Union commends the Committee's
efforts to facilitate the provision of assistance to States,
as well as its cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations. The regional workshops are an
important part of the Committee's outreach effort and
of such cooperation. The European Union has pledged
to support the organization of those workshops
financially. I am proud to announce that as of today,
the first part of the amount pledged by the European
Union has been transferred to the Office for
Disarmament Affairs Trust Fund for Global and
Regional Disarmament Activities.

The European Union would like to join others in
thanking the members, experts and Chairmen of the
three Committees for the work already done and the
work under way. I would like to assure the Council of
the European Union's full commitment to support the
future work of the Committees.
