Mr. Schulz (Germany): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) ofresolution 1970 (2011) of26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established by the same
resolution. The report covers the period from 30 July to
4 September 2019, during which time the Committee
held a formal meeting and conducted additional work
through the written silence procedure.

At the formal meeting held on 30 August 2019,
which was organized in follow-up to a recommendation
contained in the interim report of the Panel of Experts,
the Committee held a discussion with 22 invited
Member States on sanctions implementation. The
Panel of Experts also briefed the participants about the
different sanctions measures. In their interventions,
Committee members and invited Member States
addressed various aspects of the sanctions regime,
emphasizing, in particular, respect for the arms
embargo. Invited Member States also expressed their
commitment to cooperating with the Committee and
with the Panel of Experts. I intend to propose follow-up
action to Committee members on some of the ideas and
proposals that were raised during the meeting.

With respect to the arms embargo, the Committee
responded to a request for guidance from the Republic
of Korea. The Committee also received an update from
the Panel of Experts containing a preliminary case
study on air strikes in Murzuq on 5 August.

In connection with the assets freeze, the Committee
received an exemption notification under paragraph 19
(a) of resolution 1970 (2011), submitted by the United
Kingdom in relation to the legal expenses of Ms. Aisha
Al-Qadhafi, a listed individual. No negative decision
was taken.

The Committee further received an exemption
request, under paragraph 19 (b) of resolution 1970
(2011), submitted by Switzerland, for the purpose of
allowing a subsidiary of the Libyan Africa Investment
Portfolio, a listed entity, to cover expenses arising from
a national court ruling. The Committee is seeking
further information from Libya in relation to that
exemption request. The Committee also responded to
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on the applicability of the
assets freeze measure to a particular entity.

With regard to the travel ban, the Committee
approved, with modified travel dates, an exemption
request pursuant to paragraph 16 (a) of resolution 1970
(2011) from Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi. The Committee was
subsequently informed by Oman, Ms. Al-Qadhafi's
State of residence, that she would not be travelling.
Furthermore, the Committee received a response from
Egypt on the circumstances surrounding the travel of
Mr. Abu Zayd Umar Dorda, a listed individual, from
Libya to Egypt through Tunisia on 17 February.

The Committee wrote to Libya in connection
with measures aimed at preventing illicit exports of
petroleum, including crude oil and refined petroleum
products, from Libya. The letter was in follow-up to a
recommendation contained in the interim report of the
Panel of Experts and asked to activate the oil focal point
and provide his contact details so that the Committee
can correspond with him directly.

We would also like to recall that, inmy previous report
to the Security Council (see S/PV.8588), I informed the
Council that the Committee was considering proposals
submitted by a Member State for the designation of
three individuals involved in the criminal network that
illicitly exploits crude oil and other natural resources
in Libya. In that regard, the Committee has sought
additional information from the designating Member
State. The Committee received one implementation
report during the reporting period - from the Kingdom
of the Netherlands - submitted pursuant to paragraph
12 of resolution 2441 (2018).

Finally, in an update on 5 August, the Secretariat
informed the Committee that the Tunisian authorities had
not yet terminated the legal proceedings, as requested
by the Secretariat, against Mr. Moncef Kartas, a
member ofthe Panel ofExperts, and that his belongings,
including a phone, laptop and documents, had also not
been returned. The Committee continues to follow the
case, while recalling paragraph 16 of resolution 2441
(2018), which "urges all States to cooperate fully
with the Committee and the Panel", as well as the 1946
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
United Nations.

