Mr. Qazi: The report (S/2007/330) before the
Security Council illustrates the severity of the
challenges facing Iraq and the efforts of the
Government of Iraq, neighbouring countries and the
wider international community to address them. The
gravity of the situation is self-evident from the daily
misery and suffering endured by the people of Iraq.
Despite the notable and courageous efforts of the Iraqi
and multinational security forces to stem the violence,
progress has been slower and more uncertain than had
been hoped for when the current set of security
initiatives was launched, four months ago. Iraq is today
faced with an exceptionally complex series of
overlapping sectarian, political and ethnic conflicts that
are beyond the capacity of any one actor or policy to
resolve. That situation has contributed to a deepening
sense of insecurity and pessimism among many.
Today's revisiting of the 22 February 2006 tragedy of
the Al-Askari shrine in Samarra only add to our
concerns.

It has been nearly three years since I took up my
assignment as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq. I have come to admire the
wonderful resilience of the people of Iraq in adversity.
But they are, after all, human, and they are entitled at
last to see the light at the end of the long, dark tunnel
in which they have been forced to live their lives for so
long. But what do too many of them still see? They
still see themselves and their children engulfed by
every kind of Violence. They see themselves without
protection, and often without basic services. They see
their leaders struggling to reach basic agreements on
basic issues. They often see an endless blame game,
instead of mutual accommodation and reconciliation.
They see the world as just watching their tragedy or
not doing as much as it should to alleviate it. But they
do not give up hope, even when they see little reason to
hope.

In his report, the Secretary-General has
commented on the positive and serious efforts during
the reporting period to activate the International
Compact with Iraq, the establishment of working
07-38126
groups with Iraq's neighbours in the field of security,
energy supplies and displaced Iraqis and progress in
reviewing the constitution and setting up a new
electoral commission. Those are important and
valuable developments. There are also political,
security, economic and social benchmarks that the Iraqi
Government is expected to implement. But to make a
difference on the ground they will have to form part of,
and contribute to, an effective political reconciliation
process in Iraq. In addition, a concerted effort in
support of reconciliation in Iraq by its neighbours and
the international community will be required. The
Council is uniquely placed to support such efforts.

The hope implicit in resolution 1546 (2004) that
the achievement of specific political benchmarks
within specific timelines would enable Iraq to make
progress towards genuine national reconciliation has
not yet been realized.

Contentious issues have been discussed in several
forums, including the Political Committee for National
Security, the Cabinet, the Council of Representatives,
the constitutional review process, et cetera. However,
the impact of bitter memories, fresh grievances,
perceived discrimination, increasingly entrenched
identity politics, mutual mistrust and, above all, the
horrific and unending killings, has brought about an
environment in which constructive and productive
discussions leading to lasting reconciliation appear to
be very difficult. Achieving benchmarks is not the
same as reaching milestones on the path to
reconciliation.

The international community cannot allow itself
to become a spectator of the unfolding situation, if only
because of the unconscionable human cost involved.
The international community not only has a vital
security stake in the stability of Iraq, it also has an
inescapable moral obligation to encourage and enable
the Government of Iraq in building inclusive and
cumulative processes that can bring stability. While the
Government of Iraq is the first to acknowledge that
primary responsibility for rescuing the country falls
upon itself, it is also the case that the magnitude and
number of challenges confronting the Government
entitles it to call upon the international community for
necessary assistance. The International Compact with
Iraq and structures established by the regional meetings
provide a potentially solid framework for vital
cooperation.
07-38126

Iraq's leaders support a fair distribution of power,
equitable sharing of national resources and wealth,
democracy and the rule of law, et cetera. However, in
practice it is often difficult to strike a mutually
acceptable balance between competing claims on basic
issues. That balance can only be struck if democratic
politics is seen as more than just a competition between
majority and minority rights and more than a power
struggle between political communities. That is
especially the case in countries like Iraq, which are
undergoing a comprehensive transition process that
involves nation-rebuilding.

In such situations, fundamental questions relating
to the future of the country have to be answered by
more than rhetoric and general statements of principle.
Answers need to be given in the shape of agreed and
specific policy measures that, by effectively addressing
the priorities of the people of Iraq, progressively
transform despair into hope. If the levels of despair and
hope among the Iraqi people have worsened or remain
essentially unaltered, it is time for the leaders of Iraq,
the international community and the United Nations to
consider how to enable Iraq to move forward on a more
assured basis.

The constitutional review process is itself a result
of the assessment by Iraq's political leadership that
further reflection on key constitutional issues is
required. The United Nations has been privileged to
assist with a range of technical advice that has laid out
options for tackling most of the contentious issues. But
the key decisions remain political. For those decisions
to serve the national interests of Iraq, they need to be
made by democratically elected Iraqi representatives
and leaders in a way that strengthens a sense of popular
participation and national unity.

Fortunately, the choices before the Iraqi people
are not black and white; nor are they zero-sum. There
is a whole range of grey areas of compromise which
can accommodate the essential concerns of all
participants in the political process. Those choices
often need to be spelled out with professional expertise
in a clear and concise manner; our constitutional
support team has been doing just that. This kind of
assistance can be extended to other areas where mutual
understanding, accommodation and compromise are
essential to progress. The political leaders can be
persuaded that they are not always faced with zero-sum
choices on basic issues. Once that is appreciated, the
constitutional review process and several other
3
processes - such as the legislative programme,
provincial elections, peacefully negotiating the
implementation of constitutional provisions, a fair
sharing of oil revenues, depoliticizing ministerial
appointments and recruitment to security forces,
transitional justice, strengthening human rights and
humanitarian protection systems, et cetera - can be
extremely effective vehicles for reconciliation while
simultaneously closing off space for the perpetrators of
violence and political extremism.

Few Iraqi families have been spared the direct
and indirect consequences of violence and human
rights Violations. It is natural that many of them have a
deep sense of victimization. Justice, which is another
essential pillar for reconciliation, requires that actual
Victims are assisted and compensated for their loss.
These may be individuals detained without charge,
involuntarily displaced persons inside or outside the
country, families that have lost their main source of
income through violence or discrimination, et cetera.

A variety of initiatives are now under way to
alleviate the plight of externally displaced persons, by
the Government of Iraq, host Governments -
especially Syria and Jordan - and the international
community through the efforts of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
other relief agencies. However, a much broader internal
initiative supported by the international community
will be needed to address the plight of internally
displaced persons and of the Iraqis in general. The
people of Iraq need to see tangible, sustained and
effective measures to improve the conditions of their
daily lives and to build their confidence in the political
process and their own future.

The Secretary-General's latest report once again
expresses serious concern about the human rights
situation in Iraq. It is clear that all of the institutions of
law and order in Iraq face severe challenges. Even so,
as State institutions bound by the norms of
international human rights law, they are held to
standards set by those norms, especially with regard to
the protection of non-derogable rights. Criminals and
extremists of all stripes who use violence and
vengeance against innocent civilians for their aims
have already displayed their callous contempt for all
norms of civilized behaviour. The Government of Iraq
has a particular responsibility to bring to justice the
perpetrators of such acts while strengthening the
institutions that promote the rule of law, particularly
the security forces and the judiciary.

Accordingly, I urge the Government of Iraq and
others who are undoubtedly committed to humanitarian
and human rights protection, to work closely with the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights on how to best
achieve that goal with a view to realizing an early
improvement in the human rights situation. That effort
would also immensely strengthen the political
reconciliation process.

In conclusion, there is an urgency about the
situation in Iraq that the international community needs
to take note of and respond to. If the political and
security situation in Iraq is not improved over the
coming months, there is a danger that its several crises
may escalate even further. The United Nations, with
the support of the Security Council and the
Government of Iraq, has the potential to effectively
assist and develop national dialogue and reconciliation
processes, regional cooperation on Iraq, and
international support. In reviewing the UNAMI
mandate, the Council may wish to consider how best to
harness that potential in the service of the Iraqi
Government and people.

