The President: I thank His Excellency
Mr. Al-Jaafari for his very important statement. We
very much appreciate your leadership in the new Iraqi
Government's efforts.

It is now my privilege to make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

At the outset, let me express my thanks to everyone
for participating in this meeting. I have seen in the past
weeks when travelling around how extraordinarily busy
everyone is and how committed to the effort everyone
has been through their actions as well as through their
incredibly busy schedules. I am convinced that the fact
that so many countries are represented in the Council
today from so many parts of the world really underscores
the clear need for all ofus to come together, to welcome
and to support the new inclusive Government in Iraq,
and to put an end to the unfettered barbarity of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).

I want to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and to welcome our new Iraqi counterpart, Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Al-Jaafari. I do not need to remind
the Council that the last two times the eyes of the world

were focused on Iraq was when its Government was in
confrontation with the international community, with
great consequences. Today, however, we come together
in support of the new Iraqi Government, which has
already made great strides in a short length of time. We
must not miss this moment.

In the past week, I made my second trip to Baghdad
in just over two months in order to meet with the new
Iraqi Government. I was very encouraged to hear them
reaffirm their commitment to govern in the interests
of all Iraqis and to finally address the deep divisions
of which we are all aware, including those over energy
resources, regional autonomy and the composition
of the security forces. All of those have plagued Iraq
throughout its modern history. They are also committed
to empowering local communities to mobilize, to
maintain security control in their areas and to work
with the international community to defeat ISIL.

Indeed, Iraq has responded to the ISIL threat with
a spirit of unity that the country has not experienced
in decades, if ever. In the past month, an Iraqi-Arab
pilot, Major General Majid Ahmed Saadi, flew an Iraqi
Air Force helicopter with a Kurdish crew and a Yazidi
member of Parliament with the single goal of rescuing
Yazidis on Mount Sinjar. Tragically, the helicopter
crashed. Major General Saadi was the only one killed,
but before he died, he told a New York Times reporter
that the mission to rescue the Yazidis was the most
important thing he had ever done in his entire life and
career as an Iraqi pilot. That historic level ofcooperation
between Iraqi and Kurdish forces has resonated deeply
in both communities.

As President Obama explained earlier this month,
ISIL is a terrorist organization, pure and simple. It has
no vision other than the slaughter of all who stand in
its way. In a region that has known so much bloodshed,
these terrorists are actually unique in their brutality.
They execute captured prisoners, kneeling them down,
tying their hands behind their backs, a bullet through
their heads. They kill children. They enslave, rape and
force women into marriage. They threatened a religious
minority with genocide. In acts of barbarism, they took
the lives of two American journalists, Jim Foley and
Steven Sotloff, and British aid worker, David Haines.
Simply, ISIL poses a threat to the people of Iraq and
Syria and the broader Middle East. If left unchecked,
those terrorists certainly would pose a growing threat
beyond the region - because they have already
promised to do so.

Ultimately, history will judge how the world
responds to this moment, to this challenge. In the face
of this sort of evil, we have only one option to confront
it with a holistic, global campaign that is committed and
capable of degrading and destroying this terrorist threat
and ensuring that ISIL cannot find a safe haven in Iraq,
Syria or elsewhere. As President Obama has clearly
explained, and as I think everyone in this Chamber
is well aware of at this point, the coalition required to
eliminate ISIL is not only, or even primarily, military
in nature. It must be comprehensive and include close
collaboration across multiples lines of effort. It is
about taking out an entire network - decimating and
discrediting a militant cult masquerading as a religious
movement.

The fact is there is a role for nearly every country
in the world to play, including Iran, whose Foreign
Minister is here today. ISIL poses a threat to all of us,
and we are committed to working in close partnership
with the new Iraqi Government and countries around
the world to defeat it. That is why I have spent the
past week consulting with my Iraqi counterparts and
travelling in the Middle East and in Europe, building
partnerships, and that is why we were so focused on
hosting the meeing here today.

I also thank Foreign Minister Saud Al-Faisal for
Saudi Arabia's leadership in hosting its conference in
Jeddah, and President Hollande and Foreign Minister
Laurent Fabius in France for their leadership in hosting
the conference in Paris. From each of these has come
a greater and greater commitment to doin what we
need to do. I have to say that in many of the meetings
that I have had so far, leaders are not talking about if
they should support our campaign against ISIL; they
are asking how. Already, across each of the lines of
effort that we are focused on, we have seen more than
50 countries come forward with critical commitments.

Regarding military support, countries in the region
and around the world are already providing assistance,
both in terms of kinetic action and also in the form
of training, advising, equipping, providing logistical
support and so on. In the region, countries such as
Egypt have committed to significantly enhancing the
coordination between its forces and Iraqi and Kurdish
forces. But even further away from Iraq, countries
such as Australia are committing to deploying fighter
jets, support aircraft and personnel. Germany, in
recognition of the grave threat posed by ISIL, reversed
its long-standing policy against offering lethal aid. Last
night, France conducted its first air strikes against ISIL
targets in Iraq. These forms of assistance, provided at
the request of Iraq and in full respect for its sovereignty,
are essential to combating ISIL, but they are only one
part of the comprehensive approach that is required.

We are also seeing overwhelming support when it
comes to humanitarian assistance. Dozens of countries
from throughout the international community have so
far committed almost $1 billion to the United Nations-led
humanitarian response in Iraq. That includes donations
from countries within the region - Saudi Arabia, Qatar
and elsewhere - as well as funds from countries on
the other side of the world: Japan, New Zealand, South
Korea and more. We are seeing encouraging progress
in the effort to dry up ISIL's illicit funding as well, and
Bahrain has offered to host an international conference
in the near future to further develop a global action
plan to counter terrorist financing.

As we will discuss next week at the meeting that
President Obama will preside over, we must also stop
the flow of foreign fighters to ISIL - men and women
who carry passports from countries around the world,
including nearly every country represented in this
Chamber. This is yet another area where countries
have already begun to take important steps, including
legislation criminalizing the recruitment, preparation
and participation of their citizens in combat activities
of terrorism abroad.

Finally, there is an urgent need to counter the
poisonous propaganda and gross distortion of Islam
that ISIL is spreading far and wide. It is time to put
an end to a group that is so extreme in its rejection
of modernity that it bans math and social studies
for children. It is time to put an end to the sermons
of extremists that brainwash young men to join these
terrorist groups and commit mass atrocities in the name
of God. This is something that leaders of the region are
very focused on. Saudi Arabia's top clerics this week
came out publicly and declared terrorism a heinous
crime under Sharia law and called ISIL in particular
"the order of Satan".

All of this is vital, because we know that in
preventing an individual from joining ISIL or from
getting to the battlefield in the first place, that is
the most effective measure one can take. But if this
campaign international to have any chance of success,
Iraq itself - and its security forces on the front
lines - must be leading the way. That is one of the
reasons why it is imperative that we all go the extra
mile to help Iraq fully reintegrate into the region and
into the global community of nations. That is starting
to happen. Last week, the Iraqis, long estranged from
their neighbours and isolated from the world, were not
just invited, but were warmly welcomed at international
meetings in Jeddah and Paris, and now here in New
York, before the Security Council and the entire world.

What is different about today's meeting - and
this is one reason why we are so grateful to so many
ministers for travelling here - is that at previous such
meetings the world did not share in the deliberations or
the discussions formally as they went on; they heard
afterwards. Today, the world can listen to each of the
ministers, and it will understand the breadth and scope
of the support for this effort. We are well on our way,
but that does not mean that we are where we need to be.
I hope that today the progress that I have described will
continue, and that over the course of this week more
partners will come forward and more commitments to
these efforts will be announced.

Make no mistake - our work to build and enhance
this coalition will continue well after this week is over.
I commit that to those here, and President Obama
firmly commits it to. One of our most respected
military experts sitting right here behind me, General
John Allen - who served in Afghanistan in command
of our forces there for two years and also in Iraq, and
who knows many of the people in Iraq from his service
in Anbar - has agreed to come to the State Department
with a presidential appointment and oversee the United
States effort to match up each country's capabilities
with the coalition's total needs so that the line of effort
is coordinated.

I look forward to hearing from all of those here in
the course of this afternoon. Again, I would close by
thanking everybody for joining this discussion, and I
am absolutely confident that through a global campaign
that is comprehensive and committed, we can support
the promise of the new Government in Iraq, and we can
defeat the ISIL threat wherever it exists.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Louise
Mushikiwabo, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Rwanda.

