Mr. De Soto: In the occupied Palestinian
territory, a democratically elected Government is in the
process of being formed that will be led by the Hamas
list of Change and Reform, an organization which is
still formally committed to the destruction of Israel and
which has a condemnable record of terrorism against
Israel.

Israel, which is entering the final month of a
Knesset election campaign in which future policy vis-
a-vis the occupied Palestinian territory is a central
issue, has already halted the transfer of customs and
value added tax (VAT) payments to the Palestinian
Authority and tightened the closure regime in the
occupied Palestinian territory.

In Lebanon, a national dialogue is scheduled to
begin shortly to discuss issues of national concern,
including the continuing investigation by the United
Nations International Independent Investigation
Commission (UNIIIC), the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1559 (2004) and Lebanon's
relations with Syria.
This is an unscripted moment, particularly in
Israel-Palestine. It falls to the parties to make the
choices that will largely determine their future. But the
international community also has an important role to
play in helping the parties to make wise choices and in
ensuring that we keep sight of the overall goal of
achieving a two-State solution by peaceful means.

In that respect, members of the Council will
recall that, when the Secretariat last briefed them, the
Quartet had met in London in the aftermath of the
Palestinian legislative elections. On that occasion, the
Quartet congratulated the Palestinian people on an
electoral process that was free, fair and secure, and
stressed its conviction that all members of a new
Palestinian Government must be committed to non-
violence, recognition of Israel's right to exist and
acceptance of previous agreements and obligations,
including the road map. The Security Council
subsequently took the same position.

The Quartet, mindful of the needs of the
Palestinian people, also called for immediate measures
to stabilize the Government and reminded the members
of the Palestinian Legislative Council and members of
a future Government of the need to respect all signed
agreements. It also appealed to the international
community not to punish the Palestinian electorate for
its democratic choice, as expressed at the ballot box.

On 21 February, President Abbas asked
Mr. Ismail Haniya of Hamas to form a Government.
Mr. Haniya has three weeks to complete the task, but
that period can be extended by another two weeks. The
leaders of the Hamas and Fatah blocs have begun
consultations on the programme of a new Government,
with a View to Fatah's joining it. I should also add that
Mr. Khaled Meshal, a Hamas leader based in Syria, has
been visiting several countries in and outside the
region.

On 19 February, a day after the inauguration of
the Palestinian Legislative Council, the Israeli cabinet
met to consider its response to the new situation
created, in the View of the Government, by the
swearing-in of the new Council. Acting Prime Minister
Ehud Olmert made clear the Government of Israel's
view that, in the face of Hamas' majority in the
Palestinian parliament, the Palestinian Authority is
turning effectively into a "terrorist Authority". Israel,
he added, would not hold contacts with an Authority
led partly or completely by Hamas.

The Government of Israel decided that it would
immediately withhold the payment of value added tax
and customs revenue to the Palestinian Authority,
which is due monthly pursuant to agreement in the
framework of the Oslo accords. The Government also
put a stop to the transfer by the international
community of equipment for the Palestinian security
forces. Additional measures, as yet unspecified, will be
taken.

Israel is entering the final month of a Knesset
election campaign. Since taking over as leader upon
the illness of Prime Minister Sharon, the Acting Prime
Minister has spoken both of entering into final status
negotiations with the Palestinians, should a Palestinian
Government accept the principles laid down by the
Quartet, and of the possibility, if that does not happen,
of setting Israel's permanent borders unilaterally, in
ways that would keep all of Jerusalem and the large
West Bank settlement blocs in Israel and the Jordan
Valley under Israeli control.

In the reporting period, at least 32 Palestinians
and one Israeli were killed by violence, while at least
130 Palestinians and 25 Israelis were wounded.

Violence instigated by Palestinians included
almost daily rocket fire against Israeli targets in the
vicinity of the Gaza Strip, an attack on an Israeli
military post at Erez, stabbings of Israeli civilians, the
kidnapping of foreigners - including an Egyptian
diplomat, who was later released - and violent
protests related to the publication in the West of
cartoons depicting the Prophet Mohammed. The Israeli
Government has also reported having foiled several
suicide bombings by Palestinians.

Israel has conducted a series of targeted killings
of alleged militants and other security operations. The
most extensive military operation was conducted in
Nablus beginning 19 February and resulted in a
number of Palestinian deaths. The Secretary-General
made public statements concerning rocket attacks
against Israel, targeted killings of Palestinians, and the
escalation of Israeli military operations in Nablus and
Gaza.

Israel has, since August, increased by about
25 per cent the number of physical obstacles to
Palestinian movement within the West Bank, according
to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. There are now 471 such
obstacles. The Karni crossing, which was opened
following the Agreement on Movement and Access in
November, has been closed since 22 February and was
also closed between 15 January and 5 February, with
unavoidable consequences for the economy of Gaza.

During the reporting period, the chief Palestinian
negotiator brought to our attention the details of a
number of new Israeli measures in the Jordan Valley
that prevent almost all Palestinian non-residents who
do not work in the area from accessing that part of the
West Bank.

This month, Israel carried out the evacuation of
the Amona settlement outpost despite violent
resistance by Israeli settlers. Israel announced further
barrier construction in the Gush Etzion area, and also
that it would construct a road protection fence in the
southern West Bank near the original route of the
barrier. On 30 January, the Quartet reiterated its
concern regarding the route of the barrier - a route on
which the International Court of Justice has issued a
clear advisory opinion.

Since the last briefing of the Council, there have
been several important developments in Lebanon.
While some are encouraging, others give cause for
concern. On 14 February, hundreds of thousands of
people converged on Martyr's Square in Beirut on the
first anniversary of the assassination of former Prime
Minister Rafik Hariri and 22 others. The crowds and
political leaders commemorated Hariri's contribution
to Lebanon's development and reaffirmed their
determination to establish the truth behind his murder
and of those killed along with him.

Three days after that anniversary, on 17 February,
the Government of Lebanon announced that a
Lebanese national dialogue would take place. That
important process will constitute a framework within
which Lebanese political groups will discuss issues of
national concern, such as the continuing investigation
by the United Nations International Independent
Investigation Commission, and in particular the court
of an international character to try those accused in the
assassination of Rafik Hariri; the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1559 (2004); and
Lebanon's relations with Syria. Consultations are under
way between the various political parties in preparation
for the dialogue, which is scheduled to begin on
2 March. The Speaker of the House has played a key
role in promoting the national dialogue, which reflects
Lebanese and international consensus on the
importance of addressing such issues through a
Lebanese-led process involving all political actors. The
United Nations stands ready to support Lebanon in the
national dialogue.

On 5 February, demonstrators protesting the
depiction of the prophet Muhammad in cartoons
attacked the Danish embassy in Beirut.

The past month witnessed one shooting incident
and a subsequent exchange of fire across the Blue Line.
On 1 February, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) shot a
Lebanese shepherd in the Shab'a farms area; his body
was found on the following day. An investigation by
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
found that he had been shot north of the Blue Line. In
response to the shooting, on 3 February, Hizbullah
fired two rockets in the direction of an IDF position in
the area in which the shepherd's body had been found.
The IDF responded with artillery and small arms fire
directed at Hizbullah positions, and also launched two
air strikes. Hizbullah responded with small arms fire
and fired 15 Katyusha rockets at several IDF positions.
The exchange of fire was limited to the Shab'a farms
area. Three artillery rounds fired from unknown
locations impacted approximately 200 metres east of a
United Nations position near Kafr Shuba.

Israeli air violations of the Blue Line have
continued, albeit less frequently during the past month.
Eight air violations have been recorded since the last
briefing to the Council, on 31 January (see S/PV.5361).
Lebanese military and media reports have indicated
that Israeli jets violated Lebanese airspace on
14 February during the first anniversary of Hariri's
assassination, although those violations were not
observed by UNIFIL. Jets breaking the sound barrier
were heard in certain parts of the country. The United
Nations reiterates its call on the Israeli authorities to
halt those breaches of Lebanese sovereignty and fully
respect the Blue Line.

I wish to conclude with five brief observations.
First, as President Abbas recalled in his speech to the
Palestinian Legislative Council, the Palestinians made
fundamental choices 13 years ago, to which they
remain committed. Hamas has clearly undergone an
evolution of sorts with respect to its earlier rejection of
those commitments, including overall respect of a
ceasefire and participation in elections which it had
earlier rejected. But it is too early to say whether that
evolution is irreversible and whether it will continue in
the right direction. The choices Hamas makes are the
single most important variable that will shape the
future of the conflict; and, as the Secretary-General has
noted, it may take time for clarity to emerge.

Secondly, I wish to remind Council members of
the need - stressed by the Quartet - to stabilize the
finances of the Palestinian Authority during the period
remaining to the caretaker Government. The Quartet's
Special Envoy, James Wolfensohn, has recently
stressed to Quartet members that the Palestinian
Authority faces a budget deficit of at least $260 million
over the expected lifespan of the caretaker
Government, mainly because of Israel's decision to
withhold tax and customs revenue transfers of up to
$130 million - money that belongs to Palestinians. I
welcome the decision of the European Union,
announced yesterday, to provide $143 million of
emergency assistance. I recall in that regard the appeal
by the Quartet to the international donor community to
do its part to avert this short-term crisis.

Thirdly, the formation of a new Government and
its programme are awaited in order to assess its
commitment to the principles the Quartet has
articulated and to make determinations regarding
future assistance in that light. We should be alert to the
danger that cutting off assistance prior to that date
might be interpreted by Palestinians and the Arab
world as a whole as punishment of the Palestinian
people for the way they voted on 25 January.

Fourthly, in the Palestinian context it is very
difficult to make a neat distinction between
humanitarian and emergency aid and basic service
provision. Also, we must keep in mind that the
Palestinian Authority is not something that can be
turned on and off like a light switch. It is through the
Authority that basic social and economic services and
salaries are provided. If those services are not provided
and if those salaries are not paid, the humanitarian,
economic, institutional, political and security
consequences could be severe. And if the Authority -
essentially a creature of the Oslo process - is allowed
to collapse or is sacrificed, then with it may go hopes
of achieving a Palestinian State in a reasonable time
frame, for a functioning Authority is an essential
building block of a Palestinian State. I need hardly
elaborate on the consequences of that happening - for
the parties, the region and international security.

Finally, today no less than yesterday, a credible
political horizon for resolving the conflict is vital.
Peace cannot be imposed unilaterally, and it cannot be
achieved durably outside the regional framework of the
Middle East peace process. In that respect, we have
seen the engagement of certain regional countries in
recent weeks, and their efforts to bring back onto the
agenda the Arab peace initiative, which is a building
block of the road map and a vital part of the
agreements to which continued adherence by the
Palestinians is expected.
Indeed, the Quartet has signalled its

determination to consult closely with the key regional
actors. And I stress the Quartet's own continued
commitment to the road map and to the principles that
underlie it, which include non-violence, recognition of
Israel's right to exist and respect for previous
agreements. I very much hope that a new Palestinian
Government, fully cognizant of the responsibilities
now thrust on its shoulders, will commit to those
principles not because of the appearance of pressure
from outside but because the Palestinian people have a
right to expect that their new Government will address
their aspirations for peace and statehood.

