Ms. Getschel: It is an honour to address the
Security Council, and I thank the Dominican Republic
for having convened this debate.

I am here as a young person to demand action
because it is my generation and those that come after
me who will bear the consequences of climate change.
We are dedicated to finding solutions to this issue so
that we can live in a world that is more secure, more
peaceful and more prosperous.

I will lay out three concrete steps that the Security
Council can take to reduce the security impacts of
climate change.

First, the Security Council should adopt a draft
resolution that formally recognizes climate change as a
threat to international peace and security.

Secondly, deployed United Nations missions should
assess how climate change will impact local youth
and how youth can be involved in building resilience
and sustainability.

And, thirdly, deployed United Nations missions
need to transition to using clean energy in the field,
which will help mitigate climate change as well as build
more sustainable communities.

The adoption by the Security Council of a draft
resolution formally recognizing the threat that climate
change poses to security is long overdue. While I
applaud the Council for discussing climate change's
security impacts, it has been 10 years since its first
debate on this issue, and no resolution has been adopted
that affirms that climate change constitutes a threat to
international peace and security.

There is no question that climate change is a
security issue. At the Stimson Center, an international
security policy research institute in Washington, DC,
where I work, we are doing innovative research on how
social and economic vulnerabilities, poor governance,
migration and a decline in fisheries will impact the
stability of coastal cities. By overlaying these factors,
we are identifying the most at-risk places for instability
as a result of climate change in order to better target

policies, investment and aid.
It is clear to everyone in this room that climate
change is a security threat. Today, we know that
18 million people were displaced in 2017 alone as a
result of storms, drought, flooding and heat waves. As
we have seen in just the past few Atlantic hurricane
seasons, which have ravaged the Caribbean and Gulf
of Mexico, local Governments simply cannot handle
the increasingly severe weather that is becoming more
common. When local Governments cannot provide
basic services to their people, the result is displacement,
poverty, political instability and violence. Climate
change is also harming the food and economic security
of millions of people. There is an increasing consensus
that more extreme and longer droughts in Africa and
the Middle East are connected to conflict there. As
oceans warm and marine ecosystems shift, coastal
communities, particularly in island nations, will lose
the sources of food and livelihood they have relied on
for generations.

Simply put, climate change makes people less
safe, forcing them to leave their homes and abandon
their livelihoods as they lose access to their income,
food and ways of life. This clearly impacts political
and social stability. Importantly, young people are
particularly vulnerable, be it through human trafficking,
unemployment, poverty or simply not knowing where
their next meal is coining from.

While the United Nations has incorporated climate
change into the mandates of missions, such as in
Somalia, Darfur, Mali, the Central African Republic
and the Lake Chad region, a Security Council resolution
that recognizes the security impacts of climate change
must also require climate sensitivity to be part of the
mandates of all peacekeeping missions and special
political missions.

The next step the Security Council must take will be
to recognize both the disproportionate impact climate
change has on young people and young people's unique
role as innovators, bringing new ideas to the table to
solve this global problem. The Security Council should
require the special representatives of the Secretary-
General at each deployed mission to assess the impact
of climate change on local youth, particularly in terms
of displacement, unemployment, food security, and
recruitment into armed groups, because these are
insecurities that we know drive continued conflict.
The special representatives should brief the Security
Council on their findings. Such assessments would
function as an early-warning mechanism to alert the
Council to areas where climate change will hamper the
ability of United Nations missions to carry out their
conflict prevention and peacebuilding activities.

Deployed missions must also engage young
people in finding solutions to build climate resilience
in their communities. As just one example, in Saint
Lucia, a local young person, Mr. Johanan Dujon saw
how climate-induced blooms of harmful seaweed
damaged the local fishing industry and he created a
fertilizer using the seaweed that had washed ashore.
This improved the resilience of local fishers to climate
change and improved local gardening and agriculture.
In the three years since Mr. Dujon started his business,
he has removed almost 300 tons of seaweed from the
shores of Saint Lucia. More of these innovate solutions
are needed to address climate change around the world.
The United Nations and its newly launched Youth 2030
Strategy can act as a platform where young people can
share their ideas and find support for their initiatives.

Finally, the United Nations must live up to this
organ's long-stated goal to reduce reliance on fossil
fuels in field missions. By reducing the energy footprint
of its deployed missions, the United Nations can reduce
its greenhouse gas pollution while also building
sustainable infrastructure in the communities that it
serves. By using sustainable energy, the United Nations
can prevent its reliance on the fossil fuels market and
build a more self-sufficient community. According
to an environmental study conducted by the United
Nations Department of Field Support, as of April 2017,
renewable energy accounted for less than 1 per cent of
electricity generation in deployed missions, meaning
that missions rely almost entirely on fossil fuels,
particularly diesel. The Security Council should adopt
a resolution to commit to 50 per cent of energy from
renewables by 2025 and use regular reports from the
Secretary-General to track progress.

There is no question that climate change is a
security threat both in its direct impacts and as a threat
multiplier. The United Nations and the Security Council
must live up to their words and act now to mitigate
and adapt to climate change. While I am heartened by
multilateral frameworks like the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change, there is much more to be done. Those
commitments are important, but they are not nearly
good enough if we are to prevent warming above 1.5°C.

Young people must be central to finding and
sustaining these solutions. Almost 2 billion young

people around the world do not have the luxury of
choosing not to care about this issue. And with the help
of the United Nations and its member countries, we will
find solutions. Otherwise it is us, our communities and
our future that will face the consequences.

