Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, and Mr. Adama Dieng, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, for their briefings.

The alarm raised by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights cannot leave the
Council indifferent. The situation in South Sudan
is extremely serious. The country has become an
area of lawlessness. Violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law are increasing,
including deliberate attacks against civilians,
large-scale sexual violence and the recruitment of child
soldiers. A cycle of reprisals has begun, fuelled by
public calls to violence and hatred. Radio broadcasts
intensify that vicious circle by calling for women from
opposing communities to be raped. We are dealing with
a dangerous drift into communitarian conflict, which is
being exploited by both parties.

The humanitarian situation is equally disturbing.
The number of displaced persons and refugees is
increasing by the day. Nearly 5 million people are in
need of humanitarian assistance. In particular, the
situation in the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) camps, which are still home to almost
80,000 civilians, has deteriorated markedly. The rainy
season will further exacerbate the situation, and there
is a threat of famine.

Both parties are responsible for the tragic situation
and the seriousness of the violations committed against
the civil populations. The massacres of Bentiu and
Bor have once again demonstrated that no one has a
monopoly on violence or atrocities. We support the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
mediation efforts, but we must recognize that, today, the
political process is at a standstill. While a ceasefire was
signed on 23 January, the parties still refuse to engage
in peace talks and act only on the basis of the territorial
gains they can make, especially in oil-producing areas.

The Government of South Sudan, just like the
opposition forces, must stop any incitement to hatred
and the attacks against United Nations staff. The
resumption of talks in Addis Ababa on 28 April is an
encouraging sign. We call, as IGAD has, for Mr. Salva
Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar to meet face-to-face to
end the vicious cycle of massacres and decide on a
one-month truce, which will be essential for the South
Sudanese to sow their fields.

While the authorities have the primary
responsibility to protect their citizens, the international
community should take the measures necessary to
ensure the protection of populations under threat. The
Council cannot remain indifferent to the situation in
the country. That is why France supports a rapid review
of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS). All its capacities must be dedicated
to enhancing protection for civilians, respect for human
rights and free access to humanitarian aid.

Noting the lack of political will to reach a peace
agreement, we also believe that the Security Council
should consider the establishment of a sanctions regime
against individuals who oppose the political process. To
answer the legitimate questions asked by the Russian
Federation, the regime could initially not name names
but simply be used as a means to exert pressure on both
parties.

The reign of impunity in South Sudan cannot
continue. Independent and impartial investigations
must be conducted immediately. The perpetrators must
be tried and convicted, regardless of their political
affiliation. The African Union's commission of inquiry
must collect evidence on the crimes committed. The
attacks, in particular those against United Nations bases,
constitute war crimes. Given the exceptional gravity
and scale of the crimes, and within the framework of
a dialogue with IGAD and the African Union, we must
also consider a referral to the International Criminal
Court.

