Mr. Choi (Republic of Korea): The tragic situation of
Liberia was encapsulated by the media images of teenage
soldiers rampaging through the streets of Monrovia toting
deadly weapons and the ordeal of the refugees aboard the
freighter Bulk Challenger earlier this month. The Republic
of Korea expresses its strong indignation at the atrocities
committed by the warring Liberian factions, the wanton
killings, the looting and the destruction which have plunged
Monrovia into total anarchy for nearly two months. The

 

dire humanitarian situation resulting from the carnage is
also cause for serious concern among all of us. What has
been particularly disturbing to my Government was the
disrespect that the Liberian factions have shown towards
the United Nations in the massive and systematic looting
of United Nations property, including most of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia's (UNOMIL)
vehicles and equipment. My Government takes this
opportunity to express its appreciation to the United
States Government for its assistance in evacuating
international personnel from Liberia to safety in
neighbouring countries.

The latest turn of events in Liberia indicates the
limits of the international community's ability to help
restore internal peace and stability in the failed State,
where the warring factions are determined to use any
means to seize power, even at the risk of destroying the
whole country and holding the entire population hostage.
It was made clear once again that the good will of the
international community cannot be a substitute for the
political will of the parties to help themselves in resolving
any conflict. The resumption of fighting has undone much
of the hard-won progress in the Liberian peace process.
It has further deepened the mutual mistrust among the
faction leaders, exacerbating the already daunting
challenges facing the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) and UNOMIL. The Abuja Agreement has
lost much of its credibility and, thus, its chances of being
implemented in its original form.

The question now is: what can the international
community do about all this? The following are my
delegation's observations.

First, the Abuja Agreement should remain the basis
for any effort to restore peace and stability in Liberia,
although its implementation schedule will require
adjustment in the light of latest developments. In this
regard, we welcome the adoption of the Mechanism for
Returning Liberia to the Abuja Agreement by the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Foreign Ministers in Accra early this month. We urge the
Liberian factions to faithfully fulfil the conditions set out
under the Mechanism, as referred to in paragraph 7 of the
Secretary General's report (S/ 1996/362). The commitment
of the Liberian factions to the peace process will be tested
by how faithfully and expeditiously they carry out these
conditions. We also underline the importance of the
Council of State's working within the spirit of the Abuja
Agreement.

Secondly, the international community can make a
difference in Liberia by strengthening the ECOWAS

 

Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) peace-keeping capability.
While much has been said about ECOMOG's controversial
role recently, especially in responding to the latest eruption
of fighting in Monrovia, we believe ECOMOG remains the
only effective deterrent force to bear upon the Liberian
factions. With greater international assistance and logistical
support, we believe ECOMOG can perform better. On its
part, ECOWAS also has its own share of effort to make to
enhance ECOMOG's capability and effectiveness through
an improved force and command structure, strict neutrality
and strengthened discipline. What is at stake here goes
beyond the success or failure of the Liberian peace process.
Given that Liberia is the first case in which a regional
organization has been leading peace-keeping operations in
cooperation with the United Nations, the failure of
ECOMOG's mission could have adverse consequences for
the future role of regional or subregional organizations in
Africa in dealing with intra-regional conflicts.

Thirdly, the faction leaders should be stemly warned
of the possible consequences of their misbehaviour. They
should be held personally responsible for serious violations
of international humanitarian law. Moreover, they should be
served a clear warning that any faction leader who takes
power by any means other than the democratic process will
be denied international recognition. We welcome the
decision of the ECOWAS Foreign Ministers in Accra to
this effect.

Finally, my delegation believes that the arms embargo
put in place by resolution 788 (1992) should be more
effectively implemented. Without a cutting off of the supply
of arms to the factions, the success of the peace process
cannot be ensured.

Regarding the Secretary-General's recommendation to
extend the mandate of UNOMIL for three months, my
delegation supports it with the conviction that the very
presence of UNOMIL in Liberia, even at a minimal level,
carries symbolic significance as a token of the United
Nations commitment to the restoration of peace and
stability in Liberia. It will help foster a climate of
confidence conducive to reviving the peace process.
However, the continued presence of UNOMIL makes sense
only if the Liberian parties demonstrate by concrete actions
their commitment to the peace process, and only as long as
ECOWAS maintains its mission to monitor its
implementation and the safety of UNOMIL personnel is
assured.
In concluding, my Government appeals to the leaders
of the warring factions in Liberia to stop further bloodshed
and return immediately to the peace process. It is high time
for them to rise above their personal greed and ambition for

 

power and to settle their differences through democratic
processes.

