Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canada took note with great interest of the addendum
to the report submitted to the Council by the Panel of
Experts. It was very important that the Panel be able to
complete its difficult work, and we thank them for it.

The addendum to the report takes nothing away
from the severe comments and recommendations
already expressed with respect to the actors operating
with the cooperation or backing of forces exercising
control of the so-called rebel zones. To the contrary, it
presents a more complete and alarming picture of the
extent of the illegal exploitation of natural resources
throughout the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

This additional information put forward by the
Panel of Experts has just increased the growing alarm
of Canada concerning the illegal exploitation of natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This feeds even today a devastating conflict that has
lasted for more than three years now.

Canada would like to reiterate its remarks of
3May and, in particular, its condemnation of any
persons, Governments and armed groups that have
illegally exploited the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and that have, through their
activities, contributed to perpetuating the war in that
country. Canada believes that the Security Council
must ensure that measures are adopted to put an end to
the plundering of the resources in the Congo.

If the Member States in question and other armed
groups refuse to cooperate, the Council should apply
stronger and more effective measures. Moreover, we
believe that vigilance is required now more than ever,
and that the Panel of Experts must be asked to pursue
its work. Its mandate might be usefully adjusted and
extended to make it possible to verify whether the
plundering continues, to see if it develops in new
directions and to better determine how the international
community could contribute to putting an end to it
without further burdening the population in their
economic and security needs.
We are deeply convinced that any progress aimed
at ending the illegal exploitation of natural resources in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will be one
more step towards a return to peace in this country and
in the region.

