Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): Madam
President, it is my pleasure to welcome you and to
commend your delegation for organizing this debate
during this historic occasion of South Africa's
presidency of the Security Council.

Ghana remains deeply committed to President
Thabo Mbeki's vision of an African renaissance that
would enable our continent to assume its rightful place
of honour and dignity in the twenty-first century. This
is the context in which my delegation wishes to situate
its contribution to this morning's debate, which,
inevitably, raises a number of cross-cutting issues
already reflected in the Outcome Document of the
2005 World Summit, including the 10-year plan for
capacity-building and peacekeeping in relation to the
African Union (AU).

It is our view that, beyond the requirements of a
strong African peacekeeping capability necessary for
containing immediate dangers, we cannot afford to
resign ourselves to a mindset that accepts perpetual
conflict as the natural course of events in our

continent. Our cherished vision of an African
renaissance is, indeed, inseparable from the
Millennium Development Goals that represent the
international consensus on the pre-conditions for
achieving lasting peace and security, especially in the
most volatile parts of the world. Therefore, much as we
attach great importance to capacity-building in
peacekeeping, we consider the far less costly strategy
of conflict prevention to be the path to the
empowerment of African States so that we can become
the true masters of our destiny.

In the endeavour to realize a new era of peace
and stability in Africa, the United Nations is an
indispensable ally. Indeed, even if Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter had not explicitly prescribed a
role for regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, the imperatives of our
history and the current situation on our continent
would still have dictated the need for a close and
symbiotic relationship between the United Nations and
the AU. That is evident from the substantial
investments that the world body continues to make in
the peace and developmental process in Africa.

The adoption of Burundi and Sierra Leone by the
Peacebuilding Commission is an example of the sort of
sustained engagement expected of the United Nations
in our region. Therefore, it is of vital importance that
we do our utmost to build a strong partnership between
the AU and the United Nations, so that the two
organizations can complement each other's efforts in a
manner that reflects their need for each other in the
management of conflicts in Africa. Already, some of
the institutional structures of the AU, including the
Peace and Security Council, are substantially modelled
on the United Nations, which should facilitate
increased cooperation and coordination between them.

The grave instability and dire humanitarian
situation in various parts of our continent sometimes
lead us to question whether the vision of an African
renaissance, so well articulated in the New Partnership
for Africa's Development and in the Constitutive Act
of the African Union, has been wholeheartedly
embraced by our Governments and peoples. Two thirds
of all United Nations peacekeeping forces are still
deployed in Africa. The intolerable deprivations
suffered by our people have, in several respects,
become a major preoccupation of various United
Nations specialized agencies. In these circumstances,
we are duty-bound to speak out forcefully in defence of
those principles and values that will help us realize our
shared vision. In the same breath, we must denounce
any tendencies that would diminish the prospects for
achieving a new era of peace and stability in Africa.

In this connection, we welcome the admirable
efforts being made by the African Union and various
subregional bodies, such as the Southern African
Economic Community, the Economic Community of
West African States, the Intergovernmental Authority
of Development and their counterparts to strengthen
their peacemaking capability, with the support of the
United Nations and other international actors.

It must be emphasized, nonetheless, that the
effectiveness of the AU as a partner in peacemaking
does not depend solely on its ability to mobilize
adequate financial and logistical support. It also has
much to do with the extent to which the AU can
transcend any negative constraints on its capabilities
resulting from its internal political dynamics.
Furthermore, it is essential for the AU to pay close
attention to the implications of the integrated approach
to United Nations peace operations that is emerging as
the preferred model.

It has been demonstrated time and again that the
international community is most effective when it
unites behind a common diplomatic endeavour and
backs it with the necessary political will to enforce its
decisions. Unfortunately, we do not live in a perfect
world; the interests of nations frequently clash and
rarely converge, thereby preventing timely and
decisive action, even in the face of unspeakable
atrocities and acute human suffering affecting millions
of people.

Consequently, while my delegation fully supports
the politically expedient principle of African leadership
in peacekeeping on the continent, we wish to caution
against stretching that idea too far lest it become
another paralysing dogma. Even if co-deployment
between the United Nations and regional bodies
represents the most viable alternative to traditional
peacekeeping, what should be the overriding objective
in such situations is the interest of the innocent civilian
victims of conflict, especially women and children,
who deserve adequate protection from the international
community.
On the other hand, let me hasten to add that
decision-making within the United Nations itself has
occasionally been held hostage by vested interests that

are not necessarily limited to the most powerful
Members. Certainly, the internal dynamics of both
organizations have impacted on their relationship with
each other, and not always positively. These factors
need to be carefully considered, if realism is to prevail
in the partnership between the United Nations and the
AU.

Ghana is proud to be among the countries that
have so far signed on to the African Peer Review
Mechanism, and in 2005 we submitted ourselves before
a panel for a critical review of our internal situation.
We believe that it is only through recognizing our
individual national failings and taking the necessary
steps to correct them that Africa will emerge stronger
and more resilient. We hope the United Nations will
take an active interest in and support the African Peer
Review Mechanism so that it can make a strong
contribution to peace and security in Africa.

To conclude, there is need for a more systematic
and sustained follow-up to the strategic shift that has
occurred in contemporary thinking about peace and
security. African States have long recognized that
substantial progress in the areas of good governance,
democracy, security sector reform, rule of law,
economic reform and social justice, among other areas,
is a prerequisite for durable peace and stability. If the
AU is to fulfil its Chapter VIII responsibility as a pillar
of the global security architecture, then it must be
encouraged and supported to pursue a strategy of pre-
emption that addresses the underlying causes of
conflict and instability in our region in a holistic
manner. Short of that, the African renaissance is
unlikely to materialize this century.

In closing, we fully support the draft Presidential
statement that the South African delegation has kindly
prepared.

