Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ian Martin, for his briefing, and would
like to express our appreciation for the work that he
has accomplished since he was appointed.

The general development of the situation over the
past several months has indeed been positive. We
welcome in particular the very satisfactory conditions
in which the elections were held. This was a success
for the Nepalese people, and also a success for the
United Nations, which played an essential role in
re-establishing democracy.

Nevertheless, we must remain vigilant. The delay
in forming a new Government - which we understand
will take place soon - shows that the political process
remains complex and fragile. Building peace and
democracy in Nepal constitutes a long-term process
which has only just started. The new Government will
rapidly have to tackle numerous challenges.

In these circumstances, we are of the view that
the Security Council should respond positively to the
Nepalese authorities' request for an extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) for a further six months. In this regard, my
delegation would like to thank the United Kingdom for
having prepared a draft resolution in this regard, which
we support.

By continuing its work in monitoring the
management of arms and armies over this period - a
task on which the Mission should focus - UNMIN
will give the new authorities time to find a lasting
solution to pending problems linked to the
implementation of the peace process. The meaning of
UNMIN's continued presence, however, must be clear:
it would be a temporary arrangement which cannot and
must not replace the search for a lasting solution to
the problem of the future of the former Maoist
combatants - quite the contrary. The Nepalese parties
have sought United Nations support for the peace
process and, for their part, they must shoulder their
responsibilities in order to advance this process. The
Secretary-General's midterm report will be an
opportunity for the Security Council to assess the
progress that has been made.

In this regard, I would like to express our deep
concern at the complete lack of progress made in the
discharge of children from Maoist cantonments.
Nothing can justify this absence of progress, and the
Security Council must remain vigilant and firm in
dealing with this particularly unacceptable situation
which has gone on for far too long.

At the end of UNMIN's mandate, the
international community will of course remain
committed to the Nepalese people. The future
government will have to identify its needs in this area
and, in particular, to assess the appropriateness of
possibly maintaining more streamlined United Nations
presence in support of the political process.

In any event, Nepal can count on the solidarity of
the European Union, which is the largest donor of
development assistance to this country. The European
Union has been strongly engaged in support of the
peace process and, in particular, has deployed a large
election observation mission consisting of some 100
short- and long-term observers. The Union will
continue to actively support democracy-building and
economic and social development in Nepal.

