Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
I would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Farid Zarif for his briefing. We
also welcome Prime Minister Ivica Dacie and Prime
Minister Hashim Thaci back to the Council and thank
them for their statements today.

The year 2013 was an important year for Belgrade
and Pristina on their path towards normalizing relations.
In order to maintain the positive momentum of last
year, the full and more effective implementation of the
19 April Agreement should be an urgent priority. In
that regard, we are pleased to note the tangible progress
both sides have made in the European Union-facilitated
high-level dialogue and its technical working group.
Indeed, the Agreement has already led to a number of
changes on the ground, such as the gradual transition
of the police structures in northern Kosovo. Building
upon such achievements, we look to Serbia and
Kosovo to increase their efforts towards resolving the
remaining differences, mainly in the areas ofjudiciary
integration. We hope that the next round of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue, to be held this week, will
lead to mutually acceptable solutions on those issues.

We also welcome the successful conclusion of the
second round of local elections in Kosovo. That is a
milestone towards normalizing relations between the
two sides and represents a big step towards regional
peace and stability. We thank the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo
Force for their indispensable contribution to ensuring
a safe and secure electoral process throughout the
country. At the same time, we strongly condemn the
election-related violence and the killing of the member
of the North Mitrovica Municipal Assembly. Such an
attempt to derail hard-won progress cannot be tolerated
and needs to be addressed decisively.

Another issue that must be considered in that
context is the scepticism and resistance of ethnic Serbs.
Winning their hearts and minds remains a challenging
task, but is essential to building lasting peace. Achieving
that will require time and good faith on all sides. In
that connection, we would like to emphasize that the
ongoing integration process in northern Kosovo should
be fully inclusive and cohesive. Furthermore, as part of
its efforts to build a harmonious, multi-ethnic society,
Kosovo must uphold its commitment to protect the
rights of ethnic minorities. In particular, further efforts
are needed to foster a more conducive environment for
the return of internally displaced persons. That should
be done by facilitating their access to housing and basic
services while ensuring the appropriate security. The
new strategy on the reintegration of repatriated persons
for the period 2014 to 2018, as approved by the Kosovo
authorities, is a most welcome measure in that regard.

Before concluding, we would like to commend
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Farid
Zarif and the entire team of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo for their valuable
contribution to promoting stability in Kosovo and the
region.

