Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, Bolivia wishes
to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Miroslav Jenca, for his briefing this
morning. Bolivia is attending this meeting to make
known its concern regarding the latest developments in
the occupied Palestinian territories.

We are concerned about the information circulated
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs that on the morning of 21 August Israel
demolished a nursery in the Bedouin community ofJabal
al-Baba, in the occupied territory ofthe West Bank. We
wish to make known our deep rejection of this type of
unilateral action taken by the Government of Israel, as
such are violations of international law, human rights
and international humanitarian law. As expressed by
the Council in resolution 242 (1967), of 22 November
1967, the fulfilment of Charter principles requires the
establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, which should include, among other things, the
termination of all claims or states of belligerency and
respect for and acknowledgement of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of every
State in the area and their right to live in peace within
secure and recognized boundaries free from threats or
acts of force.

For Bolivia, the solution by which two States would
live side by side, with secure borders recognized by
both, is the only alternative that, based on dialogue, will
allow Palestine to achieve its full development in all
spheres - political, social, economic and cultural. In
that regard, we join in and commend all efforts aimed at
reaching a peaceful settlement of the conflict between
Palestine and Israel, such as the Arab Peace Initiative,
the Quartet road map and others, and at ensuring a just
and lasting peace for both peoples. We reaffirm our
full commitment to multilateralism and debate framed
in respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States.

However, it is essential that efforts to resolve the
conflict between Israel and Palestine continue to be a
matter ofpriority to be addressedbythe Security Council,
with the understanding that it is our responsibility to be
the guarantor of international peace and security and
to take timely action to safeguard the integrity of both
peoples. We should not allow ourselves to be immersed
in delaying tactics that are used by the occupying
Power to continue with its colonizing activities. It is
unacceptable that, under the pretext of security and
public order, the Government of Israel should blatantly
continue its policies and practices aimed at altering the
demographic composition, character and status of the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem. We must remember that such measures
were condemned by the Security Council in several
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). We
cannot allow, by our inaction, situations such as those
that occurred last July in the clashes in East Jerusalem
and the West Bank to be repeated. As Council members,
we cannot allow more violence that adds to the number
of dead, be they Israeli or Palestinian, to take place.

Bolivia reaffirms that the lack of accountability
for violations of international law committed by Israel
serves to reinforce a culture of impunity, leading to a
recurrence of violations and seriously endangering the
maintenance of international peace, as established in
Human Rights Council resolution S-21/ 1.

Once again, we express our commitment to the
immediate and timely implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), and we again call for the next report to be
circulated in advance and in writing to the members
of the Council for their thorough consideration. In that
context, all settlement activities being carried out by
the Government of Israel in the occupied Palestinian
territories must cease, as well as any expansionist
activities that undermine any possibility of dialogue
between Palestinians and Israelis.

We vehemently reaffirm that the only long-term
solution to the conflict is the two-State solution, with
an Israeli State and a free, sovereign and independent
Palestinian State, within the pre-1967 international
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and of the General Assembly.

