Mr. Sharmarke (Somalia): I am pleased to be
present here today to participate in discussions on
moving Somalia forward. It is indeed an honour for
Somalia and to all of us here. Somalia cannot thank
the Security Council enough for all that it has done to
support it over the years. I was pleased to hear from
the speakers before me today of their optimism and
commitment to support the progress that Somalia is
making.

I would also like to welcome the United Kingdom

Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonweath
Affairs, Mr. Philip Hammond, and to commend him
for his leadership in presiding over today's meeting. I
would also like to thank the Special Representative to
the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Kay, for his role
in Somalia over the past two and a half years. Those
must have been two difficult but also rewarding years
for him in term of the progress that Somalia has made
during his tenure as the Special Representative of the
Secretary General. Mr. Kay has been steadfast in his
support and infectious optimism for Somalia. It is a
matter of disappointment that he has not been left to
complete the process, which he has invested so much
effort and emotion in shaping, along with national and
international partners, especially at the present moment,
when Somalia is experiencing an unprecedented level of
collective momentum in the political process. I would
like to assure Mr. Kay and the Council that Somalia's
political leadership, both at Federal and regional levels,
are committed to move forward what is in the best
interests of its people and country. All of us recognize
that it is in the best of interests of Somalia to complete
the State-building and electoral processes within the
mandate of the current Government, which ends in
August 2016.

As all the briefers attested to, significant progress
has been made in Somalia in almost all security and
political fronts. At this early stage of rebuilding our
Government, we have yet to bolster the economic
sector, as has been the case with reard to the political
and security sectors. With much more remaining to be
done, as leaders we are prepared to go the extra mile to
record more progress.

The progress in Somalia since this Government
took over the reins of leadership, at the end of 2012,
the challenges that have to be overcome and the tasks
that are still outstanding were all covered in great
detail during the last High-level Partnership Forum,
held in Mogadishu from 29 to 30 July. We are certain
to talk about even greater milestones at the next such
meeting, to be held some time in February 2016. We
encourage high-level participation and we hope both
you, Mr. President, and Secretary-General Ban Ki-
moon will join us to take stock of our achievements
and challenges and to plan for a sprint-lap to elections
in 2016.

As the Council is well aware, we held a series of
top-level meetings on the political process in the month
of October, which culminated in the inauguration of
national consultative forum. Its maiden plenary session,
which was held in Mogadishu on 19 and 20 October,
brought together high-level representatives from the
existing four regional administrations, led by their
respective Presidents, the top leadership of the Federal
Government of Somalia, as well as representatives from
our international partners. Regional-level consultations
will start in earnest in a matter of days, ahead of the
national consultative forum meeting in December, to
discuss and unveil the best possible election option,
in the absence of a one-person-one-vote election, and
agree on a timeline for the process for elections, which
must take place in 2016.

I am pleased to say that the process of establishing
the last and final interim regional administration has
officially begun. A technical committee, which will
manage the process, has been put together. We expect
to usher in the birth of a new regional administration,
Hiraan and Middle Shabelle, by the end of the year.

The reconstruction-review process is in progress.
Although we are not happy with the pace of progress,
the institutions concerned are progressing in a manner
that has neveaur before been seen.

A United Nations-facilitated workshop on the
constitutional review, with stakeholder participation,
was recently held in Mogadishu under my stewardship.
A review of two chapters has been concluded, and we
expect the remainder to be fast-tracked.

There is no refuting the fact that we have made
gains in the security sector. To cement those gains,
the leadership of the Federal Government of Somalia
has made public its commitment to security-sector
reform, especially in the areas of transparency and
accountability. Progress in the integration of forces is
under way. The Guulwade (Victory) Plan is key to the
success of the integration process. What has not been
inspiring, however, is the lack of donor support for the
plan - as elaborate as it is. The Somali National Army
still lacks in equipment, training and logistical support.
That has hampered our ability to leverage the benefit of
force integration in terms of the envisioned sustained
offensive operations against Al-Shabaab. While being
committed, the Federal Government of Somalia still
faces challenges in assuming full responsibility for
the payment of salaries to the security forces. Once we
attain that goal, which we hope to do by January 2016,
we hope to redirect stipends funding from our partners
to further cover equipment, training and logistical
support.

Despite the military gains against Al-Shabaab that
Council members have mentioned, Al-Shabaab's recent
offensive attacks against the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and Somali National Army
targets are disconcerting, to say the least. Complex
attacks against hotels are a sign that, although Somalia

and its international partners have won the war against
Al-Shabaab, that group has yet to be dismantled.
The Somali terror network's recent proclamation of
allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) is not to be taken lightly. For all its modest gains
against that terrorist organization, Somalia cannot
afford to allow a space for ISIS to exploit, which could
enable it to reverse the hard-earned progress on security
for which AMISOM. and the Somali National Army
have sacrificed so many lives. That is why we need the
support of the Council more than ever before: to stand
with Somalia against that terror network and to deny
it the ability to regroup and to pose renewed threats in
Somalia and the region.

A resolution of the crisis in Yemen is crucial. That
would go a long way towards keeping Al-Shabaab from
accruing support from ISIS by using Yemen as conduit
or launching pad. It is also vital to rally support for the
Guulwade Plan. The Federal Government is committed
to building the ability of its security forces to absorb the
kind of support that they expect from our international
partners. That is thejob of the leadership of the Somali
National Army, as well as the essence of effecting
recent leadership changes at the top, namely, to bring
about strategic, technical and operational reforms. The
Federal Government of Somalia is prepared to back up
those changes with progressive policies and civilian
control.

There is a serious need for AMISOM. and the
Somali National Army to reflect on recent attacks on
their bases. The toll that Al-Shabaab is exacting against
them compromises the confidence of the Somali people
with respect to confronting Al-Shabaab. We welcome
and encourage the efforts of our international partners
to eliminate the leadership of Al-Shabaab. We owe it
to AMISOM. and to the Somali National Army to fulfil
their commitment to defeating them.

Finally, concerning security, while our special
forces have performed impeccably well in saving lives,
in real time, in the face of complex attacks on civilian
business premises, our intelligence and pre-emptive
capacities remain seriously flawed. Because of
systematic intelligence shortcomings, our people are
being subjected to preventable losses. That must end. It
is disappointing that we seem to have resorted to verbal
condemnations of Al-Shabaab. Their tactics are well
known. We must focus further on action. With better
coordination among AMISOM. forces and between
AMISOM. and the Somali National Army, we can again
turn the tables against Al-Shabaab and neutralize its
ability to pose any real threat to civilian or military
targets.

Thanks to the Security Council's anti-piracy
resolutions, we have seen almost no incidents of
violence during the past two years or so in Somali
waters. While the result is reassuring, there is a need for
sustainability. There is a need to protect the livelihood
of coastal communities, long ravaged by piracy
activities. Somalia also needs the Coucil's support with
respect to illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
in its waters.

Lastly, poverty and the lack of economic
prosperity play a major role in the appeal of extremism
and terrorism. Uneducated, underemployed and
unemployed youths remain a ticking time-bomb
for Somalia - time that we cannot afford to waste.
Somalia needs investment to support job-creation
initiatives, education, vocational training and other
basic infrastructure development programmes that will
lead to true stability and sustainability. We can look
to examples in the region for proof that the appeal to
violent extremism decreases with individual or societal
prosperity. As a Government, we are putting in place
the necessary legal frameworks to attract and guarantee
investment.

Ones again, I would like to thank the Council and
its leadership for promoting world peace and prosperity
in general and for its continued support to the people
of Somalia.

