Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I am very
proud and honoured to be saying goodbye to the
members of the Security Council at a meeting presided
over by you, Sir, and attended by our much admired
Secretary-General.

I do not know which humanitarian said that if he
had been present alongside God at the day of creation,
he would have provided Him with some ideas on how
to order the world differently. I could have said as
much about the Security Council if I had been in San
Francisco in 1945, particularly on 13 June. I would
have offered some ideas on how to reform the Security
Council to make it better, but what I would not
change - and I say this with appreciation and
fondness - is the human and professional quality of
the people with whom I have sat on the Council
throughout the past year and a half.

We have experienced an agitated, volatile and
tortured year and a half. There was a resolution in
November 2002 that was a wonder of diplomatic
architecture. However, a few months later it became
the mother of all ambiguities. Sometimes technocrats
are the best, and at other times we have to consider
politicians. Personally, for some time I have been a
member of the coalition, but not an occupying Power,
and now I also believe I am not a member of the
coalition.

As I said, we have experienced times of flux, but
I am firm in and serious about my appreciation for all
the persons, all the colleagues-Ambassadors,
Permanent Representatives, other representatives -
whom I have had the pride and honour to have worked
with during that time. If Lakhdar Brahimi were to
come to study the members of the Council, and if he
was not clear about whether he wanted politicians or
technocrats, I do not know how he would categorize
us, but I am sure that we, at least my colleagues, are
honourable, serious, very professional people who have
served the interests of their countries, always bearing
in mind the importance of the values and the principles
of the United Nations. When things clash, we are left
with a bad feeling.

I do not want to conclude without paying a tribute
to Mr. Kofi Annan, who has always inspired my
diplomatic work. I believe he is, if not the best -
which he probably is - one of the best Secretaries-
General the United Nations has had, and when we
allow him, something we do not always do, he always
does something that benefits humanity and the
Organization.

To conclude on a happier note, I wish, for two
reasons, to refer specifically to the Ambassador of
China. I want to offer him a small gift - first, because
I admire Ambassador Wang - I wish he were here -
and I want to offer him a gift that symbolizes Chinese
diplomacy - something reflective, observant, fair-
playing, yet, at the moment of truth, firm and decisive.
My first reason is my admiration for him and for
Chinese diplomacy. The second reason is because
China is sitting in the very seat in which I would have
sat had I finished my tour in the Security Council,
which has been shortened because things are as they
are. In summing up Chinese diplomacy, I would like to
offer Ambassador Wang Ronaldo's Real Madrid team
jersey, which I believe symbolizes, as I have said,
reflective, observant, fair-playing diplomacy, but which
at the moment of truth is firm and decisive.

I thank all members of the Council. I hope the
United Nations will continue to be what we all want it
to be, or even more.

