Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): Ijoin others in
thanking Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
comprehensive briefing. I welcome and thank the
delegations of Palestine and Israel for their
participation in this debate of the Council. We align
ourselves with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The serious engagement of Palestinian factions
over the past month in a dialogue process mediated by
Egypt has led to the establishment of five committees
that are working on national reconciliation issues, the
successful outcome of the Cairo international

conference on the reconstruction of Gaza and the
further efforts of the Palestinian Authority to improve
socio-economic rehabilitation and reconstruction,
especially in the face of the devastating global
financial crisis.

These developments, however, remain
overshadowed by the extent and scope of the
challenges that persist in the region. We condemn
Israel's continued military activities and
bombardments, its ongoing construction of the
separation wall and its expansion of illegal settlements
in the West Bank. In the same vein, we condemn rocket
attacks against Israeli civilians.

Already pauperized by an l8-month blockade and
a tight regime of closures and restrictions on
movements that date back to the early 19905, the
Palestinian population in Gaza has been driven to the
limit of human suffering by the unprecedented
aggravation and hardship in the aftermath of the war.
The recent tragic events in Gaza only further prove that
violence will not and can never be a solution to the
Israel-Palestine conflict. At this politically delicate
juncture, pending the formation of a new Government
in Israel and the outcome of reconciliation efforts
among Palestinian factions, we call upon all the parties
concerned to opt for peaceful rather than military
means for settling their disputes and to desist from any
action that is detrimental to innocent civilians and to
the process of negotiations towards a two-State
solution to the conflict.

We underline the pressing need for the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009), especially
with regard to a durable, lasting and fully respected
ceasefire, the opening of border crossings and intra-
Palestinian reconciliation. In that connection, the role
played by the United Nations, the League of Arab
States and countries of the region remains essential.

We support collective efforts aimed at addressing
the heavy casualties and damage to the physical life
and psychological well-being of the Palestinian people
and the immediate post-conflict needs of affected
families, as well as at facilitating long-term recovery
and reconstruction in Gaza. We commend United
Nations agencies, in particular the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, and other humanitarian organizations for
their bravery in rendering emergency assistance to
Gazans, and we urge the parties concerned to extend
the fullest cooperation in facilitating humanitarian
activities.

We urge all parties concerned to respect
international humanitarian and human rights laws in all
circumstances. In this connection, we welcome the
Secretary-General's initiative to dispatch the board of
inquiry to Gaza, and we look forward to the report on
the results of its investigation.

A lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East cannot be disassociated from concurrent progress
on other, related tracks. We note the steps taken by the
Government of Lebanon to assert full authority over its
territory, strengthen the country's political stability and
socio-economic development and normalize relations
with countries of the region. We join the Secretary-
General in condemning the recent terrorist attack
against PLO personnel in Lebanon and request that the
culprits be brought to justice. We call upon all parties
in Lebanon to refrain from violence, build on the
general momentum of national unity and reconciliation
created since the signing of Doha Agreement, in May
2008, and concentrate their efforts on ensuring that the
parliamentary elections scheduled for 7 June 2009 are
conducted in a free, fair and peaceful manner.

While reiterating our support for the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), we stress
the imperative for all parties concerned to work
together to peacefully tackle such outstanding issues as
Israel's intensified air violations of Lebanese territory
and its continued occupation of the northern part of the
village of al-Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the
Blue Line, the unresolved status of Shaba'a farms and
the environmental contamination and civilian
casualties due to Israel's failure to provide the
technical strike data on the cluster munitions and
landmines used earlier by its forces.

