Dr. Amathila (Namibia): The most recent open event
in the General Assembly took place on World Aids Day.
Men, women and children from all walks of life came to
pay tribute to those who have fallen victim to this scourge.
Some told their own real-life stories and those of their
families, and today, at the first meeting of the Security
Council for this millennium, the plight of Africa and its
fight against HIV/AIDS is being highlighted.

I am pleased to note that on 13 January, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees will address this
Council on the inhuman conditions in which millions of
refugees and internally displaced persons in Africa are
living. She will no doubt talk about, among other issues,
the impact of HIV/AIDS on women and girl refugees in
particular. The Executive Director of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the head of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
the President of the World Bank have given us a detailed
analysis of the impact of HIV/AIDS in Africa. Thus, we
view today's high-profile meeting not as an end in itself,
but as a very important beginning of the focus on the
impact of HIV/AIDS in Africa.

You have participated personally, Mr. President, in no
small measure. That is testimony to your personal
commitment and that of your Government to the cause of
Africa. Your country has made significant national gains in
curbing the spread of HIV/AIDS and improving the quality
of life of those already infected. We call on your
Government to take the lead in mobilizing the
pharmaceutical industry to work with African Governments
and the World Health Organization for more affordable
access by Africa to life-saving and life-enhancing drugs for
the treatment of AIDS.

We thank the Secretary-General for his participation.
His report on the work of the Organization (A/54/l),
submitted to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth
session, was very clear on the impact of HIV/AIDS in
Africa and we encourage him to keep up his advocacy.

Anything that is a threat to the social and economic
development of Africa is, in turn, a threat to its political
stability. As long as the HIV/AIDS pandemic continues
to grow, political stability and peace will be affected. Due
to the incapacity of Governments to effectively deal with
the needs of those affected, the anger and frustration will
continue to escalate. The social infrastructure, such as
hospitals, cannot cope with the many cases coming in.
Although it is known that there are drugs that can prolong
and improve the quality of life, African Governments
cannot afford them. Therefore, in our view, security needs
to be visualized as part of a complex of issues affecting
the manner in which we perceive and deal with socio-
economic and political problems. It is in this context that
we welcome today's meeting.

More than 23 million people - whether the
statistics indicate 21 million or 23 million is immaterial;
we know that it is a huge number - are infected with
HIV/AIDS in Africa today. A continent which is home to
only 10 per cent of the world's population probably
carries now over 70 per cent of the world's total HIV
cases. The impact of the social and economic
consequences of HIV/AIDS is being felt through the
erosion of growth in gross domestic product, especially in
the heavily affected countries. This is affecting the labour
force, which in turn negatively affects the breadwinners
and their families. As a result, the future of children in
general, and HIV/AIDS orphans in particular, is
compromised. We do not know whether such children
will be able to continue with their schooling, because the
breadwinners have died. Usually it is the father who dies
first, followed shortly afterwards by the mother, and the
children are left in the hands of their grandparents.

Wherever there is a conflict, sexual violence is used
as a weapon of war. Refugees, in particular women and
girls fleeing from conflict situations, are at risk of being
infected with the virus. It is estimated that 250,000
children between the ages of 7 and 18 years actively
participate as child soldiers in armed conflict around the
world, and many of them are sexually active. Of course
it is not known how many are HIV-positive, but we can
assume that a high percentage of them are positive. Let
loose in the communities, they perpetrate sexual violence
against their captives, thereby further increasing the
spread of HIV/AIDS.

While the issue of HIV/AIDS is not under the
purview of the Security Council, the primary
responsibility of the Security Council in the maintenance
of international peace and security will contribute in a

 

major way to minimizing the impact of HIV/AIDS in
Africa. By effectively addressing conflict situations in
Africa, the Security Council will no doubt assist African
Governments in devoting more resources to tackling social
and economic problems. In this connection, we urge the
arms-producing countries to cease providing arms to rebel
movements in Africa. It is very important to bring conflict
to an end in Africa so that peace and security can become
a reality, giving a chance to the African Governments to
pay attention to the priority issues of health and social
development.

Let me say a few words about peacekeeping. At the
outset, I would like to salute the peacekeepers for the work
they have done and are doing, often at the risk of losing
their own lives. In this connection, it is important that the
training of the military and police forces covers HIV/AIDS
prevention and understanding of how to protect themselves.
Peacekeepers, military observers and relief workers need to
be well briefed on the implications of HIV-risk behaviour,
through education on prevention. The means of protection
must also be readily available to such people. In the
demobilization of ex-combatants, in particular child
soldiers, HIV/AIDS prevention issues need to be
highlighted. The demobilization of child soldiers should
include psychological counselling and HIV prevention.

Let me emphasize that the tragedy of AIDS in
southern Africa warrants an emergency response from the
international community. HIV/AIDS is a developmental,
social and national security issue. African Governments
have realized the multidimensional nature of HIV/AIDS and
have therefore embarked on a programme of expanded
response. This means that HIV/AIDS is everybody's
business and no longer just the business of ministries of
health and social services. However, those Governments
cannot effectively combat HIV/AIDS due to a lack of
resources and drugs.

Currently, the resources available for the prevention
and treatment of HIV/AIDS are disproportionate to the
problem. Estimates have it that out of the $2.5 billion
needed in Africa each year, only $165 million is
available - I think that Dr. Piot said $150 million, but it
does not make that much difference. We therefore call on
the international community to make resources available
and to subsidize drugs to African Governments.

You will agree with me, Mr. President, that it is
immoral that the worst-affected continent has the least
access to the care and social and economic safety nets that
might help families cope with the impact of this epidemic.
Africa today has the least access to HIV drugs, but major
access to arms. In countries marred by conflicts,
Governments are forced by circumstances to channel their
resources to the efforts to bring about peace, rather than
to caring for the sick. And so thousands of infected
persons die without any hope of the treatment that would
prolong their lives.

The political commitment of African Governments
to the prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS is quite
visible. However, the lack of resources is a real constraint
that needs to be addressed by the international
community. Even in Namibia, where we allocate over 15
per cent of gross domestic product to health and social
services, we have not made an impact on the treatment of
HIV/AIDS. The cost of drugs to us is extremely
prohibitive.

I should mention, however, that as far as social
mobilization, awareness and advocacy are concerned, we
have made significant progress. I remember going to a
village in the farthest corner of Namibia, where I met an
old man of whom I asked: "Do you know anything about
HIV/AIDS?" He said, "Yes, I have heard, and I keep on
telling young people that they must use condoms; but,
Doctor, I have not seen a condom myself". So I left him
a condom, as I am sure he was neglected because of his
age. I am sure that since then he has been going around
with his condom to show the young men: "This is what
I am talking about".

Furthermore, the Namibian Government is in the
process of establishing a fund for AIDS orphans and
pensioners, which our President launched barely two
months ago. This is to assist old people, who invariably
have to look after the children of their own dead children.
Namibia and South Africa are the only countries I know
of in Africa that are giving universal grants to all
pensioners, regardless of whether they have worked or
not. But that pension is meagre and will not be enough to
help old people look after orphans. We have therefore set
up a fund for orphans and pensioners to help in this
regard.

African Governments are increasingly urged to
invest more resources on HIV/AIDS. But where will these
resources come from? Today, half of those infected are
children between the ages of 15 and 24. Ninety per cent
of those are in Africa, as can be seen from the table.
What does this mean for Africa's future? Not many
Governments can afford the drugs, and as a result, a

 

difficult choice has to be made between prevention and
treatment for those already infected.

I would therefore recommend that World AIDS Day
be commemorated in a more high-profile manner, consistent
with the seriousness of the problem. For example, we
would like to propose that activities on World AIDS Day
at the United Nations be focused solely on raising
awareness about the pandemic. A lot still remains to be
done in raising awareness.
In May this year, UNAIDS will convene a board
meeting in Geneva. The International Partnership against
AIDS in Africa is currently being formed, and the
Partnership will be launched at that board meeting. Let me
strongly echo the call made by the Secretary-General to the
international community,

"to formulate a response commensurate with the scale
of the crisis, led by African Governments but with
civil society, the private sector, the United Nations
and donor Governments playing a full role".

Furthermore, drug companies have a moral
responsibility in this pandemic. We therefore urge them to
sell their drugs at subsidized prices to African Governments
so we are not left to allow our people to die. As was
correctly mentioned, we can at least prolong the life of a
mother to make it possible for her to at least see her
children through primary school. We therefore need to get
these drugs in Africa.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
HIV/AIDS is now the leading cause of death in our
countries of southern Africa. Over 50 per cent of hospital
beds are occupied by HIV/AIDS patients. Over 60 per cent
of paediatric hospital beds are occupied by HIV/AIDS
cases. HIV/AIDS in Africa can be prevented, and we have
seen the results of our colleagues who started before us.
With the provision of drugs, the quality of life of these
affected people can be prolonged and enhanced. AIDS has
lowered the average life expectancy levels in some of our
countries by as much as 10 years.

I would like to share with you a measure we have
adopted in the field of prevention, namely the letters A-B-
C. A means "Abstinence"; B stands for "Be faithful to one
partner" and C means "use Condoms". This is how we are
trying to change the behaviour of our communities. Let us
hold hands together to fight the pandemic of HIV/AIDS.

Finally, Mr. President, I cannot end without
expressing my Government's deep thanks to you for your
dedication to this cause. I did not see you when you were
in Africa. The timing was bad because we were trying to
hold our elections; but I was happy that you were there
and I am pleased to meet you here. I want to thank you
for this specific and timely initiative you have taken in
bringing to the forefront the impact of HIV/AIDS. I hope
that this will now be a regular session at the Security
Council. Let it not be the first and last time we meet on
this issue, but let it be a yearly event so that we may all
touch base.

