Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to welcome you to the Security Council, Mr. President,
and congratulate you on presiding over today's meeting,
as well as to thank Nigeria for taking the initiative in
organizing this open debate on security sector reform
(SSR). I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his statement.

Security sector reform consists of several elements
and is an important instrument for both peacebuilding
and conflict prevention. Such reform must therefore
be comprehensive and include all the elements that go
to make up the security sector - police, the military,
intelligence and border-control services, the protection
of civilians and more. It must establish effective,
accountable and professional institutions in order to
strengthen the security of peoples and States.

Chad welcomes the fact that SSR has become
an essential component of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations as well as United Nations-
initiated development. We commend the significant
achievements of the United Nations in this area,
including, among others, the creation and strengthening
of special inter-agency SSR teams, SSR capacity-
building in missions and at Headquarters, and the
establishment of SSR expert groups and of dialogues
and partnerships with regional organizations, Member
States and civil society. The United Nations has also
provided assistance to several national processes,
including through technical, legal and political advice,
the assessment and analysis of needs, and technical
support for developing political strategies and plans for
SSR.

Successful security sector reform depends primarily
on national authorities' ownership of the process and firm
commitment to designing and implementing national
strategies and priorities. In that regard, beyond the
support forthcoming from the international community,
national authorities must allocate supplementary
resources in order to operationalize the process. Chad,
which underwent several successive armed conflicts
after its independence in 1960, has become a place of
relative peace and stability, thanks to reforms in the
areas of defence, policing and justice. Those reforms
were implemented thanks to national dialogue and
reconciliation efforts and an effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, coupled
with subregional efforts backed by agreements with
its neighbours, leading to the professionalization and
strengthening of the security sector. Chad is happy to
share its modest experience and proud to be able to
contribute today to regional and international efforts
aimed at promoting and maintaining peace and stability
in the subregion and the world.

In the face of the growing threats in the Sahel-
Saharan region, which include terrorism, organized
crime and trafficking in drugs, humans and arms, to
which we can add the challenge presented by porous
borders, it is important to think more deeply about
reforming the security, customs, intelligence and
border-control sectors within a subregional framework
and linking such reforms to regulation of small arms,
light weapons and mines. Chad welcomes the increasing
number and diversity of the stakeholders involved
in the process of security sector reform at both the
national and regional levels. Such growth can enrich
the exchange of knowledge and experience between
Member States on a regional and subregional scale.

In that context, we commend the complementary
nature of efforts in the Sahel region, aimed at
strengthening cooperation by sharing information and
experience on security sector reform. Such efforts,
which complement and consolidate efforts within the
States concerned, should therefore receive support
from the United Nations and all development partners.
To that end, the African Union, as part of its strategic
partnership for implementing its Policy Framework
on Security Sector Reform, could help in developing
guidelines for reform, based on regional perspectives
and taking into account the aforementioned threats

In conclusion, in spite of the ground that has
been covered since the Secretary-General's 2008
report (S/2008/39) and the many achievements I have
mentioned, there is still much to do in order to tackle
the many challenges linked to security sector reform.
