Mr. Siazon (Philippines): First of all, allow me to
commend you, Sir, and your country in particular for your
commitment to peace and sustainable development in
Africa.

I appreciate the candidness with which the Secretary-
General has reported on Africa. His reports have held
nothing back. His are reports that call on all of us to give
our all in turn.

The Philippines shares with Africa similar colonial
pasts, the diversities of our people, the mistakes of our
leaders and the manipulations of world Powers. I do not
seek to oversimplify the problems of Africa by creating
analogies. Rather, I would like to emphasize the
commitment of my country, though distant and facing its
own challenges, to joining all others in working towards a
durable peace and for sustainable development in Africa.

The Philippines commends the decision by the
Foreign Ministers of the members of the Security Council
on 25 September 1997 to consider the need for a concerted
international effort in promoting peace and security in
Africa. We are also pleased to note that the Security
Council has pursued appropriate action with respect to the
recommendations of the Secretary-General in document
A/52/87l on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.

Efforts aimed at preventing armed conflicts must
continue to be directed towards those parts of Africa where
the potential for conflict remains high. At the same time,
the international community must accord the fullest support
to Security Council resolutions 1196 (1998) and 1197
(1998) aimed at strengthening both the effectiveness of
arms embargoes on conflict areas and the peacekeeping
capacity of the African countries themselves. These are
steps in the right direction. These initiatives have had some
success, but more must be done.

We must be prepared to establish legal regimes that
will penalize - through sanctions, for example - those
who continue to transfer arms into conflict areas in Africa
in excess of the legitimate defence needs of African
countries. We have to put all our creative energies to
work to stop the flow of small arms. Often, the illicit
small arms trade and its flow of finances and profits are
facilitated by bribery and corruption. We must be ready
to resort to every means, to take every measure to stop
the flow of small arms and the profane profits from its
trade. Initiatives similar to that taken by the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development to reduce the
scope for corruption in aid-funded procurement should be
seriously considered and applied to the illicit trade in
small arms.

I believe that the Security Council itself should
consider these measures. The international conference on
small arms and lights weapons scheduled for 2001 must
also consider these approaches as possible measures to
prevent the proliferation of small arms.

Stopping the proliferation of arms will have the
greatest chance of success if accompanied by confidence-
building initiatives. The United Nations should pursue a
strategy that brings into focus all interrelated elements,
encouraging concerned African countries to place at
centre stage the commonality of their interests for a stable
and prosperous Africa.

Principal regional actors must be involved in
measures being contemplated for action as well as in the
actual implementation of the measures themselves. In this
regard, we fully agree with what the Secretary-General
has said: that where a peace process is needed, it is the
role of the United Nations, with the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), to help create one. The role of the
OAU and regional bodies in Africa, such as the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Southern African Development Community (SADC), in
the resolution of the conflicts in Africa and its
development and prosperity cannot be overemphasized.

Providing assistance to the victims of conflict is a
moral imperative, and must be pursued as a complement
to measures aimed at conflict resolution. While
humanitarian assistance is an immediate response, it is at
the same time a necessary step towards full recovery,
rehabilitation and development. Humanitarian aid should
not only be devoid of any semblance of politics, but must
also, as much as possible, lay the initial but firm
foundation for post-conflict growth.

 

Another critical component is the strengthening of
economic foundations for sustainable development of the
African countries. The mobilization of adequate resources
for development is essential. Many African countries
continue to rely substantially on official development
assistance for development financing.

There should be no disruption of or reduction in the
provision of such external financial resources to the
countries in Africa. I agree completely with the Secretary-
General when he said that the dramatic cuts in assistance to
Africa in recent years have hurt rather than helped Africa's
efforts to implement the difficult economic and political
reforms which are now under way across the continent.

The challenges in Africa are challenges to all of us in
the international community. But the people of Africa
should be the first to resolutely respond to these challenges.

Good governance is a key foundation for building an
enduring peace and promoting progress in Africa. Good
governance should be the only element in considering the
political legitimacy of rulers among the governed. Good
governance must be based on the important principles of
democracy, freedom and the rule of law.

I have worked with many Africans and I have seen
their dedication and commitment to the peace and
development of their continent. I knew that the African
people were ready to take their future decisively into their
hands. With this in mind, when I was Director-General of
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization
(UNIDO) from 1985 to 1993, I supported a special
programme for the industrial development of Africa and I
made sure that the programme recognized the important
role of the African people themselves.

As part of this programme, next month, in cooperation
with the Organization of African Unity, the Economic
Commission for Africa, the World Bank, the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the African
Development Bank, UNIDO will gather African leaders and
business groups in Dakar, Senegal, to meet with
Government and private sector representatives of investor
nations. It is hoped that this meeting will further strengthen
the basis for viable industrial partnerships and investments
in Africa.

For democracy and good governance to succeed, it is
important for the international community and the United
Nations to provide adequate development resources to
Africa. We must reinvigorate all the development initiatives
in favour of African countries, such the United Nations
New Agenda for the Development of Africa, among
others.

The United Nations family of agencies should
intensify its activities for Africa. I commend, among
others, the UNDP regional initiative, "Enterprise Africa",
for facilitating and coordinating support for small- and
medium-scale enterprises; the International Labour
Organization's employment-generating opportunities in
many parts of the continent; the assistance of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the
International Trade Centre in the trade sector; UNIDO's
assistance on cleaner production centres in Tanzania and
Zimbabwe; and UNIDO's Alliance for Africa's
Industrialization.

While the majority of Africans now live under
democratic systems, much more needs to be done to
ensure that democracy continues to thrive and grow.
Democratic nations in the world can show the way by
taking initiatives that will prime Africa's economy. I
commend the initiatives before the United States Congress
to pass the African trade bill, which will provide Africa
with privileges similar to those contained in the Caribbean
Basin Initiative. Crucial votes will be taken in the United
States Senate next month on this bill, and I hope that
much of what we do and say here today will somehow
serve to encourage the eventual passing of the African
trade bill into law.

It is likewise important that the international
community find a resolution of Africa's unsustainable
external debt burden. The Secretary-General has noted
that any significant move to lift Africa's crippling debt
burden will require concerted political action at the
highest levels.

The international community has shown a
willingness to address this issue. In particular, I hope that
the Cologne initiative will translate itself into concrete
action that provides a durable solution to the debt
problem of highly indebted developing countries.

Any international action must, however, take into
consideration the OAU's framework for action on debt,
which called for an international agreement to clear the
entire debt stock for the poorest countries in Africa within
a reasonably short period of time and in the context of
Africa's overall economic reforms.

 

As individual States, we must encourage stability and
development in Africa by engaging them as fellow
members of the community of nations.

On our part, the Philippines has heightened its
engagement in Africa. We continue to maintain our
presence through diplomatic posts, and we have continued
to establish and formalize relations with more countries in
Africa. We hope that in strengthening our relations we will
not only encourage mutual growth, but will also share our
democratic and liberal traditions. The Philippines has been
at the forefront of the movement of new and restored
democracies. We know at first hand how difficult it is to
move forward when much of the past holds us down.

We know, however, that together new and restored
democracies can achieve much. Our movement must now
strengthen its engagement in Africa. The Philippines will do
all it can to see this through.

