Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen): I have the honour to
address this body on behalf of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference (OIC).

Let me begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of March. We have immense confidence
that your experience and wisdom will lead the
deliberations of the Council to a satisfactory
conclusion. Let me also avail myself of this
opportunity to express the OIC's thanks and gratitude
to Ambassador Bolton and the delegation of the United
States for the efficient and prudent manner in which
the work of the Security Council was handled last
month.

The Council is meeting today to discuss an issue
that has been on its agenda for decades, namely, the
issue of the Middle East, which regrettably has not
found its way to a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution. It is the view of the States members of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference that there can
be no peace in the Middle East unless and until the
Arab-Israeli conflict is resolved on the basis of the
principle of land for peace, the road map and the
relevant United Nations resolutions and through
negotiations between the parties. We are confident that
the Palestinian National Authority is a good partner in
the quest for peace.

In that context, we believe that unilateral
solutions will not promote the cause of peace in an area
that has suffered enormously from the lack of it. For
peace to prevail, however, Israel must withdraw from
the territories it occupied in the 1967 war, including
the Syrian Arab Golan Heights and the remaining
occupied lands in southern Lebanon, and must allow
the creation of a Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its
capital.

With that in mind, the OIC believes that it is
incumbent upon the international community to exert
pressure on the State of Israel to end its policy of
creating and expanding settlements and to respect and
abide by the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice and demolish the separation wall.
Furthermore, we believe that the Security Council and
the Quartet have to move expeditiously to find a
comprehensive, just and durable solution to the Middle
East conflict on the basis of relevant United Nations
resolutions, the principle of land for peace, the Arab
peace initiative adopted at the Arab summit held in
Beirut in 2002 and the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force.

The daily Israeli practices of weakening the
Palestinian infrastructure and casting doubt on the
democratic choice of the Palestinian people are not
conducive to restoring peace and stability. Nor are the
blockades of territories - which deprive Palestinians
of goods necessary for daily life - anything but
violations of Israel's obligations as the occupying
Power according to the Fourth Geneva Convention.

Moreover, we believe that to withhold aid
following the results of a fair and free election is to
send a wrong message to the Middle East region.
Therefore, we would like to take this opportunity to
call upon the international community to provide the
necessary economic and financial assistance to the
Palestinian people. In that context, it is imperative that
Israel respect its obligations under the relevant
agreements and release to the Palestinian side what
Israel owes it in tax and custom duties levied on goods
destined for the Palestinian territories.

In conclusion, if peace is to reign in the Middle
East, a just and comprehensive resolution of the
Middle East conflict must be found. The Security
Council - notwithstanding Israel's daily harsh
practices in the occupied territories and its
pronouncements that it will impose unilateral
solutions - is duty-bound, given its responsibility for
the preservation of international peace and security, to
help to find a fair resolution of this long conflict.

