Italy aligns itself with the statement by the Delegation of the European Union, as well as with the statement by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict and would like to add the following remarks in its national capacity. We thank the presidency of the Security Council for organizing this debate at a challenging time for the protection of civilians in times of war, which exposes the most vulnerable in particular. Children continue to be disproportionately affected by gross violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law, as the latest Secretary-General's report on children and armed conflict shows (S/2020/525). The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has further exacerbated the need to protect children living in emergency situations by strengthening international cooperation. Italy supports key global actors, such as the United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations Population Fund, the World Health Organization, the Global Partnership for Education and the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization, whose action is crucial to ensure that no child is left behind. The Italian Development Cooperation Agency is consistently working in numerous countries around the globe to serve children's needs and provide them with comprehensive, good-quality services. In order to achieve long-lasting results for the protection of the rights of children, both during and after conflict, Italy made an open pledge on the occasion of the thirty-third International Conference of the Red Cross and the Red Crescent, held in Geneva from 9 to 12 December 2019. We are willing to further intensify our efforts, in particular by fostering children's access to education and health services and facilities and by guaranteeing that those facilities are protected and respected in accordance with international humanitarian law. Italy actively promotes references to this key issue in all relevant international documents and contributes to the global response through multilateral programmes and initiatives. This year we celebrate the fifteenth anniversary of the establishment of the monitoring and reporting mechanism through landmark resolution 1612 (2005). The mechanism and its related advocacy efforts have contributed to the release of more than 155,000 children from parties to conflict and to the signing of 32 action plans. As child protection advisers within peacekeeping missions play a key role in the framework of the monitoring and reporting mechanism, the relevant posts need to be duly staffed and budgeted. Child protection is currently one of the main priorities of the United Nations peacekeeping architecture, and Italy strongly promotes its mainstreaming into the mandates of all United Nations peace operations. We welcome the practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict and the manual for child protection staff in United Nations peace operations. We encourage their broadest possible dissemination and full use in peace and mediation processes. This year also marks the twentieth anniversary of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. We encourage all Member States to sign and ratify the Optional Protocol with a view to achieving its universality. Due to COVID-19, schools are being left empty or abandoned, which poses an increased risk of their becoming military targets or premises, as well as a major risk of exposing girls to violence, abuse and recruitment. In accordance with international humanitarian law, Italy considers it fundamental to protect and respect educational facilities and personnel and condemns all armed attacks against them. We welcome the General Assembly's decision to establish 9 September as the International Day to Protect Education from Attack. We are working with determination to achieve the universal endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration, with a particular focus on gender-based implementation of the Declaration. Italy has endorsed the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers and is strongly convinced that children formerly recruited by armed groups should be treated primarily as victims, as stated in resolution 2427 (2015), which Italy co-sponsored. Italy supports the mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary- General and strongly appreciates her campaign "Act to protect children affected by armed conflict", aimed at widening the reach of the previous "Children not Soldiers" campaign. We will continue to engage and advocate for the respect, protection and promotion of the rights of children, as they represent the backbone of our present and future societies.
