Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita
for her briefing. Together with Assistant Secretary-
General Wahba, of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), and Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco, of the Peacebuilding Support
Office, Ms. Keita recently made ajoint and very timely
visit to the Sudan that was conducive to regional peace
and stability in Darfur and to advancing the smooth
implementation of the transition plan for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).

The security situation in Darfur has remained
generally stable in the past few years. Since the latter
half of last year, during which UNAMID was gradually
transferring its responsibility for security to the
Government of the Sudan, the situation has remained
stable. China appreciates UNAMID's contribution
to the maintenance of peace and stability in Darfur
and welcomes the Sudanese Government's voluntary
enhancement of governance and security capacity-
building in Darfur, its continued weapons collection
campaign and its efforts to reach out further to the
non-signatories to the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur, and we trust that those measures will be
conducive to Darfur's long-term stability. At the same
time, however, Darfur is still dealing with problems
of intercommunal tension, internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and relatively limited socioeconomic
development. I have three points to make in that regard.

First, it is important to continue to advance the
political process for Darfur. The Government of
the Sudan is committed to a political solution to the
Darfur issue. There are some opposition and armed
groups in Darfur that should lay down their weapons,
participate actively in the peace process and work to
resolve problems by political means such as dialogue
and consultation. Countries with influence should work
actively to exert pressure on them.

Secondly, priority should be given to assisting the
Sudanese Government in strengthening its capacity-
building. While the Government has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of regional security
in Darfur, the international community should actively
assist it in enhancing its capacity-building for the
maintenance of law and order and security control
in order to help its security forces take over full
responsibility for security from UNAMID as soon
as possible and ensure UNAMID's withdrawal from
Darfur in 2020, in accordance with the road map. In the
light of the latest developments, the Security Council
should work quickly to conduct a review with a view to
ultimately lifting the sanctions on the Sudan.

Thirdly, we should accelerate the reconstruction
process in Darfur. In the light of the needs of the
Sudan, the international community should continue to
provide active humanitarian assistance and economic
support. The immediate focus should be on assisting
the Government in addressing the return and settlement
of IDPs, building and improving local infrastructure
and enhancing agricultural production and food self-
sufficiency. We welcome the necessary support of
UNDP and the Peacebuilding Commission to the
rebuilding and development of the Sudan.

China has consistently supported the Darfur
peace process and is one of UNAMID's main troop-
contributing countries. We have made positive
contributions to the maintenance of peace and stability
in Darfur over the years and would like to continue
to make concerted efforts, in cooperation with the
international community, to play a constructive role in
realizing peace, stability and development in Darfur.

