Mr. Richardson (United States of America): Today
the Security Council is discussing one of the most
important issues we face, the future of Africa. The
Secretary-General laid a solid foundation for this discussion
with his frank and incisive report, "The causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa".

Seven months ago, the Security Council, then under
the presidency of the United States, asked the Secretary-
General to analyse the causes of conflict in Africa and to
identify ways the international community could work in
partnership with Africa to prevent, mitigate and resolve
conflicts. The Secretary-General responded to this difficult
challenge with great courage and vision.

The Secretary-General's report provides valuable
insights into the varied situations confronting Africa today.
While the report recognizes the historical failures of
African countries and the international community to
prevent or resolve conflicts, it urges us to move beyond the
recriminations of the past and focus on the possibilities of
a brighter future for all Africans. The Secretary-General's
recommendations serve as useful frameworks for action
towards that goal.

The United States has taken the Secretary-General's
message to heart. We are committed to an active
partnership with Africa to promote democracy, respect for
human rights and sustained stability and to accelerate
Africa's integration into the global economy.

Only three weeks ago, President Clinton returned
from an historic 11-day, 6-nation tour of Africa. As the
Secretary-General did in his report, President Clinton
stressed the central importance of democracy and basic
freedoms. This was the vision that brought President
Clinton and seven leaders from Central and East Africa
together to sign the Entebbe Accord. The Accord
endorsed the core principles of inclusion, the rule of law,
respect for human rights, the equality of all men and
women and the right of citizens to regularly elect their
leaders freely and to participate fully in the decision-
making which affects them. The eight leaders recognized
that meeting these objectives requires the political will to
resolve conflicts without Violence, achieve sustainable
economic development and prevent the tragedy of
genocide from ever recurring in Africa.

Regional and subregional African organizations have
shown the political will to play a leading role in ending
conflict and thereby enhancing stability and prosperity in
Africa. Over the past several years the United States has
contributed over $10 million to assist the Organization of
African Unity to build a crisis management centre in
Addis Ababa and to train and equip a lOO-man rapid
deployment observation force. We have worked with
regional organizations in West Africa, southern Africa
and East Africa to support African-led efforts to end
conflicts. Our African Crisis Response Initiative and
similar efforts by France and the United Kingdom are
designed to help African nations enhance their ability to
serve as peacekeepers in Africa or in other troubled
regions. Coordination and cross-training are keys to the
success of peacekeeping operations. We urge the
international community to continue helping the regional
and subregional organizations develop their conflict
management and peacekeeping capacities.

As the Secretary-General's report notes, only when
peace and security are established can sustainable
economic development take root. As the benefits of
economic opportunity spread, the prospects for a
sustained and lasting peace correspondingly improve. The
all too familiar cycle of violence can and must be
replaced by a cycle of opportunity.

President Clinton emphasized the need to broaden
economic opportunities for Africans. Africa does not need
or want the world's sympathy; it needs foreign
investment, new trade and commercial links and the
increased tax revenue and improved infrastructure that
come with economic growth. The United States is
implementing the Partnership for Growth and Opportunity

 

and working with Congress to pass the African Growth and
Opportunity Act, which will open our markets to African
countries undertaking economic reforms. In addition, we are
working with leading reform-oriented countries to consider
additional measures to expand trade and investment
relations between Africa and the United States.

At the same time, President Clinton pledged to work
with Congress to restore levels of official development
assistance to Africa to their historical high-water mark. The
United States believes that there is no sounder investment
than in the well-being and future of people, and we are
making that investment in Africa. We are helping to control
the spread of diseases such as HIV/AIDS and malaria in
Botswana. In Uganda, we launched the Education for
Development and Democracy Initiative, which will improve
the quality of African education at all levels, but give
special attention to educational opportunities for young
women and greater access to the technology and
information needed to compete in the next century.

One of the burdens Africans should not have to carry
far into the next century is the burden of debt. We, along
with other donors, recognize the importance of reducing to
sustainable levels the debts of countries that are taking the
often painful and difficult steps necessary to reform and
modernize their economies. By the year 2000, the United
States will have provided some $3 billion in debt reduction
for African countries. Under a new bilateral initiative for
Africa, the United States hopes to fully forgive concessional
debts owed by African countries that demonstrate the
political will to undertake sustained reforms.

Just as President Clinton's trip launched a critical
reassessment of the United States' relationship with Africa,
the Secretary-General's report should establish the
framework for a new dialogue between the international
community and Africa and spur us all to action.

Today's meeting of the Security Council represents
only the first step in that discussion. We must not walk
away from today's meeting, pat ourselves on the back and
think that our work is done. We look forward to
collaborating with other countries, in the Security Council
and in other United Nations bodies, to study and then
implement the recommendations of the Secretary-General.
We strongly endorse the Secretary-General's call for
ministerial-level meetings of the Security Council every two
years to assess how we are doing and how we can do more.

We must now meet the challenge the Secretary-
General has put before us: to begin a new partnership
among Africa, the United Nations and the international
community. Together we can contribute to Africa's effort
to realize its potential and its dream of peace, stability
and development. Together, as an international
community, we must reach out to support the next
generation of Africans as they work to create a new, more
dynamic and hopeful Africa.
