Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes this holding of this briefing
and thanks Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu for her very
informative briefing.

As the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) enters its fiftieth year, the disarmament
and nuclear non-proliferation architecture, which
was implemented following difficult negotiations and
through bold compromises, is now threatened by the
gradual retreat from the commitments made by certain
signatory States. That multilateral framework, which
was brought about by the realization of the possible
disastrous consequences of nuclear weapons, allowed
for providing humankind with security guarantees that
have shielded it from nuclear danger to this day.

The Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF)
Treaty, negotiated in the late 1980s, gave us reason to
be optimistic. In a context in which the international
community is struggling to ease tensions emanating
from the Iranian and North Korean nuclear issues,
the demise of the INF Treaty is now raising fears of
a renewed arms race that could undermine the gains
made in the area of nuclear non-proliferation. If we are
not careful, the end of the INF Treaty risks becoming
the first in a series of steps that will further complicate
controlling ballistic missiles and weapons of mass
destruction. The recent initiatives taken by the two
signatories tend to demonstrate this last point.

Given that risk, the position of C6te d'Ivoire is in
fully in line with that of the Secretary-General, who
expressed his regret concerning the termination of the
INF Treaty on 2 August. In the light of the current
exacerbation of security threats, my country believes
that any initiative that threatens the current arms
control and disarmament frameworks could contribute
to undermining the gains made in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Cote d'Ivoire therefore urgently appeals to the
Russian and American parties, as stakeholders and
guarantors vis-a-vis the INF Treaty, to resume dialogue
in order to save this shining example of cooperation
between the two major nuclear Powers. My country,
which moreover was one of the first signatories to the
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, adopted
in 2017, would like to take the opportunity afforded
by this Council meeting to urge all States parties to
bilateral and multilateral non-proliferation frameworks
to step up efforts to safeguard the current gains through
continued dialogue.

Cote d'Ivoire also calls on those countries that have
yet to do so to accede to the Treaty on the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons in order to accelerate its entry
into force, as we are convinced that safeguarding the
international non-proliferation architecture is above
all a matter of collective responsibility, Similarly, my
delegation strongly hopes that the New Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty, which is set to expire in February
2021, will be extended.

The success of our joint action in the area
of non-proliferation is inextricably linked to
confidence-building measures among States parties
to the relevant treaties. In that regard, Cote d'Ivoire
believes that it is incumbent upon the nuclear-weapon
States to provide guarantees on the non-use of such
weapons for non-nuclear-weapon States by adopting
an international legally binding instrument. That is a
necessary condition for dispelling the slightest doubt
or suspicion motivating the reluctance of some States
to join the international effort to ban weapons of mass
destruction with resolve.

Human consciousness continues to bear the
indelible marks caused by the use of nuclear weapons.
Any further use of that type of weapon would reflect
the moral bankruptcy of our civilization. Cote d'Ivoire
considers that the maintenance of international peace
and security is our collective responsibility, but States
with nuclear capabilities have a crucial role to play
in safeguarding the stability that was achieved at the
end of the Second World War within the framework of
multilateral and bilateral instruments for controlling
weapons of mass destruction.

