Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like first of all to thank the Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, and the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, for their detailed briefings.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo continues to be a source of serious concern.
After the seeming success of the conclusion of the
agreement on the cessation of hostilities between the
parties involved in the conflict and between the States
of the region with regard to the withdrawal of troops
and the development of confidence-building measures,
armed clashes have again broken out in the east and
north-east of the country.

Unfortunately, we are obliged to note that the
inter-Congolese dialogue has bogged down. The
agreements reached on the basic composition of the
transitional Government, the national assembly and the
prerogatives of the Vice-Presidents do of course inspire
a certain optimism. However, it is clear that not all the
parties that signed the Agreement are satisfied with the
roles given to them in the new Government. Some of
them are continuing to put forward demands that are
clearly excessive, reinforcing them by force of arms.
Nor is optimism inspired by the continuing rumours
that in the conditions of the political and military
destabilization in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, certain non-Congolese gamblers are trying to
strengthen their influence with the groups that they
support and to gain an advantage for themselves, which
in turn threatens unpredictable consequences. Such a
situation would, of course, lead to an acute
deterioration in the already catastrophic humanitarian
situation, accompanied by mass human rights
violations.

In this connection, we would like to recall that
almost all Security Council resolutions and presidential
statements on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
contain paragraphs obliging the hostile parties to
provide every assistance to international humanitarian
and legal defence organizations. However, as we are
increasingly convinced, the situation remains very
worrying, above all because the parties participating in
the conflict are continuing to place various obstacles in
the way of ensuring the normal functioning of
international organizations. Such a state of affairs must
be brought to an end.

