Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): Allow me at the
outset to apologize for the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma,
who would have wished to participate in this meeting,
as she did in the joint visit mentioned by previous
speakers. For reasons beyond her control, she was
not able to do so. Allow me therefore, on behalf of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
to thank France for having placed the situation of the
Sahel on its programme of work for the month and for
having invited us to this meeting. That reflects the
Council's ongoing interest in the challenges posed by
the Sahel region.

In that regard, I welcome the close cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations
concerning the situation in Mali and in the Sahel as
a whole. We recall that our two organizations led a
joint assessment mission in the Sahelo-Saharan region
in December 2011, in implementation of the relevant
provisions of the strategic partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations. More recently,
as mentioned by previous speakers, we also conducted
the joint visit to the Sahel. I take this opportunity to
express the full appreciation of the African Union to
the Secretary- General, the President of the World Bank,
the European Union and the African Development Bank
for that joint initiative, which has set an example for the
other situations we will face, as it has indeed already
done in the Congo.

With respect to Mali, I welcome the important
strides that have been made in stabilizing the situation
there with the deployment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), which facilitated the peaceful and
successful holding ofpresidential elections and the first
round of legislative elections on 24 November, with a
second round scheduled for 15 December.

The African Union reiterates its appeal to
the Malian stakeholders, with the support of the
appropriate regional and international actors, to
redouble their efforts to overcome the obstacles to
the effective implementation of the Ouagadougou
Preliminary Agreement of 18 June and the promotion
of an inclusive national reconciliation process that
respects the territorial integrity of Mali. The African
Union attaches great importance to the immediate
restoration of the authority of the Malian State over its
full territory. From that perspective, the issue of Kidal
must be resolved without delay, because there must not
be any lawless zone on Malian territory. The African
Union, through me, reaffirms its support for the Malian
authorities in their endeavour to promote reconciliation
among the different groups that constitute the Malian
people.

With respect to the overall situation in the region
of the Sahel, I reaffirm the importance that the
African Union attaches to an integrated approach to
the international community's activities in the Sahel.
In that regard, we welcome the Council's adoption of
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel,
which encompasses a holistic view of the challenges,
the security issues, the humanitarian aspects and the
development of the region. Likewise, we reaffirm the
crucial importance of stronger security cooperation
among the countries of the Sahelo-Saharan region, with
the support of international partners, and we stress the
importance of regional, interregional and international
coordination in the fight against the threats that persist
in the region.

For its part, given the challenges and threats in the
Sahel region, the African Union is continuing its efforts
to strengthen security cooperation among the countries
of the Sahelo-Saharan region through the Nouakchott
Process. Launched in March by the Commission, the
Process is based on the holding of regular meetings of
the heads of intelligence and security services, as well
as of relevant ministers, to exchange information and
agree on shared or coordinated forms of action.

The Nouakchott Process has proven to be a crucial
tool in efforts ofthe countries ofthe region to collectively
take up the transnational security challenges they face.
In the final analysis, for the countries of the Sahelo-
Saharan region, it is a matter of building a collective
security system within the framework of the African
peace and security architecture. In the coming weeks,
we expect to consider a number of separate initiatives
designed to further strengthen the Nouakchott Process.

We cannot overemphasize the crucial importance
of long-term socioeconomic development to efforts to
create lasting stability in the Sahelo-Saharan region.
As we said at the outset, the African Union welcomes
the joint visit to the region, from 4 to 9 November,
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, the
President of the World Bank, the President of the
African Development Bank, and the Commissioner
for Development of the European Union. For the
African Union, that visit reflected the commitment
of the international community to addressing the
multidimensional challenges facing the Sahel within
the framework of close collaboration among all the
relevant stakeholders. It also highlighted the need for
close coordination among all the different initiatives
for the Sahel.

In that context, the African Union reaffirms
its readiness to work for the establishment of a joint
secretariat, as provided for in the communique issued
by the ministerial meeting held Bamako on 4 November
on the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
I take this opportunity to thank the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa for his proposals to that end.

With respect to strengthening its presence in
the region, the African Union has established the
Mission for Mali and the Sahel (MISAHEL), under
the leadership of the High Representative, in order
to actively contribute to the process underway in
Mali, as well as to international efforts to support the
Sahel region. On 19 and 20 October, MISAHEL held
a workshop with all of the specialized institutions and
liaison officers of the African Union in the region so
as to draw up its plan of action. The African Union
Commission will soon organize a high-level meeting
of the African Union specialized institutions with a
view to establishing a holistic approach so as to better
coordinate action already under way in the Sahel from
a political, security, economic and sociocultural point
of View.

We welcome the partners, whose valuable assistance
will make it possible to take up the challenges on the
continent. We launch an appeal to them to strengthen
their support to countries in the region and to provide
support for common initiatives to be carried out as part
of their collective efforts. The constraints of history
and the geography of the Sahel, as well as present-day
political facts, oblige us to adopt a coordinated approach,
a united approach, in the face of the challenges before
us.

To conclude, allow me to reaffirm the determination
and availability of the African Union, in close
cooperation with countries in the region and with
international partners, first and foremost the United
Nations, to play its proper role in supporting individual
and collective efforts to promote peace, stability and
security initiated by the States in the Sahel-Saharan
region.

