Mr. Panayotov (Bulgaria): Bulgaria thanks
Sweden for convening this debate on a subject that is
very relevant and timely. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing outlining his
vision on how to take the work of the United Nations on
prevention forward.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union and its
member States.

The concept paper presented by the Swedish
presidency (S/2017/6, annex) for today's debate offers
us a valuable opportunity to consider many aspects of
prevention, including the role that it can play in ending
human suffering and reducing humanitarian needs.

The message for bringing prevention back to the fore
emerged from the United Nations reviews on peace and
security, which offered a wealth of recommendations
for the way forward, including by addressing the root
causes of armed conflicts at a much earlier stage. In that
regard, Bulgaria welcomes the important new concept
of sustaining peace, which encompasses activities
aimed at addressing the root causes, preventing the
outbreak and recurrence of armed conflicts and
moving towards recovery and development in conflict-
affected countries.

Focusing greater energy on prevention also means
that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
should be part of our strategies for sustaining peace.
With that understanding, Bulgaria contributed to the
development and subsequent operationalization of the
United Nations Guidance for Effective Mediation, which
calls for a comprehensive and integrated approach that
flows through all three pillars of the United Nations:
peace and security, development and human rights.

The human costs of armed conflicts can be seen
in all too many places. My country therefore feels
obliged to take upon itself a greater commitment to
implementing the new concept of sustaining peace as a
cost-effective way to find sustainable political solutions
to armed conflicts, which currently drive 80 per cent
of the global humanitarian needs. In that regard, at the
World Humanitarian Summit, Bulgaria made a set of
commitments that particularly relates to prevention
by addressing the root causes of armed conflicts,
reducing fragility in post-conflict situations and
bringing humanitarian, development and peacebuilding
efforts together.

Furthermore, Bulgaria has consistently supported
the mediation capacities of the United Nations system,
including through an annual voluntary financial
contribution to the United Nations Mediation Trust
Fund. Bearing in mind the increasing relevance of
the prevention of conflicts and sustaining peace, let
me assure the Council of my country's readiness to
continue backing the activities ofthe United Nations in
maintaining international peace and security.

