Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for her very informative briefing. We listened to the
statement delivered by the Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, Mr. Joao
Vale de Almeida, with interest.

The African view of the problems of the region
set out by Mr. Maman Sidikou, Permanent Secretary
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), and
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations, deserves
extremely serious attention from the member States
of the Security Council. We agree with their alarming
assessments that the level of the threats to security and
stability in that part of Africa is unprecedentedly high.
The forces of international terrorism in the Sahel are
stronger, unfortunately. They have ramped up their
activity and are seeking to expand geographically. New
radical groups and leaders are appearing. We know
the reasons for this. One of the most important is the
collapse of Libya as a State, which came about as a
result of foreign interference in its internal affairs. We
believe that if the situation there is not normalized, it
will be difficult to stabilize the Sahel sustainably.

We welcome the 2017 initiative of the States of the
G-5 for the Sahel to create the Joint Force to combat
terrorism and organized crime. A lot has been achieved
during the past year on the practical front. Two
successful military operations have been conducted.
The completion of staffing capacity at headquarters
is in its final stages and mechanisms for financing it
are in place. We expect concrete plans for continuing
joint operations against the militias to be announced
very soon.

At the same time, we were disturbed to hear that
the process of forming the G-5 Sahel units has slowed
down recently. Progress has not been made in setting
up military bases and providing them with adequate
quantities ofweapons, which will have a serious impact
on the forces' readiness to counter the current threats.
Those issues will not be resolved without ensuring
stable and predictable funding for the Sahel States'
joint military structures that are being put in place in
the region. In that regard, we call on the external donors
that have made respective pledges, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, in the framework of its mandate, and the G-5 Sahel
countries to resolve these issues as quickly as possible.

We believe firmly in the importance of further
coordinated steps on the part of both African States
and the international community for combating
extremism in the Sahel-Sahara region. Clearly this evil
cannot be eradicated through purely military means.
It will be important to work effectively to counter the
expansion of extremist ideology, deal effectively with
the acute socioeconomic problems of the countries of
the region and strengthen their State institutions. In
that connection, we note the key role that the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel will play in
tackling those tasks.

Russia is considering the possibility of establishing
effective cooperation with the G-5 Sahel States in
addressing their core regional problems. We are already
providing military and technical assistance to a number
of States in the region and helping to train military and
police personnel. We will continue to contribute to
strengthening the military potential of the G-5 Sahel
military forces so that their Joint Force can become
an effective instrument for restoring and maintaining
peace in West Africa.

