Mr. Raum (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg thanks you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open debate on the important topic of
the protection of civilians, which reflects Indonesia's
commitment in that regard. My delegation fully
associates itselfwith the statements made by the observer
of the European Union and by the representative of
Switzerland, on behalf of the Group of Friends for the
Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict. We thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2019/373),
which contains useful recommendations. We share the
irrefutable analysis of the Secretary-General and of the
other briefers who have enhanced this debate.

In 2019, as we celebrate the seventieth anniversary
of the Geneva Conventions and the anniversary of
resolution 1265 (1999) on the protection of civilians,
the fact is that, despite the legislative progress made,
armed conflicts, which not only afflict civilians
but often deliberately target them, continue. The
norms and rules of international humanitarian law
are intended to protect all of humankind. It is our
collective responsibility to defend and uphold those
rules and standards and ensure that they are respected,
and Luxembourg is actively engaged in that regard.
We support the practical implementation of the code
of conduct developed by the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group regarding timely and decisive
action by the Security Council, as well as France and
Mexico's initiative on limiting the use of the veto. We
also support Switzerland's initiative to include in the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court the
use of starvation as a war crime in non-international
armed conflicts. Luxembourg would like to make
four proposals.

First, all peace operations should have a civilian
protection component when the situation on the ground
requires it, and operations should be provided with the
capacity they need to fulfil their mandate in that regard.

Secondly, ifwe are to change things, we must know
how to measure them. Civilian casualties in conflicts
must be effectively and independently tracked so
that the United Nations can measure the extent of the
challenge and improve the protection of civilians. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan is a
good example.

Thirdly, impunity must end, because it often leads
to further violence. When Heads of State choose to
pardon war criminals instead of bringing them to
justice, they perpetuate impunity and sow the seeds
of future crimes. In that context, Luxembourg fully
supports the International Criminal Court and the work
of its Prosecutor.

Fourthly, we must ensure that the connection
between the protection of civilians and post-conflict
peacebuilding is recognized. If warring parties and
their international supporters target civilians and
civilian infrastructure, they are not just guilty of war
crimes, they are also ruining the chances of restoring
and building just and lasting peace after a conflict. That
is unfortunately evident in Syria, where Government
forces and their allies continue to deliberately target
civilians, hospitals and other protected facilities, in
particular in Idlib.

The protection of civilians involves many of the
topics on the Council's agenda. It overlaps with the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, and with the fight against
sexual violence in conflict and the protection of
children in armed conflict. Luxembourg is committed
to all of those areas and supports in particular the
mandates of Special Representatives Virginia Gamba
and Pramila Patten, as well as the framework for action
of the Safe Schools Declaration and the Paris Principles
and Commitments.

The continued engagement of the Council's
permanent and elected members is essential to
strengthening the protection of civilians while ensuring
that United Nations peace operations have the mandate
and capacity to protect civilians - men, women and
children - who are the most vulnerable to violence in
today's conflicts, and to prevent conflicts before they
claim other innocent Victims.

