Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing.

Chad is following the situation in the Gaza Strip
with a great deal of concern. We firmly condemn the
new escalation of violence, which has already claimed
over 270 lives, including 30 today, more than 2,000
injured, 40,000 displaced persons, most of whom are
women and children, as well as thousands of houses
destroyed. Chad is outraged by the indiscriminate and
overwhelming violence and calls on Israel immediately
to put an end to its air raids and ground offensive, all
of which are mainly aimed at civilians, educational
facilities and hospitals and constitute a very serious
violation of international humanitarian law and human
rights law.

Chad also urges the Palestinians to put an end to
their attacks against Israel originating from the Gaza
Strip. That includes the firing of rockets and the cross-
border attacks, which we condemn. We urge both sides to
exercise restraint in order to rapidly achieve a ceasefire
and the lifting of all forms of blockade imposed on the
Gaza Strip. In that regard, Chad supports the efforts of
the international community and the countries of the
region to restore peace and put an end to hostilities.

We express our solidarity with the citizens of
Gaza and the whole of the Palestinian people during
the very difficult and painful times they are currently
experiencing. We call upon the entire international
community to provide every possible form of support
and assistance to the Palestinian people, including
medical supplies and emergency aid to the Gaza Strip.

The Palestinian question has been on the United
Nations agenda for more than 66 years now but the
Palestinian people has no glimmer of hope based on
the efforts undertaken to guarantee its rights to self-
determination and to put an end to the Israeli occupation.

The current situation in Gaza is a very dangerous
one. It is alarming as well. In the face of this, the
international community, including the Security
Council, must act in a firm and urgent manner to put an
end to this unprecedented cycle of violence and to create
conditions conducive to peace between Palestinians
and Israelis.

One and a half million people in Gaza cannot enjoy
a normal, dignified life. The blockade imposed upon
the Gaza Strip by Israel since 2007, with all borders
hermetically sealed, has rendered the daily life of its
inhabitants very difficult and unbearable. Almost no
one can leave the Gaza Strip even just to visit the West
Bank, where a great many have family and have worked
in the past. Health facilities are suffering from the
restrictions imposed by Israel on the transfer of medical
equipment, building equipment and a great many basic
goods necessary for their upkeep.

Security-related incidents in the zone between
Gaza and Israel often claim human lives and cause
the destruction of property and people's means of
subsistence. Young people, who make up 50 per cent of
the 1.5 million inhabitants of the Gaza Strip and have
an unemployment rate of nearly 40 per cent, suffer from
a lack of any prospects and are carrying out a constant
and relentless fight to preserve hope in the future.
In those difficult conditions, when the Palestinian
population is destitute and oppressed, how can the
Palestinians believe in the peace process?

The Middle East is currently going through a very
difficult period in its history since a number of regions
have already erupted into conflict, in particular in Iraq,
Syria, Iraq and Yemen. All of that constitutes a serious
threat to international and regional peace and security.
The international community must step up its efforts
to relaunch the process of dialogue between Israelis
and Palestinians to achieve a fair, comprehensive and
lasting peace in the region, one founded on the principle
of two States based on the 1967 borders, pursuant to
international law and the relevant provisions of Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, including
the exchange of land for peace, the road map, the
agreements previously concluded between the parties
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Inter-Palestinian reconciliation should not serve as a
pretext for Israel to undermine the peace process. Peace
negotiations absolutely require political and a suitable
environment, as well as mutual confidence-building
measures. A people under occupation, whose territory
is slowly being eaten up by the illegal building of
settlements and who is systematically a victim of
aggression, will probably lose all hope in a better future.

