Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by welcoming the presence here of
President Tadic' of the Republic of Serbia and of
Minister Hyseni of the Republic of Kosovo. I would
also to thank Mr. Zannier for his briefing on the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2009/149).

For Costa Rica, the development of the situation
in Kosovo should be seen in the context of a process
that leads to a peaceful settlement of the dispute
engendered by the declaration of independence by the
Kosovar authorities. In this sense, Costa Rica
welcomes the reconfiguration of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
in accordance with the statement we adopted in
November (S/PRST/2008/44).

Likewise, the creation of the Kosovo Police, in
compliance with the constitutional precepts adopted in
June, is a step towards order that should be perceived
not as a threat towards any minority, but rather as an
opportunity to build inter-ethnic institutions that
contribute to peace.

The deployment of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force (EUFOR) and its achievement of
full operational capacity with respect to the rule of law
in the framework of resolution 1244 (1999) are
milestones in a process that should lead to the creative
and productive coexistence of all communities in
Serbia and in Kosovo.

For my delegation, the ongoing obstacles to this
coexistence are cause for concern. The lack of
understanding between groups of different ethnic
origin can be overcome only by the efforts of both
Governments. Costa Rica avails itself of the
opportunity provided by the presence of President
Tadie and Minister Hyseni to call on the Governments
of Serbia and Kosovo to work to ease these natural
tensions arising from the painful events of recent years.
Only the development of mutual respect and the fruits
of peaceful coexistence can provide the basis for a
coexistence that benefits the communities of Serbia
and Kosovo.

I would like to conclude by recognizing once
again the work of UNMIK and the cooperation that
EUFOR provides to the international community in
order to establish a lasting peace in the Balkans. We
are certain that continued European assistance will also
contribute to the prosperity of the peoples in that
region.

