The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

The Netherlands, too, would like to thank
Ms. McAskie for her straightforward briefing,
depressing as it was. Apart from the misery heaped
upon the Congolese people themselves, reference was
made around this table today to the appalling
circumstances in which humanitarian workers have to
do their work in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the very acute dangers they face in this context. As
recently as two weeks ago, we heard the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees make the
case for improving the safety and security of United
Nations personnel, especially in situations of conflict,
in the face of the increasing risks they encounter in the
field.

Of course, the Council addressed this issue as
early as February this year and, on that occasion,
issued a presidential statement. Given the present
situation of an apparent deterioration in the security
conditions of United Nations personnel, however,
Iintend to circulate, as a Security Council document,
the petition that I received from the Coordinating
Committee for International Staff Unions and
Associations of the United Nations System and the
Federation of International Civil Servants'
Associations, which appeal to the Security Council to
look into this issue further.

Switching to another subject, it is difficult to
respond to a humanitarian briefing without talking
politics. Some of the statements we have heard in this
meeting bear this out. My delegation would like to
make just one observation of a political nature.

Ever since the Security Council was invited to
endorse the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, some
delegations on this Council have tried to give our
involvement a slightly different slant by, on the one
hand, introducing the distinction between invited and
uninvited troops - also characterized as "allies" and
"aggressors" - and, on the other, glossing over
President Kabila's reluctance to implement the national
dialogue.
It goes without saying that every delegation is
perfectly entitled to try and effect that adjustment, but
we would like to point out that if the distinction
between invited and uninvited troops had been made in
Lusaka, and if the national dialogue had been deleted
from the draft text, the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
would simply not have been concluded. Delegations
that insist on these adjustments must therefore know
what they are doing. It may be true that Lusaka
requires an update. There seems to have been a
consensus from the outset that the task Lusaka allotted
to the United Nations by way of tracking down
members of the former Rwandan armed forces and
Interahamwe was hardly realistic. But an update of
Lusaka is, of course, conceivable only if it is
acceptable to at least all the signatory States.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on Ms. McAskie to respond to comments
and questions from members of the Council.

