Mr. Nguyen Duy Chien (Viet Nam): Viet Nam
aligns itself with the statement delivered by
Ambassador Hamidon of Malaysia on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

Viet Nam is deeply concerned about the
escalation of violence in the Middle East. It has caused
hundreds of deaths and injuries, severely damaged
infrastructure and forced hundreds of thousands of
people to flee from their homes. In fact, while we meet
here, violence is continuing to escalate and the number
of victims is increasing by the hour, if not the minute.

We are gravely worried about the dire
humanitarian situation of the Lebanese people and
about the possible humanitarian catastrophe now
looming over the Middle East. We are also worried
about the fact that United Nations agencies and their
humanitarian partners are unable to reach southern
Lebanon to assess the situation or to deliver
humanitarian aid. Civilians, and children in particular,
must be protected.

Viet Nam condemns all acts of terror and
violence, all attacks against civilians and their property
and the destruction of infrastructure. We condemn the
abduction and detention of Government officials and
other individuals and demand their immediate and
unconditional release.

Viet Nam calls on the international community
and donor countries to provide assistance and
humanitarian aid to Lebanon. All air, sea and land
blockades imposed on Lebanon recently should be
lifted so that humanitarian activities can take place.
The safety of the personnel of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon should also be ensured, to
help them fulfil their mandate and provide
humanitarian assistance to people in need.

Viet Nam calls on the parties concerned to stop
the indiscriminate and excessive use of force and to
exercise restraint and take practical steps to save the
Middle East peace process, create favourable
conditions to stabilize the situation and resolve the
dispute through negotiations.

In the face of the grave situation prevailing in the
Middle East, the international community should act
urgently and decisively to stop violence and killing in
the region. We call upon the Security Council to take
prompt action in order to achieve an immediate
cessation of hostilities and bring the parties concerned
to the negotiating table, with a view to finding a long-
lasting solution to the conflict.

