Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks President Agius, President Meron and
Prosecutor Brammertz for their respective briefings on
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.

Over the past six months, the ICTY has continued to
make progress in its work. It delivered ajudgment in the
appeal case of Prosecutor v. Mic'o Stanisie and Stojan
Zupljanin, terminated the trial case of Prosecutor v.
Nyiramasuhuko et al. ("Butare"), and made continued
progress in the trial of Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladie and
the appeal of Prosecutor v. Prlic' et al. China expresses
its appreciation for those activities. China has taken
note of the challenges facing the Tribunal that President
Aegis and Prosecutor Brammertz referred to in their
respective reports (S/2016/976 and S/2016/976, annex II) and hopes that the Tribunal will take measures to
enhance efficiency and overcome its difficulties. China
believes that the ICTY should implement its completion
strategy as soon as possible and conclude its work by
30 November 2017.

With regard to the Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, China congratulates it on the
official opening of its Arusha branch. China is pleased
to learn that the Residual Mechanism has taken over
all the remaining work of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
1994 and 31 December 1994 (ICTR) and continues
to carry out its judicial activities. The International
Residual Mechanism has also opened the retrial of the
Stanisie & Simatovie case, formulated new rules and
procedures, issued a large number ofjudicial decisions
and orders and cooperated with other countries
with regard to their own domestic prosecutions.
China appreciates those activities. We hope that the
International Residual Mechanism will consider the
request that it should be small, temporary and efficient,
and continue to strengthen and improve its work.

The ICTY will conclude its work by the end of
November 2017. China hopes that it will cooperate
closely with the International Residual Mechanism to
ensure the smooth transfer of its remaining work to the
Mechanism. China will continue to support the work of
the two institutions.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank Uruguay, which chaired the Security Council
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
and the Office of Legal Affairs of the United Nations
for their work.

