Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to convey my delegation's
congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July. The Ivorian delegation is pleased
to participate in this debate on the situation in Cote
d'Ivoire, which demonstrates the international
community's great interest in my country. My
delegation takes this opportunity to congratulate the
Secretary-General on the excellent report contained in
document S/ZOll/387, which serves as the basic
document for our discussions.
11-41823

The official investiture on 21 May in
Yamoussoukro, the political capital of Cote d'Ivoire, of
His Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara, which formally
gave him full powers as President of the Republic of
Cote d'Ivoire, represents the official return to
constitutional order in Cote d'Ivoire after 10 years of
military and socio-political crisis and five months of
post-electoral crisis, whose human cost was estimated
at 3,000 deaths. Those crises ended with the arrest of
the former President, who had obstinately refused to
peacefully give up the power that he had lost in the
vote.

Today Cote d'Ivoire is gradually returning to
normal life. A new Government has been formed that
includes all political entities with the exception of the
Front populaire ivoirien, the party formerly in power,
which has refused to participate. The Government set
to work immediately, emphasizing the search for
effectiveness. During a governmental seminar held on
5 and 6 July and chaired by the head of State himself,
the Government laid out a framework for action based
on 14 strategic points, which also represent our
challenges. The President's programme d'urgence, as it
is called, unites six-month short-term plans of action
for each sector in one overall framework, to which all
Government ministers will contribute their responses
and optimal solutions to the immediate needs of the
people, who have been so painfully affected by these
years of crisis.

The Government's assessment of the country's
general situation and those conducted by the various
United Nations missions and our partners all point to
the necessity for understanding the numerous
challenges that confront us and that must be tackled
speedily in order not to lose the momentum gained
from the current normalization. Progress must be made
on the following fronts: stabilizing the security
situation; disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR); security sector reform; national
reconciliation; the humanitarian situation; the human
rights situation; organizing elections; and economic
recovery.

As far as stabilizing the security situation is
concerned, generally speaking, we can be pleased with
some areas of genuine progress, particularly removing
all lawless checkpoints; the complete re-establishment
of the police and gendarmerie, despite enormous
equipment and material problems; and an increase in
mixed patrols that include forces from the United
3
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI), helping
to reassure the people.

However, despite that progress, serious concerns
persist over the situation in the country's western
region, mainly in the area bordering Liberia, where
activity has been observed by militias and mercenaries
associated with the pro-Gbagbo former Forces de
defense et de securite. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the Council's decision, based on resolution
1992 (2011), which brings forward to 30 September
2011 the redeployment to UNOCI of three armed
helicopters and their teams from the United Nations
Mission in Liberia. Similarly, we are pleased with the
summit of Mano River Union heads of State held
yesterday in Monrovia, which was attended by
Presidents Alassane Ouattara of Cote d'Ivoire, Ellen
J ohnson-Sirleaf of Liberia and Alpha Conde of Guinea.
The leaders reiterated their desire for closer
cooperation in order to strengthen peace and security in
the subregion. My delegation therefore seeks increased
support from UNOCI and the French Operation
Licorne force for the efforts by the Forces
republicaines de Cote d'Ivoire (FRCI) to stabilize the
security situation, since there is no doubt that
command of the security situation is essential to
successfully achieving the other goals necessary to
normalizing the situation as a whole.

With regard to DDR, the reunification of the
army under the single umbrella of the New Army of the
FRCI is now a reality. A workshop has been organized
to instruct the New Army's personnel and soldiers in
the values of unity, cohesion, republican morality and
the principles of respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law. We expect to see other
initiatives of this type, aimed at inculcating a genuine
culture of respect for international humanitarian law
and human rights. We have seen the integration of
11,000 troops into the New Army, of whom 8,700 are
former members of the Forces armees des Forces
nouvelles, in accordance with the Ouagadougou
Agreements, and 2,300 associated with the FRCI.

With regard to disarmament, progress appears
slow, due to the complexity of the process. However,
UNOCI continues to encourage the voluntary surrender
of weapons held by unauthorized persons. We were
very pleased to see that, in Yopougon on 15 July, about
100 people surrendered light weapons, grenades and
ammunition to UNOCI under an operation conducted
by the Mission's division for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. My delegation
therefore hopes for continued support from UNOCI
and our partners for the DDR programme, and
certainly, as indicated in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2011/387), for the establishment of a new DDR
programme adapted to the new situation.

With regard to security sector reform and the
maintenance of law and order, the lack of equipment,
particularly handguns, is seriously affecting the
effectiveness of the police and gendarmerie, which, as I
mentioned, are now fully functioning again. The entire
handgun arsenal for the forces of law and order in Cote
d'Ivoire stands at the ridiculous total of 15 pistols.
That is why my delegation is seeking approval from
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572
(2004), in accordance with paragraph 8 (e) that
resolution, for the authorization to import handguns to
quip our national police and gendarmerie personnel. By
the same reasoning, we ask that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations speed up the return to the
Ministry of the Interior of arms collected by UNOCI
from Ivorian weapons stocks. It is understood that such
returns must be based on a coherent plan that includes
the registering and marking of the weapons.

The situation regarding the physical
infrastructure of the judiciary is a serious concern.
Seventeen of 37 courts were looted and 23 out of 33
prisons vandalized. That is why my delegation fully
subscribes to the spirit of the report's recommendation
for setting up and implementing a multi-year shared
aid programme for the justice sector with the aim of
strengthening police services, the judicial apparatus
and the penal system, and improving access to justice
in Cote d'Ivoire, as well as for initial emergency
reconstruction of the relevant infrastructure and
equipment supplies, taking into account the assistance
given by other partners in those areas.

In the area of national reconciliation things are
also gradually falling into place. The basic framework
of the Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation Commission
has been established by ministerial council decree. The
Chair of the Commission, former Prime Minister
Charles Konan Banny, has begun intensive
consultations at all social, professional and even ethnic
levels. In that context, I was able to be witness to a
meeting held last Saturday in Abidjan between
Mr. Banny and the traditional heads of former
President Gbagbo's native region. I myself was able to
talk briefly with them at that meeting, where they
expressed their confidence in Mr. Banny and their
optimism about the reconciliation process, which, they
said, was already beginning to ease tensions in their
region.

For Mr. Banny, it is important that the Ivorian
people themselves take ownership of the process,
bringing to it their sensibilities and our shared
traditional values. That is why he hopes that, after all
necessary consultations have been held, we will
observe a major period of mourning in order to honour
the memory of all those who perished. Such mourning,
grounded in our traditions, will to some degree prepare
the way for fostering truth in dialogue. However, the
Chair of the Commission is not minimizing the
difficulties that are arising concerning the availability
of the means, particularly the financial means, needed
to achieve the success of an effort of such scope. The
Commission will be undertaking information missions
in South Africa, Morocco and Rwanda to take
advantage of their experiences. My delegation seeks
the help of UNOCI and the Commission's partners in
the areas of expertise, financing, capacity-building,
devising and financing of a communication plan and
every other relevant form of support.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, of the
200,000 displaced persons and refugees, 60,000 have
returned to their homes. Some 140,000 remain, mainly
in refugee camps on the Liberian border. The pace of
return is slow, due to the lack of sufficient means to
address their needs. We have occasionally been helped
by individual private initiatives in repatriating whole
groups. In that connection, Cote d'Ivoire's Minister of
Commerce, Mr. Dagobert Banzio, who is a native of
the Liberian border region, organized the repatriation
of 5,000 refugees at his own expense. My delegation is
seeking a substantial increase in international
assistance for aid to Ivorian refugees, and agrees with
the recommendation in the report indicating the
necessity for support for the establishment of a national
humanitarian coordination structure, which would, in
particular, ensure a unified assessment of needs and of
the deployment of humanitarian entities, as well as of
follow-up to efforts on the ground.

With regard to the health and sanitation situation,
my delegation reminds the Council that during the
most turbulent time of the crisis, President Ouattara
launched a free health care programme for the most
neglected sector of the population, in particular women
and children. This programme has been operating since

March and has cost the Government $10 million per
month, equivalent to 4.1 billion CFA francs per month.
This programme will later be taken over by a self-
sustaining medical coverage system. I here and now
make an urgent request to all partners to support this
programme, which helps in the fight against poverty,
and I invite charitable organizations and the major
philanthropic organizations to support this initiative.

The human rights situation in Cote d'Ivoire is
rooted in the culture of impunity that marked the 10
years of power of the regime of former President
Gbagbo. It is also important to note that it was under
that regime that female protestors who were arrested
and detained in October 2000 in areas surrounding the
police academy were raped by law enforcement
personnel. At that time, a high-ranking member of the
regime made a comment completely lacking in
compassion that remains a sad part of the collective
Ivoirian memory. He said, "They should have not gone
out to demonstrate".

It was also under that regime that a famous
foreign journalist was killed in cold blood in public by
a policeman, who was hailed as a hero by a club
formed in his support and on T-shirts bearing his
image. I also recall that it was under that regime that
an investigative journalist researching the coffee and
cocoa industry disappeared and has still not been
found. He was last seen with a person who was close to
the former First Lady.

With regard to the former regime, all of the
atrocities and massive human rights violations suffered
by the population over the past 10 years were in the
normal order of things. We can easily understand why
there were 3,000 victims during the five months of
post-electoral crisis in Cote d'Ivoire.

I note and reaffirm that President Ouattara and
his Government have inherited a lawless State of
impunity where everything must be reconstructed. That
is why we created the Ministry for Human Rights and
Civil Rights within the current Government, whose
goals are, among others, first, to reform the security
sector in line with international norms; secondly,
ensure that human and civil rights are perceived as a
civic duty and instil a culture of forgiveness so that the
internally displaced and refugees may return to their
homes; thirdly, make the courts more accessible
pursuant to the Ivoirian Code of Civil Procedure; and
5

fourthly, align national legislation with international
norms.

With respect to the detention conditions for
politicians of the former regime who are under house
arrest, I can assure the Council that they are in no way
being treated in an inhuman or degrading fashion. I
returned from C6te d'Ivoire on Saturday after having
spent two weeks there. During that time, I met with the
Minister of Justice, the Minister of Human Rights and
the Minister of the Interior. The allegations that have
been made are based on no valid or irrefutable
evidence. The Minister of Human Rights visited one of
the detention centres as I was leaving Cote d'Ivoire.

I take this opportunity to reaffirm once again the
determination of the President of the Republic, His
Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara, to work resolutely
to ensure respect for human rights in Cote d'Ivoire and
the emergence and strengthening of a State based on
respect for the rule of law and transparency and that
will fight to end impunity. My delegation would
therefore ask that the Government's efforts to promote
a culture that respects human rights be substantially
supported by UNOCI.

With regard to legislative elections, we must now
move to the second phase of the electoral process, in
particular for the legislative elections, as provided for
in the Ouagadougou Political Agreement. In that
respect, my Government seeks the support and
logistical and technical aid of UNOCI. The electoral
process is part of a whole, and my delegation requests
that the certification role of the United Nations be
maintained, taking into account, of course, the
specificities of the legislative elections. There is no
reason why a demonstrably valuable process that has
enabled us to affirm the respect of the people should
not be maintained. Therefore, we reiterate and insist on
the ongoing certification role of UNOCI.

Furthermore, the composition of the Independent
Electoral Commission will of course be adapted to take
recent changes into account. There too, the
Government wishes it to remain representative and
inclusive in order to guarantee the credibility of the
electoral process. We would ask UNOCI to continue to
support the entire process, as it did during the
presidential elections, at all stages.
With regard to the economic situation, the
economy of Cote d'Ivoire was derailed in the post-
electoral phase, but it retains a firm foundation and
shows potential for recovery that only requires
reconstruction to begin in order to take off. In the
short-term, however, the creation of revenue-
generating jobs, particularly for young people and
women, will be indispensable to ensuring harmonious
transition towards major agro-industry and
infrastructure projects that can bring major growth. My
delegation hopes for increased funding through
UNOCI's quick-impact project in order to stabilize that
transition.

In conclusion, from its perspective of building
peace, my Government has welcomed the majority of
the relevant recommendations contained in the report
of the Secretary-General before us. The report stresses
the compelling need for the international community to
continue to help C6te d'Ivoire. We must avoid
obstacles that could undermine the efforts and
everything that has been achieved at such a high cost.

During my audience with President Alassane
Ouattara in Abidjan before I returned, the President
asked me to convey to the members of the Council the
hopes that Cote d'Ivoire entertains with respect to
UNOCI and Operation Licorne over the next 12
months. Cote d'Ivoire requires a substantial and robust
peacekeeping operation to consolidate its restored yet
fragile peace.

Cote d'Ivoire will do everything possible to build
its own capacities to fully guarantee its own security as
soon as possible, but for the moment we must
recognize that we will not succeed without the help of
the United Nations. That is why the mandates of
UNOCI and of Operation Licorne must be extended.
That support and assistance are indispensable as the
Government implements its goal of putting the country
back onto the path of progress for the next 12 months.

