Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
Thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa. We
hope this will be the first of a series of Security Council
meetings at which we can review our collective efforts in
support of peace and development in Africa. Steadfast
and long-term commitments will be essential if the
objectives set out in the report are to be achieved.

The recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General are vast in scope but practical and well
conceived. They have the general support of the
Government of Canada.

Some of the strongest messages in this report lie not
in its recommendations but in the analyses that it
contains. The Secretary-General rightly conveys one such
message when he states in paragraph 45 that the efforts
to reinforce the capacity of African countries to operate
in peacekeeping missions

"are not in any way intended to relieve the broader
international community of its collective obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations".

We completely agree with the Secretary-General' s implied
conclusion that collaboration in capacity-building in
Africa must not have the objective of equipping Africans
to respond to crises in Africa solely so as to absolve the
international community of that responsibility. A selective
allocation of responsibility for intervening in crises would
be no more acceptable in Africa than it would be
anywhere else in the world, and would, we believe,
undermine the very notion of collective responsibility and
collective action that underpins the Charter.

Collaboration with a View to the development of
African peacekeeping capacity should instead aim to
ensure that African States receive the support they require
in order to play a still greater role in future United
Nations peacekeeping operations, both on the African
continent and elsewhere. We have worked with the

 

Organization of African Unity (OAU) in developing a
comprehensive survey of African peacekeeping capacity.
We have also provided bilateral assistance to 14 countries
through our Military Training Assistance Plan.

Canadian Blue Helmets have had the privilege of
serving alongside African troops on many occasions in
Africa and elsewhere. They are doing so again in the
Central African Republic, where Canadian soldiers have
been deployed in the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINURCA) alongside soldiers from
Burkina Faso, Chad, Cote d'Ivoire, France, Gabon, Mali,
Senegal and Togo. This deployment reaffirms our deep
commitment both to collective action in general and, more
specifically, to collaboration with our African partners.

We consider particularly compelling the Secretary-
General's observation, in paragraph 46 of the report, that

"Failure to act in the face of serious threats to peace
and human lives in Africa threatens the credibility and
legitimacy of the United Nations not only in the area
of peace and security but also in other areas of its
work."

The credibility of the Security Council in particular is
directly linked to its willingness to act decisively and
effectively to make available the necessary resources to
counter threats to peace and security. The few hundred Blue
Helmets, including a handful of Canadians, who found
themselves in Rwanda under the United Nations flag after
April 1994, experienced - and continue to relive today -
the profound horror and confusion caused by their inability
to prevent or mitigate even to a small extent the flagrant
genocide because the Security Council abandoned them and
persistently failed to provide the support and the troops that
we all knew were needed.

I visited those brave soldiers at the beginning of June
1994, and I witnessed their courageous efforts to save the
lives of 25,000 people scattered throughout the camps
around Kigali, despite the battles for the capital, which they
were incapable of influencing. I cannot adequately describe
the feeling of abandonment, isolation and frustration that
these soldiers - our soldiers - experienced when faced
with such events. They believed that with modest resources
they would have been able to save hundreds of thousands
more lives. They were ready to take the necessary risks -
and they took them anyway. It was we, in New York and
in our capitals, who did not want to take on such risks.
They had laid down the plans for the rescue operation.
Only our will was lacking.

We owe to our soldiers and to those they are sent to
protect a commitment never to repeat this tragic
experience. The Secretary-General is obviously right to
draw attention to the "poisonous legacy" engendered by
our collective failure in Rwanda and to remind us that
we, the Member States, must be prepared to fulfil our
obligations under the Charter if the integrity of our
Organization is to be preserved.

A third message concerns the need to follow up the
first signs of a crisis with timely and effective action. It
is not enough simply to act. If the United Nations is to be
effective and credible, its Members must act with dispatch
in responding to crises. Canada's efforts to enhance the
Organization's ability to respond rapidly to crises - for
example, through the creation of a rapidly deployable
mission headquarters unit - reflect its conviction that
without both the capacity and the will for early and
effective action, early warning is of little value. So, too,
does our contribution of half a million dollars to the
United Nations trust fund for preventive action, set up to
enhance the Secretary-General's ability to head off
emerging crises.

[spoke in English]

The Secretary-General emphasizes throughout his
report the importance of collaboration with regional and
subregional bodies in Africa. The Organization of African
Unity (OAU) has developed a much improved capacity to
respond to crises since its Cairo Summit of 1993. Canada
has provided approximately $2 million in support of the
OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management
and Resolution, and we enjoy an excellent consultative
relationship with the OAU in this area. Several of the
subregional bodies of Africa, such as the Inter-
Governmental Authority on Development and the
Southern African Development Community are also
enhancing their capacity to promote stability. All need,
and all merit, greater support.

Subregional bodies have also demonstrated the
capacity to undertake enforcement action with effect.
Sierra Leoneans warmly welcomed the troops of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), who reversed the coup in
Freetown last May. Regional and subregional bodies
possess the capacity, expertise and, most importantly, the
commitment to act, and, as the Secretary-General
observes in his report, there may be instances when they
represent a better option than United Nations

 

peacekeeping forces. It is incumbent upon us to ensure that
this complementary capacity continues to be nurtured.

We must, however, be vigilant to avoid the dangers of
cascading responsibility for peacekeeping from the global
level to the regional or even the subregional level. We
cannot subcontract responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, even by default. Regional
and subregional bodies should respond, not to vacuums
created as a result of inaction on the part of the Security
Council, but to collaborative programmes developed in
close consultation with the Council. Such collaboration
should be based on Articles 53 and 54 of the United
Nations Charter and ought fully to reflect the Security
Council's exclusive mandate for authorizing the use of
force.
Allow me briefly to speak to five particular issues
raised by the Secretary-General with reference to Africa.
All reflect matters currently before the Security Council in
one form or another. Their solution will demand the utmost
creativity and perseverance on the part of Council members.

The first relates to child soldiers. We applaud the
Secretary-General's appointment of a Special
Representative to study the impact of armed conflict on
children. We were pleased to host Mr. Otunnu a couple of
weeks ago in Canada. The Canadian Government has
announced contributions to programmes to assist in the
demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers in Liberia
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and towards the
provision of assistance for children abducted by rebel forces
in northern Uganda. We join the Secretary-General in
endorsing the notion of children as "zones of peace" and in
urging that this concept be expanded. We applaud the
increased attention that the Security Council has focused on
the practice of recruiting child combatants and urge that it
continue to do so. We also applaud the attention the
Council has focused on the demobilization of child
combatants and other fighters.

The second issue relates to the protection of civilians,
including humanitarian aid workers, in situations of conflict.
Attacks on humanitarian personnel are increasingly
common. A Canadian aid worker was detained in Sierra
Leone recently; only a couple of weeks ago a Canadian
human rights observer was arrested and detained in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; and ten Red Cross and
Red Crescent personnel were kidnapped recently in
Somalia. We welcome the release, earlier today, of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent personnel. We agree with the
Secretary-General that such attacks are unconscionable and
undermine the basic conditions of humanitarian assistance,
and also that international humanitarian and human rights
norms must be respected by all parties to a conflict. We
also agree that more needs to be done to protect women
and children from the effects of conflict.

A connected issue, the protection of refugees, is
especially vexing. The mandate provided by the Security
Council for the multinational force in eastern Zaire, which
Canada undertook to lead, did not provide for the
disarming of former combatants and their separation from
non-combatants in and around the refugee camps, in
significant part because the number of soldiers this would
have required far exceeded the number that Member
States were willing to pay for and provide. We share the
Secretary-General's support for the establishment of an
international mechanism to assist host Governments in
maintaining the security and neutrality of refugee camps
and settlements, as a means of helping to avoid future
recurrences of the dilemma encountered by refugees
fleeing eastern Zaire.

The third issue relates to economic sanctions. We
agree with the Secretary-General that greater use should
be made of much more finely and carefully targeted
sanctions to maximize their impact on those who are
creating the problems and to minimize the extensive
damage they cause to ordinary people. Surely we have
learned by now that sanctions are a very blunt instrument
indeed. Recent experiences in Sierra Leone, the Great
Lakes region and Iraq remind us that even when sanctions
are selective and an effort is made to provide for
humanitarian exemptions, widespread suffering usually
occurs. We acknowledge that increasingly the Council and
the Secretary-General have taken greater care in assessing
and seeking to mitigate the humanitarian impact of
economic sanctions. The Council cannot, however, allow
sanctions to become a policy tool of preference merely
because other options are even less palatable.

The fourth issue relates to the proliferation of small
arms. Arms expenditures reduce the resources available
for development. We support the Secretary-General's call
upon African countries to follow the world trend towards
capping or indeed reducing military spending, and we
acknowledge the efforts and accomplishments of those
countries that have already achieved a reduction in
defense expenditures. Of equal concern, however, is the
regional instability that the proliferation of small arms
engenders, as we have witnessed throughout Africa. We
would like here to follow the example of many previous
speakers and salute the President of Mali for his

 

leadership in seeking to achieve a moratorium on the
export, import and manufacture of light weapons in West
Africa. We hope that his valiant efforts are emulated
elsewhere on the continent. We have been pleased to work
with the Institute for Security Studies in South Africa on an
extensive survey of the impact of the increased availability
of small arms in southern and central Africa and on the
development of an action plan for the control of small arms
in the region. We hope the Security Council will address
itself to this issue as a matter of urgency, as recommended
by the Secretary-General.

The Canadian Government and the non-governmental
Canadian Centre for International Peace and Security have
also collaborated with the Institute for Security Studies on
a study of a related issue, the growing "privatization" of
security and violence. This issue, too, merits the attention
of the Council as it is essential that security institutions
remain accountable to civilian Governments and the people
they serve.
The fifth issue is post-conflict peace-building. We
agree with the Secretary-General that the consolidation of
peace in the aftermath of conflict requires an integrated
effort beyond purely diplomatic and military action. The
Canadian Government announced a Canadian peace-
building initiative in 1996, one important component of
which is a $20 million peace-building fund to support local
initiatives to achieve reconciliation, reconstruction and
recovery. We applaud the World Bank's increased
involvement in peace-building, and also the higher priority
the Security Council is giving to this critical phase in
national reconstruction. The Peace-Building Support Office
in Liberia provides an important model.

You would not expect a Canadian to intervene in such
a debate without raising our collective efforts to ban anti-
personnel mines. It is a matter we believe is very much
germane to the thrust of the Secretary-General's report but
which, in fact, receives no mention in this otherwise
comprehensive document. The proliferation of anti-
personnel mines, which have had such a devastating impact
on development in Africa and imposed such an egregious
cost in terms of human lives lost and ruined, not least in
Angola and Mozambique, has an impact across the
spectrum of Africa's development and security agenda.
Thirty-eight African countries are among the more than 120
to have signed the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction since it was opened for
signature in Ottawa last December. South Africa played a
vital role in creating this treaty, and Mauritius was among
the very first to ratify it. We understand that Mali, South
Africa and Zimbabwe expect to do so soon. There are, no
doubt, others in a similar situation. Forty ratifications are
needed to achieve entry into force, a goal which, of
course, Africa alone could achieve.

We laud the Secretary-General's steadfast
commitment to mine action in Africa and elsewhere, and
acknowledge the collaborative efforts of the United
Nations Children's Fund and the OAU in encouraging
early ratification of the treaty, particularly in Africa.

Reflected throughout the report before us is the
Secretary-General's conviction that respect for human
rights and the rule of law are necessary components of
any effort to make peace durable, a conviction we of
course share. Important progress is being made in Africa
both in promoting human rights and in strengthening
democratic governance. The Harare Declaration of 1991
was of course agreed in Africa, and its expression of
commitment to democracy, good governance, human
rights and the rule of law is finding resonance throughout
the continent.
The development of vibrant judicial institutions is
especially important. Canada contributed $1 million
towards the Criminal Tribunal in Rwanda in order to
accelerate efforts to bring those responsible for the
genocide to justice and to help bring an end to a culture
of impunity.

Canada has also provided police monitors and
advisers to several United Nations missions in Africa. We
note with satisfaction the significant contribution made by
civilian police from African countries in United Nations
operations, and we are exploring ways to enhance our
mutual capacity in this area.

The report before the Council reminds us that
political progress cannot be achieved in an economic
vacuum and that development is itself a human right, as
well as the principal long-term objective of all countries
of Africa. We agree that long-term and sustainable
success can be achieved only if African countries enact
sound economic policies that will help integrate Africa
more fully into the global economy.

Donors also have significant obligations, and we
share deeply the Secretary-General's belief that official
development assistance remains a vital component of our
collective efforts to focus the potential of Africa and that
it has a critical role to play in ensuring that African

 

nations find and remain on the path of poverty-reducing
economic growth and social development.

We also share the Secretary-General's View that debt
burdens must be reduced. Canada has provided well over
$15 billion in aid to Africa, always working closely with
our African partners to ensure that such assistance responds
to their particular needs. We remain fully committed to this
partnership. We have forgiven debt wherever possible, and
will seek further opportunities to do so.

While not a substitute for official development
assistance, trade and investment can also be powerful levers
for development, and Africa is increasingly realizing its
potential in both domains. Canada now exports over $1
billion worth of goods to Africa each year, a quantity which
is exceeded by African exports to Canada. Our direct
investment in Africa has tripled since 1989. We are also
forging new partnerships in telecommunications and
information processing. The African Information Society
Initiative, an action plan designed by Africans in
collaboration with Canada's International Development
Research Centre, will help harness the development
potential of new information and communications
technologies.

The exceptional report before us is ultimately about
the renewal of commitment among the peoples of Africa,
between African people and their Governments, among
African countries, between Africa and the United Nations
and between African and non-African Member States. I
welcome this opportunity to reaffirm Canada's enduring
commitment to Africa. Canada has striven to accommodate
Africa's fundamental development needs while facilitating
pan-African efforts to promote unity, commerce, peace and
security. We remain steadfast in our commitment to this
partnership.

