Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): May I
first of all express my delegation's thanks to you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open meeting,
so that we can discuss, with the participation of all
members of the United Nations that are interested in
this subject, the issue of the non-proliferation of
weapons on mass destruction in the hands of non-State
actors or terrorists. We are interested in hearing the
opinions of other delegations and we have said this
many times, so we are delighted that this meeting has
been convened.

Chile resolutely supports all universal and
regional instruments for disarmament, weapons control
and non-proliferation, and we attach particular
importance to those that prohibit complete categories
of weapons of mass destruction. My country firmly
supports efforts being made in the framework of the
United Nations to ensure and strengthen
implementation of these instruments. We attach special
importance to the legitimacy that is provided by
negotiations in a multilateral framework. At the same
time, we regret the fact that obstructionist use of the
rule of consensus has thus far impeded the adoption of
such important mechanisms as the protocol for the
verification of the Biological and Toxin Weapons
Convention or agreement on a treaty for the prohibition
of the production of fissionable materials for military
purposes.

Chile recognizes that well-established multilateral
forums have not made full use of all the effective
means available to States to provide legal guarantees in
the face of threats to international security. For that
reason, my delegation firmly supports the International
Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation
- the Hague Code of Conduct - which addresses also
the means of delivery of weapons of mass destruction.
It is a politically binding instrument that was
negotiated and is implemented within the framework of
a broad group of like-minded countries.

We believe that a binding Security Council
resolution on weapons of mass destruction, addressing
non-State actors and terrorists, would effectively
buttress those other international instruments on
weapons of mass destruction and would constitute an
appropriate measure with respect to their
implementation, both in terms of international peace
and security and as concerns the specific issue at hand.

We reiterate that, despite its specific and limited
objectives, such a resolution would be relevant to both
non-proliferation and disarmament issues. The
existence and proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and the means of manufacturing and
delivering them constitute a source of danger that we
are seeking to prevent. The affirmation that nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons in themselves pose a
threat to international peace and security is the main
premise underlying international agreements on the
prohibition and non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, such as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, the Treaty of Tlatelolco and the
Conventions on chemical and on biological weapons. It
is also the key premise of the thinking behind the draft
resolution under discussion.

In the face of the gravity of recent acts of
terrorism, we believe that the Security Council must
act without delay; it must take all possible timely
measures within its power under the Charter. Such
measures would not prevent States from, at the proper
time, negotiating international instruments that would
contribute to a legal framework countering this threat.

We agree that it would be appropriate to act under
Chapter VII of the Charter. The draft resolution under
discussion contains provisions whose implementation
would not include enforcement action. My delegation
therefore feels that it would be appropriate to clarify
this and explicitly include it in the text that will be put
to the vote, including the possibility of applying
Chapter VII to only certain operative paragraphs.
Moreover, we consider that a follow-up committee
must be created taking into account the existence and
powers of other bodies and international institutions in
the field of the control of weapons of mass destruction,
thus enabling the committee to function in coordination
with them. The powers of such a committee would
have to be stated clearly in the resolution; we believe it
should be established for a two-year period, which
would give States a realistic period of time to adopt
national legislation under their respective legal
systems.

Finally, we reiterate our constructive, positive
position on the draft resolution under discussion on this
item. Because this is a highly important and complex
matter, it must be considered carefully; we believe this
is important so that the final text will, to the extent
possible, command universal acceptance within the
international community - which will have to
implement it - and, of course, so that the Security
Council can adopt it by consensus.

