The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Uruguay.

First, I thank Assistant Secretary-General Kang
for her briefing. The content of her statement was
profoundly moving.

The Government of Uruguay is deeply concerned
about the humanitarian situation in Syria. Above and
beyond the many efforts being made to find a solution
to this protracted conflict, the humanitarian situation
for the Syrian people continues to be a devastating
one and has been exacerbated by the practices of their
own Government, rebel armed groups and terrorist
organizations. Uruguay demands that all parties to the
conflict allow humanitarian aid convoys to have access
to the entire country, without delay 4 and particularly
those areas that are under siege by any one of those
parties.

Widespread hunger and malnutrition in areas such
as Madaya, Fu'ah, Kafraya, Dayr al-Zawr, Daraya,
areas in eastern Ghouta and the environs of the capital
of Damascus is utterly unacceptable. The arrival,
yesterday and Monday, of humanitarian aid convoys
in Madaya, Fu'ah and Kafraya is a positive sign, but
it must be followed by immediate and unconditional
access of humanitarian aid convoys in response to
requests by United Nations agencies and its partners on
the ground in Syria. We demand that the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic, a State Member of the United
Nations, comply with its obligations under international
humanitarian law and cease to impede aid that would
ease the tremendous suffering of its people. That same
obligation is also incumbent upon other non-State
actors in the conflict, who are also responsible for
such an affront to the most basic norms of civilization.
Keeping the people of those areas close to starvation as
a weapon is a war crime, which is exacerbated by the
fact that they are unable to escape or flee for their lives.
This is a clear breach of international humanitarian law.

Sooner or later, all those responsible for these
atrocities must account for their actions. The
Government of Uruguay hopes that resolution 2258
(2015), adopted in December, and the intensive efforts
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan
de Mistura, will enable humanitarian access without
obstacles or delays. Uruguay is confident that, in the
next few days, the bases set out by resolution 2254
(2015) for the start of the transition and the ceasefire
in Syria will be established. That is a sine qua none
for preventing the ongoing deterioration of the living
conditions ofthe population. They must recover, as soon
as possible, their right to live in peace and enjoy the
most basic human rights, which have been continously
violated by all the warring parties since the beginning
of the conflict.

In the midst of all this, we pay tribute to all persons
on the ground who are risking their own lives to provide
humanitarian assistance to the innocent victims of
these atrocities.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

