Mr. Bathily (spoke in French): I have the honour to
introduce today the report of the Secretary-General on
the activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) and on the Lord's Resistance
Army-affected areas (S/2014/8l2). This report presents
an overview of the political and security situation in
Central Africa and provides an update on threats to
peace and security in the subregion. It also discusses
the initiatives undertaken by the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, Member States and
subregional organizations.

(spoke in English)

Since the publication ofthe last report (S/2014/319),
in May, the situation in the Central African Republic
has remainsed of foremost concern in the region. The
political situation is still fragile. Security conditions
are volatile. The humanitarian situation is precarious.
Human rights violations continue to be reported.
Hundreds of thousands of refugees are being hosted in
neighbouring countries.

However, this last period has also seen a
consolidation of international support for the Central
African Republic and resolutionenewed momentum to
keep the political transition on track. In July, the fifth
meeting of the International Contact Group on the
Central African Republic expanded the mediation led
by President Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of
the Congo on behalf of the Economic Community of
Central African States to an international mediation that
now comprises the United Nations, which I represent,
and the African Union, as represented by its Special
Envoy on the Central African Republic, Mr. Soumeylou
Boubeye Maiga.

We worked closely in order to facilitate the signing of
an agreement on the cessation of hostilities and violence
at the Brazzaville forum on the crisis in the Central
African Republic in July. In August and September,
I encouraged the transitional authorities in Bangui to
adopt a more consultative approach to decision-making
following the controversy surrounding the selection of
a new Prime Minister. In October, following violent
attacks that erupted in Bangui, I returned to the Central
African Republic and encouraged all parties to reject
violence and focus on advancing the transition.

Tensions subsequently decreased and the Central
African actors, together with their international
partners, renewed their commitment to a peaceful,
inclusive and speedy transition at the sixth meeting of
the International Contact Group. In close collaboration
and consultation with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), Mr. Babacar Gaye, I have
employed the good offices of the Secretary-General
to ensure that all the actors remain committed to the
peace process. On a daily basis, I maintain contact with
all leaders and stakeholders to prevent a derailing of the
process. Although it has not been fully implemented,
the Brazzaville agreement generated new momentum
and provides a framework that calls for the regrouping
of ex-combatants and includes the participation of the
ex-Seleka and anti-balaka in the peace process.

While instability in the Central African Republic
threatens the subregion from within, armed groups on
the periphery threaten it from without. In that regard,
incursions by Nigeria-based terrorist group Boko
Haram have expanded into the Lake Chad basin region.
A joint UNOCA-United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWA) assessment mission to the areas ofCameroon
and Chad affected by Boko Haram was undertaken
in October. The mission observed that attacks have
increased in frequency and intensity, especially in
northern Cameroon. As a result, scores of people have
been killed, tens of thousands of refugees have arrived
in Cameroon, and abductions continue. The mission
also observed the humanitarian and socioeconomic
impact of Boko Haram's activities in Chad. Beyond
Cameroon and Chad, the other countries in the Lake
Chad basin region should be kept under close watch and
are at risk of being destabilized by Boko Haram.

The situation, if left unaddressed, may soon
overwhelm the capacity to respond. I have therefore
advocated for strengthened coordination in the design
and implementation of a multidimensional response
to Boko Haram during my many interactions with the
Governments concerned. I welcome in that regard the
reactivation of the joint multinational task force for the
Lake Chad basin countries and the development of a
draft regional counter-terrorism strategy for the Lake
Chad basin area.

The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) has been
weakened by concerted military and civilian efforts,
but it continues to threaten populations in the region,
particularly in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Central African Republic, where UNOCA conducted
assessment missions in July and August. The missions'
findings revealed a noticeable increase of LRA activity
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and a lack of
reintegration support and development programming
to combat the LRA. Killings and abductions continue.
More than 160,000 persons are still displaced. There
are persistent reports of LRA activity in the disputed
Kafia Kingi enclave and of the group's involvement
in ivory poaching in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, gold and diamond trafficking in the Central
African Republic and opportunistic alliances with the
ex-Seleka.

International cooperation involving LRA-affected
countries and their national and international partners
is at the centre of the efforts to address the threat
and impact of that armed group. In that regard, I am
collaborating closely with the African Union Special
Envoy on the Lord's Resistance Army, Jackson Tuwei,
on the fight against the LRA. I am pleased that he
will be addressing this body today. Tomorrow, I will
participate in the International Working Group on the
Lord's Resistance Army, chaired by the United States
and the European Union. I would like to acknowledge the
Government of Uganda for its steadfast commitment to
the collective effort against the LRA and, in particular,
the Uganda People's Defence Forces for their critical
operational role within the African Union Regional
Task Force. The international community and States in
the region must remain committed to putting an end to
the LRA threat once and for all.

The region also continues to suffer from the
scourge of a wide range of illegal activities, including
piracy, armed robbery at sea, illegal fishing, the
illicit wildlife trade and other forms of transnational
organized crime. The inauguration of the Interregional
Coordination Centre on Maritime Security in the Gulf
of Guinea in Yaounde and the operationalization of the
Regional Coordination Centre for Maritime Security in
Central Africa in Pointe-Noire, the Congo, represent
important steps towards the establishment of a regional
information-sharing architecture for maritime security
in the Gulfoquinea. In that respect, UNOCA continues
to actively support the implementation of the decisions
of the 2013 Summit of Heads of State and Government
on Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea,
held in Yaounde.

The coming two years will see a majority of
countries in the Central African region hold elections,
thus affecting the lives ofmore than 100 million people.
In a number of countries, tensions are heightened as
a consequence of the limited participation of certain
segments of society, the polarized tone of the political
debate, restrictions on the exercise of civil and political
rights and possible constitutional amendments related
to term limits, as seen recently in Burkina Faso, in West
Africa.

In that context, I began to hold consultations with
political actors in the subregion, including the leaders
of ruling parties and opposition figures, encouraging
stakeholders to manage their political differences
by engaging in dialogue, fostering consensus and
advancing the consolidation of democracy. In addition,
UNOCA co-organized a workshop in October in Douala,
Cameroon, to promote the political participation of
women, particularly in the countries scheduled to hold
elections.

(Spoke in French)

It is important to improve the coherence of the
United Nations work in Central Africa. As noted, I
have worked closely with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in the Central African Republic,
Mr. Babacar Gaye. In September, I travelled to Dakar to
meet with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of UNOWA to enhance cooperation
between our respective offices in areas of common
interest, such as maritime piracy and the fight against
Boko Haram. In the same spirit, MINUSCA, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan and the United Nations Office
to the African Union took part in the meeting of the
focal points on the LRA held in Entebbe, Uganda, and
UNOCA participated in the retreat organized by the
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to
the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Said Djinnit.

UNOCA is also working with the World Health
Organization to support the subregion in the
development of a coordinated response to the possible
spread of the Ebola virus. In that respect, although
Central Africa has thus far been spared infection by the
disease, the potential for populations becoming infected
and the capacities of Governments in the subregion
being disrupted remains real. We must therefore remain
vigilant and ensure that States are ready to respond
appropriately.

UNOCA is also strengthening its partnership with
the African Union, including by taking part in the
African Union Summit and, in October, at the meeting
of African Union mediators and special envoys on
issues of peace and security. I worked closely with the
African Union special envoys on issues pertaining to
the Central African Republic and the LRA.

At the subregional level, UNOCA has stepped
up its cooperation with the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS). In June, as soon as
I took office, I went to N'Djamena to consult with the
ECCAS Chairman-in-Office, President Idriss Deby
Itno of Chad. I then took part in a meeting of ECCAS
Heads of State on the Central African Republic, on the
margins of the twenty-third African Union Summit. I
am also in regular contact with the ECCAS mediator
for the crisis in the Central African Republic and the
Secretary-General of ECCAS on all relevant issues
under our respective mandates.

Recently, UNOCA organized a workshop on
mediation aimed at improving the skills of ECCAS
and UNOCA experts and to strengthen institutional
cooperation. UNOCA and ECCAS are also working
together to organize a meeting of experts for the
preparation of a subregional response strategy with
regard to the threat posed by the Ebola virus.

Finally, in its capacity as the secretariat ofthe United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa, UNOCA supported the
organization of the Committee's thirty-eighth and
thirty-ninth ministerial meetings, held, respectively,
in August in Malabo and in December in Bujumbura.
The Committee continues to provide a regular forum
for Governments in the subregion to allow progress
to be made on a number of initiatives with regard to
promoting peace and security in Central Africa.

Central Africa remains a fragile subregion. It
has enormous potential, but it faces considerable
challenges. UNOCA will continue to play the role of
catalyst in collaborating with other United Nations
entities, while strengthening institutional partnerships
and supporting the subregion in capacity-building for
conflict prevention and peacebuilding.

