Mr. Howells (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom aligns itself with the statement to be made
later by the Under-Secretary of State of Finland on
behalf of the European Union (EU).

Today's debate is an important opportunity to
focus on strengthening the cooperation between the
United Nations and regional, subregional and
intergovernmental organizations. I thank you, Madam
President, for your foresight in convening it.

The United Nations is a uniquely legitimate and
indispensable global body. But it cannot operate in
isolation. The demands on the United Nations,
particularly in the area of peacekeeping, expand
continually. In many areas, it is only by working
closely with its regional and international partners that
the United Nations can effectively deliver to those
most in need.

That applies more widely, too, across the
international community's response to the critical
challenges we face, including terrorism and
proliferation, poverty, climate change, and the
protection and promotion of human rights. The United
Kingdom therefore welcomes the Security Council's
commitment, expressed in the statement to be adopted
today, to expand cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations. That will strengthen the
Council's ability to respond to conflict through
prevention, crisis management and post-conflict
reconstruction.

Nowhere is that more necessary than in Darfur.
The African Union (AU) peacekeeping force - the
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) - has
done an outstanding job in very difficult
circumstances. It should now be allowed to share that
burden with the United Nations and with the wider
international community. It is unreasonable to expect
any single regional organization to maintain the level
of force needed in Darfur for long periods. The AU
itself has recognized, over many months, the need for a
transition to the United Nations. The Council endorsed
that conclusion again through resolution 1706 (2006),
agreeing to provide AMIS with support and to
reinforce it, with the aim of taking over by the end of
this year.

We cannot understand why the Government of
Sudan, while accepting a United Nations force on
almost identical terms in the south of the country, is
turning its back on United Nations help in the west of
Sudan. We very much hope that contacts in New York
this week will help President Al-Bashir to understand
that our goal is to help the Sudan. But equally, we
cannot stand idly by if the Sudan pursues a military
solution of its own in Darfur. The Council will need to
act to support the AU and to shoulder its own
responsibilities. But we hope that such a crisis can yet
be averted.

As we know, the European Union has also
developed its role in international peace and security
since the launch of the European Security and Defence
Policy by the United Kingdom and France almost 10
years ago. We welcome the increasing role played by
regional and subregional organizations in conflict
prevention efforts, as outlined by the Secretary-General
in his recent progress report on the prevention of armed
conflict. The League of Arab States has an important
role to play as we aim to reinvigorate the Middle East
peace process. We also welcome the increasingly close
relations between the United Nations, the Council of
Europe and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The three
organizations have common aims and purposes. By
working together, they can enhance one another's
contributions to the promotion of human rights,
democracy and the rule of law, and their response to
security challenges.

But now we need to build stronger relationships
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
In particular, we need to identify the relative strengths
of each and to build up their expertise and capacity.
Full implementation of resolutions 1625 (2005) and
1653 (2006), on African peacekeeping, should be a
high priority both for the United Nations and for
Member States.

The EU, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), the OSCE and the United Nations continue to
cooperate closely. Darfur is a clear example of the EU,
NATO and the United Nations all working together to
provide support on the ground. We expect similarly
valuable cooperation among the EU, NATO and the
OSCE in Kosovo, where the EU plans to have a
mission operating alongside NATO.

I would use today's debate to invite the
Secretary-General to reflect on whether the United
Nations can bring together those regional organizations
most closely engaged across the conflict cycle -
particularly the EU and the AU - to develop genuine
operational partnerships in order to strengthen their
crucial cooperation.

Greater informal coordination would help us to
ensure that the international community engages on
security sector reform, on demobilization, on
developing capable security forces under democratic
control and, across the spectrum of conflict, all
essential elements to achieve sustainable peace and
development.

The activities of the human rights bodies and
actors of the United Nations complement and build on
work in the field of human rights by relevant regional
organizations.

We are also pleased that several regional
organizations were able to present their valuable
experiences of internal review mechanisms at informal
consultations in Geneva earlier this month on the
Human Rights Council's new universal periodic
review.

The establishment of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission at last year's World
Summit was a major achievement, bringing together
development, security and diplomatic expertise to take
a holistic approach to peacebuilding. The Commission
brings together for the first time in a formal grouping
Member States, international financial institutions,
regional and development organizations to help secure
lasting peace and rebuild countries ravaged by conflict.
The Commission has many challenges ahead, and the
support and cooperation of regional organizations will
be critical to its success.

This is all positive. But the challenge today and
in the future is not just to continue this effort, but to
enhance and expand it. What is needed is targeted
capacity-building of regional organizations. Practical,
real-time opportunities to work together should be
identified. The Security Council's recent commitment
to enhance cooperation with regional organizations
should be put into practice. By doing so, the United
Nations and its regional and international partners have
a better chance of achieving our strategic objectives.

As a proud member of the European Union, the
OSCE, the Council of Europe, the Commonwealth,
NATO, the G-8 and, above all else, the United Nations,
the United Kingdom is committed to continuing this
effort. If there are agreed aims and purposes, common
objectives, shared resources and mutual understanding,
then no matter how difficult the situation, no matter
how difficult the issue, the international community
can tackle the problem head on with confidence and
conviction.

