Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General

Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his detailed briefing and the
work carried out by him and his team to ensure lasting
peace in Colombia.

Let me also welcome to the Security Council once
again Minister Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia. His
presence today once again raises the profile of this
briefing. I would like to make three brief points today.

First, Indonesia commends the measures and efforts
taken by the Government of President Duque Marquez
and its commitment to continuing to implement the
Final Agreement to End the Armed Conflict and Build a
Stable and Lasting Peace. We also once again welcome
the many positive developments achieved by the people
of Colombia in fulfilling the peace agreement, as
well as the positive role played by the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia. Nonetheless, in
line with the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/780),
we also call on all the relevant parties to continue to
make efforts to enhance mutual trust and deliver on
their commitments made to victims, conflict-affected
communities and former combatants.

Secondly, we are deeply concerned at the
announcement by a group of former commanders of the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ej ercito
del Pueblo (FARC-EP) of their decision to rearm. We
are worried about the potential negative impact the
announcement might have in terms of violence and the
security situation in some regions of Colombia. Such
an act clearly shows that those individuals are not
interested in peace, in contravention of the wishes of
the people who strive and hunger for peace.

We should focus more on amplifying the success
stories of the vast majority of former combatants,
who remain committed and engaged in reintegration
programmes as an integral part of their contribution
to the overall peace process. We are glad to hear from
Special Representative Ruiz Massieu that former
combatants are involved in various projects. We
appreciate the efforts of the Government through the
National Reintegration Council to approve more new
collective productive projects, benefitting more former
combatants, including women. It is up to us all in
the international community to support Colombia's
economic and social reintegration efforts, especially
gender-sensitive projects.

Lastly, we must not lose the existing positive
momentum. As we encourage the parties to redouble
their efforts to implement the peace agreement, the
Security Council, too, should continue to effectively
assist the Government with its peacemaking efforts.
Political reintegration and successful local elections are
also important to ensure stability.

Still fresh in our memory is the strong commitment
expressed by all parties during our last visit to
Colombia - President Duque Marquez, leaders of
FARC-EP, heads of peace-agreement institutions,
representatives of civil society organizations and
former combatants and communities from Santa
Rosa to Cauca. We heard them, and it is therefore our
obligation to deliver on our promises to make the peace
agreement work. Indonesia stands ready to assist,
including by sharing our experiences and best practices
in reintegration and illicit drugs crops, as well as in
crop-for-peace programming, including palm oil.
In conclusion, we strongly commend the people
of Colombia for their courage to achieve peace and
stability in their country. Their commitment to the
peace process is exemplary. May Colombia's example
of nationally led peace continue to be a success story
for the Council.

