Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I wish you and
your delegation every success.

From the outset, following the instructions of
Mr. Mansour Hadi Mansour, President of the Republic,
the Yemeni Government has demonstrated openness
and flexibility and made concessions and initiatives
to establish peace, end the coup d'etat, restore State
institutions and alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni
people. Our Government has taken care to support the
efforts of the United Nations, represented by Special
Envoy Griffiths and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard,
Chair of the Redeployment Coordination Committee
(RCC) in order to implement the Stockholm Agreement
and to achieve a political settlement according to the
agreed terms of reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative, its Implementation Mechanism, the
outcome of the National Dialogue Conference and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, chief among
which is resolution 2216 (2015).

Our Government is committed to the full and
complete implementation of the Stockholm Agreement
for the release of prisoners and detainees and the lifting
of the siege on Taiz. We reject any attempt to manipulate
the interpretation of the Agreement to achieve other
ends or justify the practices and obstinacy of the
Houthi militias, which want to shirk their obligations
for achieving peace and are able to create obstacles
so that they can control Al-Hudaydah and its ports by
misleading the international community.

In that regard, the Yemeni Government stresses
the importance of implementing their redeployment in
accordance with what has been agreed, as well as the
tripartite Verification and Inspection Mechanism. Each
phase of redeployment must be accomplished before
the subsequent stage is initiated. The second stage of
redeployment must be implemented after establishing
the legal authority and security services in charge and
agreement has been reached on the mechanism for
the collection of revenues. We reject any unilateral
measure. We also reject the staged withdrawals of the
Houthis, which are a clear and established violation
of the Stockholm Agreement, as well as the relevant
Security Council resolutions. Those withdrawals do not
respect past agreements.

We stress the importance of opening crossing
points and facilitating the movement of United Nations
personnel in Al-Hudaydah. Such obstructionist
practices by the militias have led to the failure of
bilateral meetings in the city, which resulted in the latest
meeting of the RCC taking place in a United Nations
vessel off the coast in the Red Sea. Our Government
is working to correct the redeployment operation and
avoid the shortcomings we have seen in the past, namely,
during the first phase of redeployment. We will work in
accordance with the established agreements. We will
demine and fill the trenches in Al-Hudaydah, as well as
in the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa.

Unfortunately, confidence-building measures are
difficult to establish when the United Nations has failed
to exert pressure on the Houthis to open up crossing
points in Al-Hudaydah. It is difficult to undertake such
confidence-building measures when meetings have
been held in the middle of the sea.

Since the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement, we have seen over the course of the past
eight months that no tangible progress has been made
to date, apart from what had already been announced
in terms of a unilateral withdrawal - a show that has
been staged by the militias. Following the Stockholm
Agreement, the militias have dug trenches, strengthened
their military positions, opened up new front lines and
fanned the flames of the humanitarian crisis. Rockets
and drones have been launched against the Yemeni
people and against civilian infrastructure, as well as
the friendly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Since the Stockholm Agreement, the Houthi militias
have continued their military escalation, targeted cities
and violated international humanitarian law and human
rights law. They have launched drones and rockets
against the Yemeni people and the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia. They have also targeted international maritime
navigation. For its part, the Iranian regime is supporting
those militias by providing them with arms and
military technology used in terrorist operations. That
demonstrates that there is a manifest will to perpetuate
the war, derail the peace efforts and exacerbate the
humanitarian crisis.

A few weeks ago, we saw a Houthi militia
demonstration of their military arsenal. When we
compare what we saw during that demonstration
with what we saw in a demonstration by the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps in 2019, there is proof
of the origin of the weapons used to kill the Yemeni
people and to target civilian structures in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, as well as to threaten international
maritime navigation. That is a clear challenge for the
international community and a violation of Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolutions 2216
(2015) and 2140 (2014). Our Government calls on the
international community and the Council to fulfil their
responsibility to maintain regional and international
peace and security and take deterrent measures to
ensure that Iranian regime is held to account for its
actions, in particular perpetuating the war in Yemen
and providing weapons to the Houthi militia, thereby
jeopardizing the security and stability of the region, in
particular the security of Bab Al-Mandeb, one of the
most important trade passages in the world.

The situation in Yemen is not simply a humanitarian
crisis. The crisis is important, of course, but it is the
result rather than the cause of the situation. To remedy
the crisis, the international community must support
the peace efforts, based on the agreed parameters to put
an end to the coup d'e'tat, restore the State institutions
and support our Government's efforts. Our Government
fully plays its role by adopting plans and programmes to
address developments in every area. Our Government
is also leading the way in implementing reforms to
address challenges and adopting effective policies
to build the State's institutions. We also work hard
to provide services, revive the economy, reinvigorate
construction and restore normal life. Ultimately, the
Yemeni Government is responsible for all Yemenis,
wherever they may be - in all governorates, without
exception. Our Government was recently able to
stabilize the national currency, while bolstering State
revenue, combating money-laundering and the illicit
trade in oil products and strengthening financial and
banking institutions, which, undoubtedly, reduced and
alleviated the humanitarian crisis.

The Houthi militias continue to divert and steal food
assistance, including from the World Food Programme
(WFP), and hinder humanitarian access. The Yemeni
Government declares that the Houthi militias are
responsible for the decision taken by the WFP on 20 June
to partially suspend its operations in the area under
militia control, in particular Sana'a. That decision will
affect 850,000 of the most vulnerable people, including
women and children. Houthi militias continue to block
and target food assistance. Militia heads are involved
in that practice, demonstrating contempt for morals
and international law. This constitutes a crime and a
clear violation of international laws and norms. The
international community has remained silent in the face
of such crimes and violations. Houthi militias continue
to starve the Yemeni people by stealing humanitarian
and food assistance provided by international
organizations and agencies. Customs barriers are being
set up against the trucks delivering aid in governorates
under militia control.

Houthi militias have prevented the entry of 88
vessels containing assistance and oil products. Seven
vessels have been attacked in the Red Sea. Three hundred
and eighty-eight trucks - some of which were carrying
medicines to combat malaria and cholera - have been
looted. Militias have also struck four relief trucks and
targeted WFP depots and storehouses and the Red Sea
Mills. They have burned thousands of tons of cereal,
which could have fed 3.7 million people. The militias
have detained employees of international organizations
and prevented them from visiting the affected areas
to assess the humanitarian situation. They manipulate
access permits, planned visits and the names of the
beneficiaries of assistance. That aid is diverted and then
sold on the black market. At times, local organizations
are set up and run by Houthi militia leaders in order to
monopolize aid distribution.

International personnel have been forced out
and local civil servants have also been detained.
Twenty employees of the French Agency for Technical
Cooperation and Development were detained and
prevented from leaving the Bani Qais directorate and
Hajjah governorate. Their passports were confiscated
for a week. The Yemeni Government calls on the
international community and the Security Council to
condemn the violations committed by Houthi militias,
put pressure on them to lift all barriers they have imposed
on humanitarian agencies and allow the United Nations,
in particular the World Food Programme, to play its full
role and uphold its noble humanitarian responsibility
in Yemen. Our Government stresses and affirms that
we will continue to provide all necessary support to
facilitate the delivery of that humanitarian assistance.

Houthi militias have imposed death sentences
on 30 activists and academics, after kidnapping and
subjecting them to physical and psychological torture
over many years. We call on the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the Secretary-General to intervene and do all in their
power to revoke those unjust sentences, handed down
by a court that has no authority or legality and uses
justice as a tool to oppress those who oppose it. The
trials and death sentences, which are extrajudicial, are
not in favour of citizens on the lists of the prisoner
exchange programme under the Stockholm Agreement.
Such unlawful acts are being carried out by illegal
armed groups that have no authority to hand down such
sentences. Pressure must be exerted on the militias to
force them to release all detainees, prisoners, people
under house arrest, disappeared persons and those who
are imprisoned by the militias.

Houthi militias also impose taxes on schools under
their control. Many of the schools that are unable to pay
those taxes have closed their doors, which increases
the suffering of children who no longer have access to
education and are caught up in the conflict. Furthermore,
the heads of the militias have opened holiday camps.
They force parents to send their children between the
ages of6 and 16 to the camps so that they can brainwash
them with sectarian ideas to encourage them to go to
the front lines. That is a violation of the rights of the
child and a methodological destruction of the present
and the future of those children.

Before I conclude, I would like to say that Houthi
militias continue to target civilians, including women
and children. I listened to Mr. Lowcock's briefing. I
would have liked to hear him talk about the children
and the women who have been targeted by snipers,
which is a practice used by the armed militias. A
nine-year-old child was targeted at his home by a
Houthi sniper two days ago. Gratitude and tributes
have been expressed and made to people on Council
sanctions lists who are the perpetrators of violations
against the Yemeni people. Those same persons are
responsible for bureaucratic obstacles. Following the
Council's meetings, those people then send messages
to say that they agree to the various provisions, simply
so that they can dodge responsibility in the eyes of the
Council. The humanitarian crisis in Yemen is far more
important than politicization.

