Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda): Let me add my
delegation's voice to those who spoke earlier to
congratulate you, Sir, as you lead this Council's
deliberations today and tonight, and let me tell you that we
are as happy to see you in the chair tonight as we have
been on several past occasions when we, as you know,
have met in other gatherings of common interest. I would
also like to pay tribute to Ambassador Olara Otunnu,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, for his endeavours and
determination to promote better protection of children and
their welfare. He has, and you have, our full support, and
we wish you well.

I also wish to state my delegation's hope of seeing
this Council open its doors more frequently in the future
to debates of this kind. Indeed, peace and security as well
as wise resolutions are best reached when, as today, they
are talked of in the open, with great transparency, thus
engaging in the debate those who care and leaving the
vote to those who represent us all.

As everybody knows, Rwanda lived through
unforgettable times of war from 1959 into the early
1990s: wars caused by bad leadership and politics of
exclusion practised by successive regimes. The genocide
that followed was a result of that bad leadership coupled
with a lack of consistency in the decisions taken by many
who had and have the power to prevent and/or stop it.

The first victims of that bad leadership and politics
of exclusion were innocent children who were not
allowed access to education because of who they were
and where they were born. It was the same children who
had grown in an atmosphere of rampant injustice who
were naturally mobilized and ready to be recruited as
first-hand witnesses of that bad leadership and of those
unjust policies that prevented people from enjoying their
basic rights. Children who witness such a situation for
long are potentially the ones to fight against injustices
directed at them, but only when and if they are given the
chance and the means to do so.

These means differ from one country and one
situation to another. We pay tribute to those who lose
their lives defending their rights. Unfortunately, it is in
the name of defending those rights that most such
children have lost more of their rights, the main one
being the right to be a child. To be recruited for a cause
is one thing, and to fight a war is another. In armed
conflicts, the most vulnerable people are civilians: elderly
people, women and children. In Rwanda the magnitude of
the suffering that children went through is simply difficult
to describe. But the trauma they still manifest can indicate
how much they suffer inside even when their rights have
been recovered. It is the duty of the Council to ensure
that this does not happen again - not just in Rwanda but
anywhere else on the globe.
 

The world around children should care more, because
it is the same world of adults and leaders that drew them
into these situations in the first place. We cannot tolerate
seeing children being treated like objects of sexual
perversion by deviant parents and relatives, by wealthy
business people or peacekeepers who have money even to
buy the virginity of small young girls at the price of a life
trauma few of them can even talk about. Among the
children we need to protect, many have suffered the
injustices we referred to earlier. Many have suffered the
harsh environment of war and the need to kill: to kill to
save themselves and their future, or to kill because they
have been told to do so.

The resolution sought from the Council today can
prevent more of these killings in the future. Many of these
children have survived mine blasts and bear scars, with
amputated legs and arms; they continue to live with such a
traumatizing experience long after the war is gone. It is the
Council's duty to promise them a better future and
guaranties that their own children will not be subjected to
the same atrocities and mistreatment from adults.

We have several thousand child heads of families and
households in Rwanda, where only children are grouped in
a house and called a family - but a family without a
father, without a mother, without any living grown-up
relative to look after them. The oldest, no matter how
young she or he is, has become the head of the family ipso
facto. Ambassador Olara Otunnu saw that on his trip to
Rwanda and is thus a witness. Looking at those kids
desperately pampering each other on the ground on the one
hand and listening to intellectual debates like this one on
the other shows how distant reality is from decision-makers
and vice versa. Resolutions should bridge the gap and bring
us to the people we ignore and yet wish to assist.

Kids are coerced in various parts of the world and
given weapons to kill other children and adults. They are
promised a better life, mind you. But what kind of better
life is this for such young memories after they have killed
so many people? Those who liberate the land and the
people feel proud of their job, but those who mass-kill their
peers and adults will remain traumatized by what they did
and saw.

In any case, however, both groups of children need
help. We call this fair justice. In Rwanda, those who fought
have been demobilized and taken to schools where they can
learn and acquire skills. Those who killed were taken to
prisons but were later released to be rehabilitated and
integrated into their society. We wish to thank the United
Nations agencies for their assistance to our Government
in this exercise, especially the United Nations Children's
Fund, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the
United Nations Development Programme and the United
Nations Population Fund, as well as many non-
governmental organizations. We thank them all, and we
hope that the wonderful efforts being made by many,
including the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, will
not be wasted so that we can reach a total ban on abusing
children's rights.

My delegation strongly hopes that the Security
Council can stand firm and do its duty to protect the
peace and security of children, because we believe that to
inculcate kids with the culture of peace is a guarantee that
we can offer a better future to generations to come.

To conclude, let me appeal to the Council to think
of the most vulnerable group of kids in armed conflicts
today: orphans. Not only do they experience the trauma
of witnessing the death of their parents and relatives, but
they also survive worse events. Some have been lucky
enough to find foster families; others have not. The
message is the same: as much as we need a world order,
we should be aware of one important thing: that there will
be no world after us if children are not taken care of.
This is a task for all of us: to protect the rights of
children.

Humanitarianism has failed in most cases; the law of
the land has been broken; international humanitarian law
and United Nations conventions have been broken by
those meant to protect them and apply them. Children
have been victims of such malfeasance, and the world
body should take measures now to ensure that we put
children first to ensure a better future for all.

