Ms. Fore: May I add my thoughts to those of
Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock.

Last month, a group of schoolchildren in Sana'a
were doing what children around the world do every
day - sitting in their classrooms, learning. Most were
under the age of nine. It was almost lunchtime, when a
sudden incident shattered the windows. Shrapnel and
broken glass flew into the classrooms. Imagine the fear
that those children experienced. Imagine the horror
their parents felt for sending them to school that day,
all so they could gain what every child deserves - an
education. And imagine the pain endured by the families
of the 14 children who never made it home at all, or the
desperate worry felt by the families of the 16 others
who were critically injured, left fighting for their lives
in the hospital, or the other students who will live with
the trauma of that day for the rest of their lives.

In any conflict, children suffer first and worst.
Since the fighting in Yemen began four years ago, 7,300
children have been killed or seriously injured. Those
are the verified numbers. The actual numbers are no
doubt higher. The fighting still rages across 30 active
conflict zones - home to nearly 1.2 million children.
Each day, another eight children will be killed, injured
or recruited to the fighting. Every 10 minutes, another
child will die from a preventable cause, like the lack
of food, with 360,000 children suffering from severe
acute malnutrition. In fact, half the children under five
years old in Yemen - 2.5 million - are stunted. And
stunting, as the Council knows, is irreversible. They will
die from the lack ofa simple vaccination - 151 children
have died of diphtheria since last August - or from
cholera and severe acute watery diarrhoea. Despite the
best efforts of the humanitarian community, including
the more than 2 million doses of oral cholera vaccines
delivered over the past year, there are 135,000 suspected
cases reported so far this year among children. More
than 3,300 people have died of cholera since 2017,
including 153 children since January alone 4 a number
that will increase as we head into the rainy season. And
as always, the children die first.

The United Nations has verified the recruitment
and use of more than 3,000 children by all parties to the
conflict since the conflict began. That number is likely
much higher - a flagrant and outrageous violation
of international humanitarian law. As children's lives
are at risk, so too are their minds. More than 2 million
children are out of school, and one in five schools has
been damaged or destroyed in the fighting - a huge
blow to their future potential. The situation has only
gotten worse.

While the ceasefire has largely held in Al-Hudaydah,
other areas are seeing a rise in violence, such as in Abs,
Haj jah, Taiz, Al-Dhale'e and elsewhere. Hospitals,
clinics and water systems are in ruins, with half of the
country's hospitals and clinics destroyed. In short, the
systems that every child and family needs are failing.

At the same time, Yemen's economy is in free fall.
A new report commissioned by the United Nations
Development Programme shows that Yemen - already
one of the least-developed countries before the
war - has lost an additional two decades' worth of
development gains since the war began.

We are at a tipping point. If the war continues
any longer, the country may move past the point of no
return. As a global community, we must ask ourselves:
Can Yemen afford losing a generation of children?
Can the region - and indeed, the world - afford
the instability and crushing poverty that will result?
What will happen if Yemen descends into a full-blown
famine? What happens now that the water table is so
low that the wells are dry and that the small aquifers
are below the required well depth? In some ways, that
can be worse than famine, as the lack of water can
sicken and kill children quickly. Are we prepared to
subject a generation of children - and perhaps their
children - to a bleak future? How long will we continue
allowing Yemen to slide into oblivion?

Our teams are working around the clock to prevent
that from happening. As Mr. Lowcock said, last year
UNICEF and our humanitarian partners treated
345,000 severely malnourished children - children
whose mid-upper arm circumference is less than 11
centimetres or three adult fingers in circumference. We
are delivering safe drinking water to more than 5 million
people every day - including 1.7 million children - in
the 15 main cities through municipal water systems. We
are providing cash incentives to 7,000 health workers
and 135,000 teachers and school staff, as many have
not been paid in more than two years. And with key
donors, we are helping to keep alive almost 9 million
of the most vulnerable Yemeni people with emergency
cash assistance.

But that work addresses only the symptoms of the
catastrophe in Yemen. To truly shape a better future
for Yemen and its children, we need the Council's
engagement and influence to end the war on children
now. Yemen is spiralling perilously close to the
brink - to the tipping point. We call on the Council to
speak with one voice to protect the children of Yemen
and stop the grave Violations against them. We urge
all parties to the conflict to open doors to immediate,
long-term humanitarian access and allow for days of
tranquillity in order to vaccinate and help children. If
we cannot reach them, we cannot keep them alive.

We must also redouble our support for the efforts
of the United Nations Special Envoy to reach a
negotiated political solution 4 one that puts children
first - because the longer that this war continues, the
more children will die on the world's watch. As we fail
those children, we fail more than their basic rights; we
fail humankind itself.

When I was in Sana'a and Aden, I visited hospitals
and clinics shattered by the conflict. I witnessed
heart-rending struggles to survive - a newborn baby
struggling to breathe in an incubator after all power
was lost in the emergency room, a distraught mother
with a child, thin and malnourished, begging for food,
and a father weeping, with so little money that he was
forced to choose between keeping his wife alive or his
children. Is that how we show our humanity to others?

Yemen is a test of our humanity, and right now,
we are badly failing that test. Time is running out. We
will not get another chance. Fifteen million children in
Yemen are asking the Council to save their lives. Please
help them. They need peace.

