Mr. Mano Queta (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): The delegation of Guinea-Bissau would like,
through you, Mr. President, to congratulate the Secretary-
General on his commitment to the cause of Africa and his
activities in that connection, particularly concerning Liberia.
We wish to pay a heartfelt tribute to all the Heads of State
of the Economic Community of West African States for
their dedication to and support for the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) since it was created with a
view to facilitating the process of restoring peace and
achieving national reconciliation in Liberia.

We take this opportunity to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Liberia and to assure him of Guinea-
Bissau's fellowship and its willingness to work for peace
and national reconciliation his friendly and brotherly
country. We thank him for the information he has provided
us concerning the current situation in Liberia.

Guinea-Bissau, a country of the same subregion, is
deeply concerned by the slow implementation of the peace
process in that brotherly country. My country has always
followed with special interest the development of the
situation, and it welcomed the signing of the Abuja
Agreement and the establishment of the Council of State.

We wish to reiterate our satisfaction at and support for
the memorandum of understanding signed on 30 November
1995, and we urge the parties to the conflict to continue
along the path of peace and national reconciliation, to work
for the reconstruction of the country and to refrain from
any action that could undermine respect for the terms of
the cease-fire established under the Abuja Agreement.
However, we regret the incidents that took place in
Tubmanburg on 28 December, and we deplore the deaths
of several members of ECOMOG and of innocent
civilians.

Guinea-Bissau is firmly convinced that the political
will of all the parties concerned is a sine qua non for a
peaceful settlement of the conflict. None the less, we also
consider that the firm and continued support of the
international community is necessary in order to speed up
the peace process. This would alleviate the suffering of
the population, which has already gone on for too long.

In this context, we appeal urgently to the
international community to keep the promise it made at
the Conference on Assistance to Liberia, held on 27
October 1995 here in New York.

The problem of refugees and displaced persons is of
crucial importance and deserves the special attention of
the international community. As the Council knows,
Guinea-Bissau has already taken in a great many of them,
which has repercussions on its fragile economic situation.
There should be a minimal guarantee of security and
stability so that they can voluntarily and spontaneously
return.

In this connection, we wish to pay a tribute to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and to the non-governmental organizations for
their activities on the ground, at times in extremely
difficult conditions, and to reiterate our full support for
them.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
unreserved support for the proposals made by the
Secretary-General in paragraph 8 of his report, relating to
the elections envisaged under the Abuja Agreement, and
in paragraph 45, concerning the extension of the mandate
of United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL) for a period of four months. We also wish to
reaffirm our desire to see the parties to the conflict
resolve their differences through constructive dialogue
that could contribute to national reconciliation.

