Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the French presidency for convening
this meeting to discuss the issue of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations and
arrangements, and Ms. Federica Mogherini, the High
Representative of the European Union, for her briefing.
As we have indicated in previous statements in
the Council, Chile believes that collective action
is vital to enabling our multilateral system to deal
effectively with threats, traditional or emerging. That is
strengthened through the involvement of regional and
subregional mechanisms, as outlined in Chapter VIII of
the Charter ofthe United Nations, as long as it is always
subject to coordination by the United Nations. In that
context, we believe it is essential to continue promoting
increased cooperation at every stage with regional and
subregional organizations in preventing crises and
handling post-conflict challenges. The European Union
has exceptional capacities for taking effective action on
issues related to peace and security and contributing to
implementation of the Council's mandates. We would
like to emphasize the promotion of the rule of law and
the protection of human rights as an essential dimension
in rehabilitating fractured societies, areas in which we
share the European Union's concerns.

My country has an interest in supporting the
peacekeeping and post-conflict processes, and it was on
that basis that we participated in the European Union-led
peacekeeping force's Operation Althea, beginning
in 2003. Based on that experience, we deepened our
cooperation through a crisis-management framework
agreement, designed to strengthen our capacity to
develop peacekeeping and humanitarian missions,
promote development of the civilian component in
future operations and facilitate access to technical
know-how and exchanges.

Through its political and military operations, the
European Union has fostered peace and post-conflict
processes in various countries and regions. Its growing
number of operations in the current decade is a sign
of the increase in new conflicts requiring collective
action and in which the European Union can once
again continue to contribute to the work of the Security
Council. Its involvement in helping to restore countries
affected by crises has been significant, as we have seen
in its support to Mali and Somalia, its military training
missions in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa, and its
Common Security and Defence Policy missions, which
are aimed at improving the capacity of the military and
police forces in those countries. Another highlight is
Operation Atalanta's efforts against piracy and armed
robbery off the coast of Somalia.

We also note with interest the European Union's
significant efforts to ensure rapid response and
deployment capacities in the face of armed conflict.
It is essential that the growing cooperation with
regional organizations respect the principle of national
ownership, which is highly important in reinforcing
the legitimacy and effectiveness of the various regional
organizations throughout the world.

In conclusion, we refer to a topic of common
interest to both Chile and the European Union, which
is women and armed conflict. We share the concern for
enhancing the protection of women in such situations,
which must include women's active participation in
post-conflict peacebuilding and decision-making
efforts. That is particularly relevant this year as we
commemorate the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000). It is our belief that regional
and subregional organizations should be active players
in the implementation of that resolution in their political
and military missions in areas of conflict. Furthermore,
they should implement the seven-point plan of action
proposed by the Secretary-General in 2010.

