Mr. Swe (Myanmar): I wish to thank you for
giving me the opportunity to participate in the open
debate on this important subject. I also wish to take
this opportunity to express my deep appreciation to
Mr. John Holmes for his tireless efforts and for
updating the Council on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

In the years since the adoption of resolution 1296
(2000), the international community has faced
numerous challenges in providing security and well-
being to civilian populations. Armed conflicts, which
lead to a cycle of violence and do great harm to
civilians, are exacerbated by the easy availability of
illicit small arms and light weapons. Because of the
easy availability of small arms, some 300,000 civilians
are killed every year by small arms and light weapons
in armed conflicts.

We therefore continue to believe strongly that one
of the most effective ways to protect civilians in armed
conflicts is to have a legally binding international
instrument prohibiting the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons to non-State actors.

The easy availability of illicit small arms and
light weapons also compounds the danger of terrorism,
which causes great suffering to the civilian population.
The Security Council adopted resolution 1674 (2006),
which condemns in the strongest term all acts of
violence or abuses committed against civilians in
situations of armed conflict. Myanmar joins the
international community in condemning all such acts.

We are in full sympathy with victims of armed
conflicts in various parts of the world because we
ourselves have gone through the bitter experience of
insurgent groups committing atrocities against our

civilian population. Soon after attaining independence,
Myanmar had to face numerous insurgencies.
Throughout various periods of insurgency, our civilian
population has suffered much at the hands of the
insurgents.

The most efficient way to protect civilians in
armed conflicts is to resolve the root causes and bring
the armed conflict to an end. Therefore, the Myanmar
Government has embarked on a national reconciliation
process and has been successful in bringing 17 of the
18 insurgent groups back to the legal fold. As a result,
some 100,000 former armed insurgents are no longer
fighting the Government. They have also joined the
National Convention process, which laid down the
fundamental principles to be enshrined in the new
constitution. They have taken active part in the recent
referendum, which endorsed the draft constitution.

There now remains a faction of one insurgent
group, the Karen National Union (KNU) and remnants
of armed narco-traffickers, who are now confined to
small enclaves in the border areas. The Government
continues to invite the KNU insurgents to come back to
the legal fold. In the past, we have encountered
difficulties in our discussions with the KNU, because
of outside interference that hindered the peace process.
However, we are gratified that, as a result of the
continued efforts of the Government at national
reconciliation, we were able to reach a peace
agreement with an important faction of the KNU/Karen
National Liberation Army (KNLA) in February 2007.
Over 500 members, led by the Chairman of the
KNU/KNLA Peace Council, returned to the legal fold
after the successful conclusion of peace negotiations.
The Government will continue its endeavours to
negotiate with the remaining fraction of the KNU, for
it to return to the legal fold and join hands with local
populace in developing their region.

I wish to reiterate once again our strongly held
belief that only a comprehensive approach promoting
economic growth, eradicating poverty and bringing
about sustainable development and national
reconciliation will enable us to put an end to armed
conflicts, which, to us, is the best way to protect
civilians.

Before I conclude, let me say that I find it highly
objectionable that some delegations have tried to use
this debate to politicize a humanitarian issue caused by
a natural disaster.

My delegation also greatly regrets that Under-

Secretary-General Holmes saw fit to mention in

passing the issue of access in the aftermath of natural

disaster. As he himself said, that is clearly outside the
scope of the report and today's debate.

