Mr. Bogdanov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Allow me to congratulate His Excellency
Vice-President Riek Machar Teny-Dhurgon and,
through him, the people of South Sudan on their
proclamation of independence and the creation of an
independent and sovereign State.

With respect to the status of the State of South
Sudan, Russia has steadfastly maintained its
fundamental position. Well before the referendum, we
had stated that we would support the sovereign will of
the people of Southern Sudan. Given the complexity of
the matter, Russia refrained from bringing any pressure
to bear on either of the parties, taking the view that the
destiny of the country should be determined by its own
people.
The Russian Federation has declared its
recognition of this new State - the Republic of South
Sudan. Overall, the Sudanese parties were able to
peacefully and in a civilized manner oversee the
division of what was once the largest country in Africa.
The leadership of the Sudan and South Sudan have
consistently demonstrated the political will necessary
to address the critical disagreements between them on
the difficult path towards the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. As a result, they
were able to successfully implement most of the
elements contained in that Agreement.

We believe that the primary challenges in the
context of nation-building in South Sudan are the
outstanding issues in the context of relations between
Khartoum and Juba, there being a great deal of
baggage in that connection, and there remains also the
contentious problem of the status of the Abyei region;
these are now at the inter-State level. We anticipate that
in the new historical climate the leadership of both
countries will shoulder their responsibility for the
destiny and prosperity of their peoples and will reach a
final solution to disputed issues politically, through the
negotiation process.

The arrangements reached in connection with the
settlement of the future status of Abyei and the states
of Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan should serve to
strengthen the emerging positive momentum, and, to
that end, the mediation efforts of the African Union
must continue.

Greater assistance on the part of the international
community for nation-building in South Sudan will be
required in order to create effective institutions of
governance, counter growing internal threats and
security challenges, address economic and social
problems and establish an appropriate human rights
regime.

The United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan, established by the Security Council, will
play an important role in helping the country to achieve
stability. In that context, we are of the View that the
Government of South Sudan has primary responsibility
for strengthening peace in the country and for
advancing it in terms of peacebuilding.

We are also giving thought to additional
economic incentives for the Republic of South Sudan,
taking into account the fact that the division of a
country is always quite painful and accompanied by a
number of new domestic problems. This we know from
our own historical experience.

For its part, the Russian Federation intends to
strengthen Russian-Sudanese cooperation in all areas,
including the prevailing constructive and favourable
atmosphere in our relationship.

South Sudan's attainment of State sovereignty
opens the way for the development of Russian-South
Sudan relations on the basis of the principles of
equitable dialogue and respect for the sovereignty of
that country. Our position is that a truly business-like
partnership between our countries will be an important
factor in consolidating stability and security on the
African continent. We are prepared to establish
diplomatic relations with the Republic of South Sudan.
We expect to hold substantive negotiations in that
regard in the very near future.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
confidence that the leadership of South Sudan will
successfully establish good neighbourly relations with
the Republic of the Sudan and other African States, in
keeping with the interests of maintaining and
strengthening peace in Central and East Africa. The
Russian Federation would like to see an overall
normalization of the situation in that region, which has
experienced a period of extended conflict and is
gradually moving towards stabilization. That is the
goal of the efforts of Russia's leadership and of its
diplomacy.

