Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we would like to express our
condolences on the death of Lieutenant General Jose
Luiz Jaborandy, Jr., Force Commander of United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, and to extend our
condolences to his family, friends and the Government
of Brazil.

We would like to join others in congratulating you,
Madam President, for the constructive and successful
management of the work of the Security Council during
the month of August and for the leadership you have
shown in dealing with the complex issues that have
come before us this month. This month was marked by
significant events.

On 7 August, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2235 (2015), creating the Joint Investigation
Mechanism between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to
investigate the chlorine gas attacks in Syria. Venezuela
welcomes the achievements of the Government of Syria
in implementing resolution 2118 (2013) and destroying
99 per cent of its chemical weapons, now outside its
territory. However, we were concerned about the recent
news that chemical weapons had been used by terrorist
groups. Venezuela voted in favour of resolution 2235
(2015) because we were convinced that the use of toxic
chemical agents as weapons constitutes a war crime. In
that regard, we welcome the Secretary-General's letter
of 27 August in which the terms of reference are set
out to guide the work of the Mechanism, including the
importance of maintaining close cooperation with the
Government of Syria. It is our hope that the work of
the Mechanism will provide an impetus for the peace
process in Syria and the region.

Venezuela is committed to a political solution to
the conflict in Syria and fully supports the efforts of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, in that regard. That is why my country
joined the consensus in the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/15 of 17 August 2015. However,
as we clearly stated, Venezuela does not subscribe to
paragraphs 8 and 10 of that statement, which promote
a political transition, including the establishment of a
transitional Government, without the consent of the
Syrian Government, which Violates the sovereignty,
political independence and self-determination of its
people.

Our country has emphasized the need to avoid
repeating the serious political mistakes made in Iraq
and Libya, where the change of Government by coercion
resulted in the collapse of State institutions, worsening
violence in the Middle East and Africa and creating
conditions for the emergence and strengthening of
terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida and the Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria (ISIS).

As a non-permanent member of the Council, we
demand that the undemocratic practice of excluding
elected members of the Security Council from
negotiations, which characterized the negotiation
process of that presidential statement, cease once
and for all. The unity of the Council requires the full
participation of all its members in building international
peace and security.

With regard to the war in Yemen, Venezuela also
advocates a political and peaceful solution to the crisis
in that brotherly country. In that connection, we fully
support the mediation efforts of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed.
We regret that, as a result of the conflict, thousands of
civilians have lost their lives or been wounded, while
more than 1 million people have been compelled to
abandon their homes in search of shelter, as indicated
by Mr. O'Brien in his various briefings. We note with
deep concern the deliberate attacks by all parties to the
conflict against civilians, houses, hospitals, schools
and roads. We urgently call for putting an end to the
indiscriminate bombings, which began on 25 March.
We demand the implementation of a humanitarian
pause, which has long been discussed in the Council.

Venezuela hopes that peace and security will return
to South Sudan. We believe that the agreement reached
between the parties to the conflict represents a major
milestone in the long and complex negotiation process
that has been promoted by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the IGAD-
plus configuration, including the United Nations and
the African Union. It is now up to the leaders of South
Sudan to implement the terms of the agreement, as part
of an inclusive dialogue with a View to reconciliation
and the rebuilding of the country. We hope that the
parties to the conflict, who are now responsible for
peace, will know how to live up to this historic moment
andjoin their efforts to achieve a lasting peace.

We welcome the fact that it was African countries
and their regional organizations that have been able to
bear the brunt ofthe responsibility in the peace process.
In that regard, we recall a phrase from the statement
delivered by you, Madam President, during the open
debate (see S/PV.7505) on regional organizations
and contemporary challenges of global security of
18 August, in which you said "it is evident that the
regionalization of global security is rapidly gaining
remarkable momentum". The role of the United Nations
should be focused on providing sustained attention
and assistance to the development and strengthening
of the capacities of regional organizations so that
they can assume the tasks of resolving conflicts and
peacekeeping on behalf of the international community.
In that regard, we support the proposal to establish an
ongoing cooperation mechanism between the United
Nations and regional organizations that would hold
regular meetings with the aim ofpromoting cooperation
between those organizations and the United Nations.

It is also important to keep in mind the importance
of having the Security Council's authorization for the
operations carried out by regional organizations and
coalitions in which the use of force is planned, as it is
only by adhering to the Charter of the United Nations
that international legitimacy can be given to the use of
coercive measures.

Venezuela joins those countries that have vehemently
condemned the cases of sexual abuse and violence in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We support
the zero-tolerance policy in all investigations into such
cases in the Central African Republic. We support
all legal and administrative measures necessary to
punish such unacceptable abuses against the civilian
population, which must be protected and assisted by
United Nations Blue Helmets.

With regard to security sector reform, the Council
should have a more comprehensive discussion of
the security experiences in countries that have been
affected by foreign military invasions and interventions
that have led to the collapse of all State institutions. The
traumatic and terrible experiences that we are seeing
in Iraq and Libya should lead us to think deeply about
this. The collapse of institutions in those States, which
is the result of foreign military intervention, and the
fragmentation of society, which was used as a policy of
occupation and domination ofthe population, including
sexual and sectarian violence as a means of punishing
and terrorizing sectors of the population that were
accused of supporting the former regime, in addition
to the terrible social and humanitarian effects of the
war, have led to the terrible phenomenon of terrorism
and extremism, such as ISIS and other violent groups,
which today represent the main threat to peace and
security throughout the entire Middle East and North
African region.

In conclusion, my country wishes to draw the

Council's attention to an outstanding issue on the
Council's agenda: the conflict between Palestine and
the occupying Power, Israel. So long as we continue to
postpone the two-State solution, we will be nurturing a
culture of violence and extremism. It is urgent that the
Council renew its efforts to bring about a peace process
and promote a political solution to put an end to Israel's
illegal occupation of Palestinian territory. We hope to
welcome Palestine as a full State Member of the United
Nations at the seventieth session.

Finally, we would like to wish every success to, and
express our support for, the presidency of the Russian
Federation of the Council during the upcoming month
of September.

