Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would also
like to welcome the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy. France
naturally associates itself with the European Union's
vision and commitment in the service of an effective
multilateralism in full cooperation with the Council,
which she has just briefed us on.

I would like to emphasize three aspects of the
European Union's contribution to achieving the goals of
the United Nations. First, the European Union remains
a unique model of cooperation and integration in the
service of peace and security on the continent of Europe.
As Ms. Ashton explained, today the European Union is
playing its part in the very heart of the continent, in the
Balkans, where war once raged. It promotes bilateral
dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo and offers them
a prospect of integration within a larger geographic
context. Kosovo's period of supervised independence
came to an end without incident on 10 September of
last year. That is a success for the entire international
community and one that the European Union can fully
share in. The opening at the highest level of a new
phase of political dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia,
under the auspices of the European Union, expands
that effort. I also commend last week's meeting in
Brussels between the Serbian and Kosovar Presidents.
This dialogue confirms the willingness of both parties
to normalize relations in the context of their European
rapprochement, which, we hope, will enable the two
countries to turn the page on their conflicts.

The European Union also possesses the tools needed
to act beyond the European continent in the service of
the system of collective security of which the Council
is the cornerstone. Exactly two years ago, the High
Representative briefed the Council (see S/PV.6477) on
the creation of the European External Action Service,
an important milestone in the implementation of the
Lisbon Treaty. Since then, these developments have
helped to strengthen the European Union's contribution
to collective peace and security and thus to become
a valuable partner for the United Nations. To give a
few examples, as Ms. Ashton said, the African forces
that make up the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali, authorized by resolution 2085 (2012)
in December, began their deployment in support of
the Malian armed forces in restoring State security.
Through the African peace facility, the European Union
helps by contributing to paying their wages.
It also provides support in reshaping the Malian
defence apparatus. The deployment, beginning in
mid-March, of a European Union training mission
is also part of the same goal of restoring Malian
sovereignty. The mission, which is 500 people strong
and includes 172 trainers, will also provide for the
training in one year of four battalions of 650 Malian
soldiers each. Its support in the quest for a political
solution in Mali demonstrates the European Union's
global approach, according to which they have recently
managed to release their economic aid to help restart
the country's development and thus lay the foundations
for a sustainable peace.

Furthermore, on another topic, despite the ongoing
stalemate in the Council, the European Union has
made a firm commitment to a democratic transition
in the Syrian Arab Republic. That is why it was swift
to condemn the bloody oppression carried out by the
Bashar Al-Assad regime and considers the Syrian
national coalition as the legitimate representatives
of the Syrian people. It has shown, in this crisis, its
willingness and ability to act. Starting in May 2011, the
European Union deployed a wide array of individual,
financial and trade sanctions against the regime.
With over €400 million delivered in humanitarian
assistance, the European Union and its member States
have provided significant aid to ease the plight of the
Syrian population, including refugees. The European
Union has always supported the efforts of the Joint
Special Representative to find a political solution to the
conflict.

On the Iranian nuclear issue, the High Representative
has been intervening as a facilitator in the dialogue
with Tehran. We thank her for her intensive efforts and
exemplary commitment, working alongside the E3+3
Governments, to keeping the door to dialogue open. A
new meeting with Iran will take place in Almaty on
26 February. It will be an opportunity for Iran to make,
without further delay, the goodwill gesture that the
international community expects from it in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
resolutions of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Board of Governors. As long as Iran does not comply
with its obligations, we will fulfil our responsibilities
and increase pressure in order to convince it to abandon
its policy of isolation and provocation.
The European Union and its member States are fully
committed to playing their role in that issue, setting
up a very strong sanctions apparatus. We continue to
believe that firmness is still the best guarantee for the
achievement of a long-term diplomatic solution, which
is the goal we all share.

Finally, the European Union provides support to the
work of the Security Council on several crosscutting
issues, showing thus that it is a major partner of the
United Nations in defining prospects for progress in
international affairs. It promotes the role of women
in crisis exit strategies, as is the case in Afghanistan,
through the European Union Police Mission in
Afghanistan, where a clear effort has been made to
increase the number of female police officers.

With respect to the protection of children in armed
conflict, I thank the European Union for the ongoing
support provided to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.

I will conclude by recalling that the special role
played by the European Union led two years ago to the
adoption by the General Assembly of resolution 65/276.
That resolution affirmed the role of the European Union
as a partner, pillar and friend of the United Nations, not
just as a regional organization but also as a pillar of a
coherent and effective international system.

