Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank today's briefers for their very informative and
valuable statements on the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) Joint Force and recent developments in
the region.

Poland welcomes the commitment and determination
of the G-5 Sahel countries to overcome the many
challenges they face in operationalizing the Joint Force.
Reports that the Joint Force's operations will resume in
December are encouraging and will send an important
message to adversaries that they are not giving up.

The cross-border character of threats in the Sahel
region requires transnational responses. We commend
the even greater role of the regional organizations in
improving effective cooperation among Sahel countries.
We welcome the adoption of the regional strategy and
pursued work on subregional strategies. However,

much remains to be done and the obstacles that need
to be overcome are diverse and complex. Therefore,
we urge the G-5 Sahel countries to accelerate efforts
to deploy all remaining troops and fully establish the
police component.

It is also urgent that the operationalization of the
Force goes along with the adequate implementation
of the comprehensive prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration strategies at the national level.
Furthermore, members of the G-5 Sahel need to step
up their efforts to finalize the Joint Force's strategic
concept of operations.

We remain deeply concerned by the multifaceted
challenges in the Sahel. The spread of insecurity
and terrorism to other parts of the region, including
into eastern Burkina Faso, is particularly worrying.
Terrorism continues to have devastating effects on
lives and livelihoods, depriving entire communities
of access to basic social services, as well as long-term
opportunities and perspectives.

Winning the hearts and minds of the populations
is crucial in the struggle against terrorism. Addressing
violent extremism and terrorism through security
measures is essential, but must be supported by a
broader political and institutional framework that can
guide its operations, ensure alignment with regional
strategies and help translate strategic decisions into
operational and tactical measures.

In that context, the United Nations Support Plan
for the Sahel should promote the completeness and
adequacy of regional and subregional initiatives. That
opportunity must also be seized to create a platform
for cooperation aimed at assuring wider respect for
international law and standards, including human
rights law and humanitarian law.

Weak governance and neglect by the State,
unemployment, socioeconomic exclusion and
inequality, worsened by climate change and a growing
population ,remain at the core of instability in the
region. It goes without saying that a military solution
alone is not enough to create durable peace and stability.
We must strengthen the nexus between security and
development actions to ensure long-term stability in
the Sahel region.

In that regard, a successful outcome for the Malian
peace process remains the cornerstone of stabilization
efforts in the region. Moreover, scaling up access to
basic services and job opportunities in Mali, as well
as other countries in the region, is necessary to reduce
the dependence on humanitarian assistance, as outlined
in the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel
and the United Nations Support Plan.
Finally, let me express our full support for the
Special Representative for West Africa and the
Special Adviser for the Sahel for their efforts aimed
at spearheading the implementation of United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and its Support Plan
to ensure continuity of United Nations support to the
Sahel region.

