Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I should like to
congratulate Germany on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of February. We
would also like to thank Security Council members for
having scheduled this open debate. Above all, we wish
to commend the Security Council for its continued
transparency in addressing the situation between Iraq
and Kuwait.

Before I begin my statement, I would like, on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, to express our
condolences to the people of South Korea and the
people of the United States with regard to the tragedies
that recently befell them.

We, the 115 States Members and 15 observer
States of the United Nations that belong to the Non-
Aligned Movement, called for this meeting because we
believe that the Security Council is engaged in a
crucial debate which has important repercussions for
the entire international community.

The Non-Aligned Movement has always
understood resolution 1441 (2002) to be about
achieving verifiable disarmament in Iraq through
inspections that would avoid leading us into a situation
of war. From the outset, we understood that the
inspections were designed as a necessary intrusive
instrument to ensure the elimination of proscribed Iraqi
programmes. To us, resolution 1441 (2002) was, and
still is, about ensuring that Iraq is peacefully disarmed.

Through the adoption of that resolution, the
Security Council unanimously decided to establish an
enhanced inspection regime with the aim of bringing
the disarmament process to full and verified
completion. The stated purpose was, in the words of
resolution 1441 (2002), "to afford Iraq a final
opportunity to comply with its disarmament obligations
under relevant resolutions of the Council" (para. 2).

The Non-Aligned Movement fully supports the
intentions of resolution 1441 (2002). Even before the
resolution was adopted, the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Non-Aligned Movement called on Iraq to
abide by all relevant Security Council resolutions. At
that time, the Ministers stated:

"We wish to encourage Iraq and the United
Nations to intensify their efforts in search of a
lasting, just and comprehensive solution to all
outstanding issues between them in accordance
with the relevant United Nations Security Council
resolutions."

The Non-Aligned Movement has noted the offer
by several States to strengthen the inspection process.
We believe this is in line with resolution 1441 (2002),
which, in paragraph 2, mandates "an enhanced
inspection regime with the aim of bringing to full and
verified completion the disarmament process". The
resolution also requests all Member States to give full
support to the United Nations Monitoring, Verification
and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in the
discharge of their mandates. In that regard, we are
pleased that Iraq has accepted an offer from South
Africa of experts who led our country's programme to
destroy our nuclear, chemical and biological weapons
of mass destruction and the missiles for the delivery of
those weapons. I am also pleased to announce that that
team is on its way to Iraq as we speak.

On 14 February 2003, both Mr. Hans Blix,
Executive Chairman of UNMOVIC, and Mr. Mohamed
ElBaradei, Director General of the IAEA, told the
Council that they detected increased and substantive
cooperation by the Government of Iraq. They testified
that access to inspection sites was prompt and without
prior knowledge of the sites that the inspectors visited.
Mr. Blix stated that UNMOVIC has so far not found
any weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. More than
200 chemical, and over 100 biological, samples have
been collected at different sites, and the results to date
have been consistent with Iraq's declaration. He made
the important point that many materials related to
Iraq's previous weapons programme remain
unaccounted for but that one must not jump to the
conclusion that proscribed weapons exist. We call on
Iraq to cooperate fully and answer all questions raised
by Mr. Blix. We welcome the cooperation Iraq has
already given to the inspectors, and we hope that it will
continue.

Mr. ElBaradei reported to the Council that since
the IAEA had already neutralized Iraq's nuclear
weapons programme by December 1998, the focus of
its current activities has been on verifying whether Iraq
revived its nuclear programme in the intervening years.
He informed the Security Council that "We have to
date found no evidence of ongoing prohibited nuclear
or nuclear-related activities in Iraq." (S/PV.4707, p. 9)
However, the IAEA's investigations are continuing.

The message that has emanated from the 14
February debate in the Security Council is that the
inspection process in Iraq is working and that Iraq is
showing clear signs of cooperating more proactively
with the inspectors. Significantly, the inspectors have
also had the opportunity to verify the accuracy of the
information that has been provided by several
countries. There are still countries that claim to have
information on Iraq that could be helpful to the
inspectors, and we would urge the Security Council to
encourage such countries to share that information with
the inspectors as soon as possible. None of the
information provided thus far would seem to justify the
Council abandoning the inspection process and
immediately resorting to the threatened "serious
consequences".
The Security Council has yet to fully utilize the
inspection mechanisms of resolution 1441 (2002) that
would make for more robust and intrusive inspections.
As a result, the Council has recently received several
offers from Member States that have included the
deployment of additional inspectors, surveillance
aircraft and mobile customs teams to check for
prohibited goods entering Iraq. We would urge the
Council to fully explore all those practical options,
which may assist in enhancing the success of the
inspection process.

Although questions have been raised about how
long the inspections should be allowed to continue in
Iraq, we recall that there are no time limitations
stipulated for inspections in resolution 1441 (2002). As
Mr. Blix stated on 14 February, UNMOVIC has been
on the ground in Iraq for only 11 weeks, during which
the inspectors have been at full operational strength for
only two weeks. Mr. Blix stated that the time frame
would depend on which task one has in mind: the
elimination of weapons of mass destruction and related
items and programmes, disarmament, or monitoring to
verify that no new proscribed activities occur. Mr. Blix
pointed out that monitoring was essential and that it
would remain an open-ended and ongoing process until
the Council decides otherwise.

We believe that the Security Council must
redouble its efforts to bring about a peaceful resolution
to the situation in Iraq, in line with international law
and the provisions of the United Nations Charter. The
United Nations is the most authoritative voice in a
world of complex multilateralism and interdependence.
It is an Organization founded on the need to preserve
international peace and security. We should not allow
its legitimacy and credibility to be undermined by this
issue.

When the Security Council passes resolutions,
those resolutions are binding on all Member States.
Security Council resolutions must be enforced without
exception. We would hope that a Member State
attempting to abide by Security Council resolutions
would be encouraged to do so. We believe that
resorting to war without fully exhausting all other
options represents an admission of failure by the
Security Council in carrying out its mandate of
maintaining international peace and security.

