Mr. Berml'ldez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank France for having organized
this open debate on an issue that is of particular
importance and on which the international community
must continue its work. I also thank you, Minister Le
Drian, for presiding over our work. I would also like
to express our appreciation for the participation and
briefings by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres;
Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict;
and Mr. Mubin Shaikh, civil society representative of
the Rome'o Dallaire Child Soldiers Initiative.

The changing and complex nature of current
conflicts presents us with the challenge of having to
continually adapt the mechanisms and strategies that
we use to protect children in conflict zones. In that
regard, we underscore the work regularly being done by
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
We align ourselves with the statement to be made by
the representative of Canada on its behalf. Likewise,
we highlight the endeavours of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, which help maintain
a consistent focus on the issue on the agenda on the
Security Council.

Uruguay gratefully welcomes the annual report
(S/2017/821) of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflicts, submitted earlier this month,
which, in its annexes, identifies parties to conflicts
having committed serious violations against children.
In that regard, although pointing out those who
violate international law is a very important step, we
reiterate the responsibility incumbent upon all States
to end impunity and investigate and prosecute those
responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity,
war crimes and other atrocity crimes perpetrated
against children, both at the national and international
levels, while highlighting the fundamental role that
the International Criminal Court plays in that regard.
Similarly, Uruguay believes that those who sell weapons
to countries in which grave violations are committed
affecting children and those who use them share the
responsibility of the consequences, and, in that vein
we call on all States to immediately stop the sale and
export of weapons to parties that have been listed in
annexes of the Secretary-General's report.

Allow me to underscore Uruguay's commitment
to protecting civilians in areas of armed conflict,
in particular children, who are especially affected
by those conflicts. Historically, Uruguay has been
a champion of international instruments aimed at
protecting children, and is proud to have ratified the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocols with regard to children's participation in
armed conflict. In that respect, although most States
have raised the minimum recruitment age to 18-years-
old for their armed forces, 43 States have yet to so.
Attempting to end that practice among armed groups
is therefore unrealistic, as certain States continue to
consider children suitable for recruitment. Similarly,
Uruguay signed the Safe Schools Declaration, and is
committed to using guidelines to protect schools and
universities from military use during armed conflicts.
Respecting and protecting the right to education during
armed conflict is a key factor in the reconstruction of a
country emerging from conflict.

Uruguay recognizes the value of appropriately
training personnel participating in peacekeeping
missions. It therefore stringently requires that every
Uruguayan contingent successfully complete a
predeployment course on human rights, international
humanitarian law, gender issues, child protection
and exploitation and sexual abuse. At the same time,
Uruguay acknowledges the importance of the presence
of qualified human resources personnel to ensure
compliance with child protection standards, and, in that
connection, is concerned about reductions in personnel
within some missions' mandates, especially given the
increased number of registered cases in which minors
have been detained on charges relating to national
security, or to gather information from them. States
must guarantee due process to all children detained
because of their association with armed groups, while
keeping in mind that children must be treated primarily
as victims, who should be detained only as a last resort
and for the shortest possible period, while always
respecting the overriding interests of minors and the
principles enshrined in the Convention on the Rights
of the Child.

In that regard, Uruguay reiterates that the inclusion
of specific provisions for child protection must be the
cornerstone of any agreement involving a cessation of
hostilities or peace negotiations, and, accordingly, it
welcomes the recent signing of action plans focused on
children, endorsed by the authorities of the Sudan and
Mali, as well as with the Civilian Joint Task Force in

Nigeria. We look forward to their early implementation.
Uruguay highlights the importance of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism established in
accordance with resolution 1612 (2005) to collect and
provide information on grave violations affecting
children. Likewise, it reiterates the importance that
the mechanism and the annual report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflicts remain
impartial and objective tools that allow initiating a
dialogue on how to address such violations, prevent
future violations and improve the protection of children.

Lastly, Uruguay stresses the need for the
international community to continue joining efforts
to improve the protection of civilians and respect
for international humanitarian law, and reiterates its
commitment to continue working tirelessly with the
United Nations, all States Members and civil society
to improve the situation of children in armed conflicts.
All girls and boys are vulnerable, but that is especially
so during armed conflicts. It is the responsibility of all
of us to protect them.

