Mr. Karsgaard (Canada) (interpretation from French): Canada has deplored the military takeover that
contravened the constitutional and legal institutions of
Burundi. A forcible takeover is no substitute for dialogue
between all the factions and parties involved to restore
social and political peace to a country. The Honourable
Lloyd Axworthy, Canada's Minister for Foreign Affairs,
has stated that such an act will never solve Burundi's
long-term problems. Only a new political agreement,
respectful of democratic principles and minority rights, will
help solve them. Canada fully subscribes to the constant
efforts of Burundi's neighbours to promote effective
negotiations between all the Burundian parties concerned.

For many months, Canada has been striving to
encourage a peaceful, lasting solution to the disputes
rampant in central Africa's Great Lakes region. We support
the noble mediation and facilitation efforts undertaken by
Mr. Julius Nyerere, former President of Tanzania. Last
June, Canada's Prime Minister appealed to the region's
Heads of State to do everything they could to find a
peaceful, lasting solution to the region's political and social
problems.

 

(spoke in English)

The takeover of 25 July put an abrupt end to efforts
designed only to support the institutions which the
Burundian people freely acquired in a transparent and
democratic manner. In 1992 and 1993, the Burundian
people spoke loudly and clearly; now, three years later,
the army is again trying to silence them.

Canada is very pleased to see that the region's
leaders stand behind the core principles that must underlie
the management of a government and the search for
solutions to political disputes.

Canada fully supports the firm, courageous stance
taken by the Heads of State in Arusha last 31 July. The
entire region clearly desires to see the new authorities
now in Burundi take the route of negotiation and respect
for the democratic principles that we all share. We are
pleased that the Security Council is considering additional
steps it might take in support of this outcome.

The attacks by both sides on innocent civilians must
cease. We must turn towards the future if we are to
overcome the difficulties of the past. Sectarian interests
must give way to the legitimate interests and concerns of
the Burundian people at large. As part of Canada's
collective and unanimous support for the efforts of Mr.
Nyerere, Canada's Minister for International Cooperation
and Minister responsible for la francophonie chaired a
meeting last June in Geneva involving interested
contributors and the Burundian authorities. The purpose
of the meeting was to help develop the outlines of a
transitional economic-assistance plan for Burundi, to be
implemented once peace is restored.

(spoke in French)

It is worth repeating here what the Honourable
Pierre Pettigrew's stated recently:

"like other donor countries, Canada is quite prepared
to support the reconstruction of Burundi. However,
this can only be done in a climate of political
stability and peace. There must first be negotiations.
Canada joins with the countries of the region and
demands that a dialogue for peace be initiated
immediately."

While it is for Burundi to find its own course in
dignity and freedom, the whole international community

 

must join with the region in declaring, with one voice,
enough is enough.

