Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Sir, for organizing this open debate, and the
Chairmen of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004) - the representatives of Austria, France and
Costa Rica, respectively - for their briefings. Please
allow me, Sir, to reiterate the importance of open
debates of this type because they allow all the States
Members of the Organization to express their opinions
and interact with the members of the Security Council.

On a daily basis, we see that the use of force
cannot and must not be the only response to terrorism.
Convinced of this fact, my country has ratified the
12 United Nations conventions on terrorism and
adopted corresponding domestic measures. It has also
ratified the Inter-American Convention against
Terrorism and signed the International Convention for
the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.

Argentina recognizes that terrorism is a crime or
a set of crimes that must be tried under criminal law
within the framework of efficient legal systems, with
the necessary resources and due process guarantees.
The work of the three Committees, whose joint report
brings us together today, is of special significance,
particularly regarding technical assistance to
strengthen security, police and judicial systems. Allow
me therefore to refer briefly to the work of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) with respect to
our country.

Argentina's commitment to the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery is a clear contribution to international peace
and security, allowing at the same time the
development and application in the domestic realm of
dual-use technologies for peaceful purposes as we
progress towards economic growth and sustainable
development. It must be recalled that Argentina is to
date the only Latin American country to belong to the
five regimes for the export control: the Australia
Group, the Zangger Committee, the Nuclear Suppliers
Group, the Wassenaar Arrangement and the Missile
Technology Control Regime.

In compliance with the obligations arising from
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1810 (2008), Argentina
has submitted its national report and subsequent
updates. In the domestic arena, and with the initial
support of the United States Department of Energy, we
have established a technical group to provide training
in the identification of sensitive goods, and entrusted it
with training national and foreign invited experts in
relevant technologies. The most recent course was held
in 2008 and attended by experts from Chile, Paraguay,
Peru, Uruguay and South Africa, the latter participating
as observers.

At the regional level, my country, convinced that
the effective control of technologies and dual-use
material is possible only through the explicit
harmonization of legislation and operative mechanisms
at the regional level, hosted a seminar of the
Organization of American States on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), held in Buenos Aires in May
2008, with the participation of 22 countries of the
region and representatives of relevant international
organizations. My country also promoted the
establishment in the subregional context of the South
American Common Market working group on weapons
of mass destruction, which meets regularly.

In the context of its commitment, in June,
Argentina will host a regional seminar on the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism, jointly
organized by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the Inter-American Committee against
Terrorism of the Organization of American States.
Representatives of 12 countries of the region have been
invited to participate. In this context, the seminar is
expected to hold a substantive exchange of views on
resolution 1540 (2004) and its contribution to the
prevention of nuclear terrorism, as well as on the
Inter-American Convention against Terrorism and its
implementation.

Finally, allow me to reiterate the offer made by
my country in March to the Chairman of the 1540
Committee to cooperate most fully in implementing
regional plans of action and to share our experience in
the progressive implementation of various disarmament
and non-proliferation measures. We also recall our
proposal, also made in March, to coordinate late this
year the organization of a workshop on the issue for
Latin American countries with the purpose of sharing
local experience in promoting and developing similar
activities in other subregional groupings. We trust that
we will be able to rely on the necessary support from
the 1540 Committee.

As regards the application of sanctions to
individuals and entities related to Al-Qaida and the
Taliban regime through the 1267 Committee, my
delegation considers that its revised guidelines can
show the way to other Committees in fulfilling the
mandate given by our heads of State at the 2005
Summit to ensure the existence of clear and fair
proceedings not only for including persons and entities
on the lists of sanctions, but also for de-listing them
and granting humanitarian exceptions. Argentina is
convinced that the international community must
redouble its efforts to include and respect the basic
elements and minimum standards of due process in all
actions undertaken to combat terrorism. It is necessary
to achieve a proper balance between security
imperatives and respect for human rights. In that
regard, my delegation deems it essential to strengthen
the relationship and cooperation between the three
Committees and the Human Rights Council, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms while countering
terrorism. We also believe that such issues as the rule
of law, due process guarantees and respect for human
rights are fundamental elements in the work of the
Committees' counter-terrorism efforts.

Allow me to conclude by reiterating that
Argentina reaffirms that the fight against terrorism
must be based on respect for international law,
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

