Miss Durrant (Jamaica): It is a pleasure to see you,
Sir, once again presiding over the Council's deliberations,
especially as we are debating today the issue of protection
of civilians in armed conflict. This very important issue,
which is at the heart of the mandate of the Security
Council, in the light of its relevance to the maintenance of
international peace and security, has rightly been given
increased attention in recent years. My delegation therefore
appreciates the special attention which Canada has given to
this issue, and we wish to thank the Canadian delegation
for piloting the draft resolution now before the Council.

We wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
important introductory statement and for the
recommendations contained in his report, document
S/1999/957. We also wish to recognize the valuable
contribution made by the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) over the years and to thank the President
of the ICRC for his thought-provoking address. We also
wish to take this opportunity to express our appreciation to
the staff of the humanitarian agencies of the United Nations
and of the non-governmental organizations who daily risk
their lives to assist civilians in zones of conflict.

It is regrettable that despite the continued efforts by
the international community to address the deliberate
targeting of civilians in conflict areas around the globe,
innocent women, children, refugees and other vulnerable
groups are targets of warring parties in violation of
international law. This has resulted from the fact that most
modern conflicts are intra-State in nature. Indeed, most of
the persons affected are now internally displaced persons
rather than refugees who have crossed borders. While we
recognize the need to proceed on a case-by-case basis,
taking into account the particular circumstances, there is no
doubt that the gravity of the problem resulting from the
blurring of the lines between civilians and combatants
requires us to redouble our efforts to devise and adopt
effective responses.

It is in this context that we are pleased with the efforts
of the informal working group established by Security
Council resolution 1265 (1999) to review the
comprehensive recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report. A number of the proposals made
in the report aimed at improving the legal protection of
civilians warrant detailed attention. Urgent steps must be
taken to follow up on the Secretary-General's
recommendations, which are particularly concerned with the
need to meet the challenge of inducing States and non-State
actors to comply with the provisions of international law.
The development of appropriate international mechanisms
to prosecute those who commit grave breaches of
international law must continue to be given priority. We
have begun with the establishment of the International
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

Jamaica strongly supports the View that promoting
respect for international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law and addressing the current culture of
impunity will contribute significantly to the overall
protection of civilians in conflict situations. More
attention must therefore be given to disseminating
knowledge of human rights obligations and to
encouraging States to fulfil their obligations to respect
international law and to take appropriate legal measures
to punish offenders.

In addition, it is imperative that we develop
innovative strategies for addressing violations of
international law by non-State actors. It is unfortunate that
the legal regimes at our disposal cannot be applied easily
to such actors. In the case of internal conflicts
characterized by the existence of complex groupings of
militias and criminal elements, it is difficult in practical
terms to enforce the accountability of these individuals.
This is an area which requires serious study to explore
possible solutions.

The success of our efforts to promote protection for
civilians in armed conflict depends largely on our
willingness to take bold steps in a number of critical
areas. I wish to highlight some of these, which should
form part of a broad-based and comprehensive strategy to
address the plight of these persons.

First, there is an urgent need to ensure that the
special protection and humanitarian needs of vulnerable
groups, particularly women and children, are addressed in
the mandates of peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-
building operations. The Council's recognition of the
importance of child protection represents an important
development in efforts to address the special needs of
children. In this regard, we strongly support the inclusion
of specific provisions in peace agreements, and in the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
particularly of child soldiers. The momentum already
gained in this area must be maintained. Further action
needs to be taken to offer women and girls special
protection, particularly from acts of sexual violence.

Second, the question of impunity must be resolutely
addressed in the most innovative ways in order to deter

 

future violations of human rights by parties to armed
conflict. Adopting appropriate targeted measures, including
the imposition of arms embargoes where parties to conflicts
deliberately target civilians in violation of international
humanitarian law, could represent an important and
effective means of achieving this objective.

Third, the design and implementation of Security
Council sanctions must be improved significantly to
increase their effects on targeted groups while minimizing
their unintended effects on civilians. During our debate
earlier this week on general issues relating to sanctions, my
delegation emphasized that the appropriate use of
humanitarian exemptions and "smart" sanctions were
critical elements in our effort to reduce the unintended
humanitarian impacts of sanctions regimes.

Fourth, appropriate responses must be developed with
the cooperation of other international bodies, regional
organizations and civil society during the early phases of
conflicts to curb the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons, which contribute to the escalation of conflicts and
which result in serious harm to civilians. Supporting
initiatives to promote mine action, where appropriate,
should also become part of the Security Council's response
to civilian tragedies.

Fifth, provisions must be made as a matter of course
for appropriate training in international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law for personnel involved in
United Nations operations, and for sensitizing them about
the conditions in the countries concerned.

Sixth, every effort should be made to ensure that
peacekeeping missions have appropriate mandates and
adequate resources in order to strengthen their ability to
offer credible and adequate protection to civilians in
situations of conflict. In this connection, we must ensure
that the civilian nature of refugee camps is maintained and
that the issue of protection for internally displaced persons
is addressed.

Seventh, improving the environment for the safe and
secure provision of humanitarian assistance to individuals
in need is a major challenge. Attention to legal and physical
protection for humanitarian personnel should be given
greater priority. Humanitarian workers must be able to offer
their services in situations of conflict and should be allowed
to do so without being subjected to abuse.

In all of these areas, much remains to be done; and
increased cooperation between the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the rest of the United Nations
system, regional bodies and non-governmental
organizations will prove essential for achieving progress
and for ensuring a comprehensive approach to protection
for civilians in armed conflict.

These concerns, among others, are at the heart of the
Security Council's mandate for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The clear connections
between large-scale human suffering, systematic and
widespread violations of the rights of civilians and the
breakdown in international peace and security increase the
need for the Council to keep this issue at the forefront of
its agenda.

While the action already taken by the Security
Council to improve the protection of civilians is a step in
the right direction, my delegation believes that there is a
further need for ensuring that the international community
takes a comprehensive, integrated approach to the
problem. This approach must involve not only the
improvement of physical and legal protection, but must
also be aimed at eradicating the root causes of armed
conflict. Prevention of armed conflicts is the best
protection and in this regard, the Security Council must
place special emphasis on the development of appropriate
preventive measures.

As highlighted by the Secretary-General in his 1999
report on the work of the organization, long-term
prevention strategies must seek to prevent destructive
conflicts from arising in the first place. A holistic
approach to maintaining peace and protecting civilians
should therefore involve the development of appropriate
early warning and information-gathering mechanisms.

In his report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, the Secretary-General reminded us that the
responsibility for the protection of civilians cannot be
transferred to others, and that the United Nations is the
only international Organization with the necessary reach
and authority. The draft resolution before us today, which
my delegation is pleased to support, seeks to recommit
the Security Council to this task.

