We thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu and Director-General Arias for their briefings. We appreciate the Director General's eighty-sixth monthly report on the progress made in eliminating the Syrian chemical-weapons programme (see S/2020/1152, annex). My delegation is also pleased that Director-General Arias is here with us, virtually, today. Indonesia wishes to highlight the following points. First, regarding the early resolution of all outstanding issues, we are all aware that that is possible only through continued and enhanced cooperation between the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the Syrian Arab Republic, with the necessary support of all relevant parties, including the Security Council. Since its first Security Council meeting on this dossier (see S/PV.8659), Indonesia has consistently emphasized the importance of constructive and substantive engagement on the part of both parties. We sincerely hope that today's meeting will serve as one of the ways in which we can further discuss developments that could lead to future progress on this issue. In that context, we are pleased to note that three of the outstanding issues related to the Syrian National Authority's initial declaration were closed during the recent round of consultations. We commend the commitment of both the OPCW and the Syrian Arab Republic to closing those issues and encourage them to continue to review and discuss the remaining outstanding issues. Secondly, my delegation notes that the Investigation and Identification Team (IIT), as a non-judicial investigative body, is continuing its investigations. We want to reiterate that the IIT must function in a balanced, impartial and transparent manner, in accordance with the provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention. Any divergences on this particular topic should be discussed in a comprehensive and constructive manner, free from any kind of politicization. That also applies to the processes undertaken by the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission. Thirdly, we appreciate the OPCW Technical Secretariat's readiness for deployment, despite the ongoing challenge of the coronavirus disease pandemic. It is important that the OPCW-mandated activities continue while at the same time the health, safety and security of all its personnel is maintained. This unprecedented situation requires some adjustments on the ground. We encourage the OPCW to carefully plan its future site inspections and deployments, taking into account the development of the pandemic. As the Director-General's latest report makes clear, there are gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that remain unresolved. We therefore once again encourage the OPCW Technical Secretariat and the Syrian Arab Republic to ensure that the necessary consultations are being held regularly. Moving forward based on good faith should be everyone's main goal. My delegation believes that any provocative rhetoric or actions would only exacerbate this already complex and sensitive issue. As this is Indonesia's last meeting on this specific dossier, I would like to reiterate the importance of our collective endeavour to prevent the recurrence of the use of chemical weapons or toxic chemicals as weapons, and the importance of unity in the Security Council in that regard. Indonesia strongly condemns the use of chemical weapons anywhere, at any time and by any country, organization, group or person, under any circumstances. No one should ever be a victim of chemical weapons, and together we can accomplish that goal.
