Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union (annex 38). This is a seminal year for the rights of women and girls. In October, we commemorated the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. Moreover, 2020 also marks two decades since the adoption of the pivotal resolution 1325 (2000). Those two anniversaries epitomize some of the highlights of the progress made throughout the past quarter of a century. Yet they also come as reminder that we need to take stock of the implementation in the field of women's rights and empowerment, especially in terms of participation in the peace and security pillar, since, when considering the impact of armed conflicts and violence, we always need to follow the gender perspective. This year is also of landmark importance for Bulgaria, as in March we joined the universal consensus on gender equality as the main predictor of peace by adopting our first national action plan on women and peace and security for the period 2020-2025. That critical step objectivizes my country's commitment to the women and peace and security agenda. The impact of the coronavirus disease has proved to be unquestionably gendered. While the pandemic has deepened security challenges, it has also exacerbated risks for women in vulnerable situation, in particular gender-based and domestic violence, and limited access to essential services, such as sexual and reproductive health and rights, social protection, education, nutrition, full access to clean water, including safe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene. Bulgaria recognizes the achievements in the field of women and peace and security in the 20 years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and stands as a staunch supporter of the full, equal and meaningful participation of women, especially in the frame of peace processes. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that there are still implementation gaps, since women are still highly underrepresented when it comes to decision-making and processes related to peace and security. In that regard, Bulgaria welcomes the adoption of resolution 2538 (2020), which is guided by the principles of resolution 1325 (2000), and aims to strengthen action on women and peace and security. The resolution firmly supports all efforts meant to ensure the full and equal participation of women at all levels, ranging from conflict prevention to post-conflict reconstruction, peace and security, as well as the prevention and elimination of sexual violence in conflict. My country attaches great importance to civil society organizations and recognizes their crucial role in the implementation and the very creation of the women and peace and security agenda. In that regard, reprisals and threats against women human rights defenders, women peacebuilders, women political leaders and activists should be condemned in the strongest terms, while addressing the shrinking space for civil society. Bulgaria remains committed to the promotion of gender equality and the protection and fulfilment of the human rights of women and girls. Our view is that we do not necessarily need new Security Council resolutions to achieve that goal. At this point, we should follow up on our promises through the full and effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), the Being Declaration and Platform for Action, the International Conference on Population and Development and the outcomes of its review conferences.
