Mr. Zinsou (Benin): As this is the first time that I
take the floor, allow me, at the outset, to congratulate
you, Madame President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. The countries of
the Gulf of Guinea, on behalf of which I speak, wish
you full success during your presidency. Let me also
commend your predecessor for his leadership in
guiding the work of the Council during the month of
September.

The States of the Gulf of Guinea are confronted
with the resurgence of piracy and armed robbery along
their coasts. In the recent months, the phenomenon has
grown to worrying proportions on the coasts of those
States.

This situation seriously affects the safety of
maritime navigation and increases the level of
transnational organized crime in the region. It is
seriously affecting the ability of the States to meet their
primary responsibility to protect people and goods in
their territory and to secure safe traffic in their
territorial waters. As such, the upsurge of piracy and
armed robbery represent a serious threat to peace and
security in the region, since it also has negative
impacts on the economic performance of the States
concerned and could destabilize them.

If left unaddressed, this situation could seriously
jeopardize the tremendous investments made by the
international community in both establishing durable
peace and in fostering economic development in the
subregion. It is not in the interest of the international
community to tolerate the establishment off the coast
of West and Central Africa of a zone of lawlessness
breeding all kinds of illicit activities, including the
smuggling of illegal immigrants, human trafficking,
and the traffic in small arms and light weapons. These
worrying occurrences at sea have also been
accompanied by an increase of arms attacks on banks
and trading centres in cities along the rivers,
undermining the confidence of citizens in the ability of
the States to protect their assets and their lives.

To tackle the problem, the States of the Gulf of
Guinea have taken many initiatives, including joint
patrols at sea, mainly between the Federal Republic of
Nigeria and the Republic of Benin, the countries most
affected. The Heads of States of the region are carrying
on consultations with the intention of convening a
summit for the consideration of a comprehensive
response to the threat. In addition to these efforts, the

Heads of States have also felt, quite rightly, the
necessity to inform the wider international community,
expecting its support in undertaking an effective fight
against the phenomenon. In this regard, consultations
and meetings have been held by the Permanent
Representatives of the States of the Gulf of Guinea,
and have been extended to all members of the African
Group in August.

The efforts made and other initiatives taken by
the Heads of State of the region and here in New York
by the ambassadors have enjoyed an initial favourable
response of the United Nations. Indeed, on 30 August
the Security Council, briefed on the matter by
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, issued a press statement (SC/10372)
on the matter of piracy and maritime armed robbery in
the Gulf of Guinea off the coast of West Africa.

In this regard, I would like, on behalf of the
States of the region, to pay a sincere tribute to the
Security Council for the promptness of its response,
which, among other things, seriously strengthened the
affected Member States in their efforts to find the best
strategy against the threat. It was encouraging that,
through the aforementioned press statement, the
members of the Security Council expressed concern
over the increase in piracy, maritime armed robbery
and hostage-taking in the Gulf of Guinea and their
damaging impact on security, trade and economic
activities in the subregion.

Our Governments are galvanized by the
recognition of the leadership role of the regional bodies
and States on this issue and of the need for the
international community to support affected countries,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Economic Community of Central
African States and other relevant organizations, as
appropriate, in securing international navigation along
the Gulf of Guinea. We would like to encourage the
Secretary-General to deploy a United Nations
assessment mission to consider the situation and
explore possible options for United Nations support for
developing a comprehensive strategy to address this
threat.

The countries of the Gulf of Guinea highly
appreciate the readiness of the international community
to provide the necessary support to strengthen the
national and regional efforts deployed to tackle the
problem of piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea. In this regard, we are of the view that the
Security Council should consider going one step
further by adopting a resolution on the issue in order to
generate a clear mandate for all stakeholders to support
the determination of our Governments to take decisive
measures, individually and collectively, to restore
maritime safety and the security of maritime navigation
in the region.

We also believe that the adoption of such a
resolution would send a strong signal to the pirates that
the international community always remains united and
strong in the fight against transboundary organized
crime and terror wherever they occur. The States of the
Gulf of Guinea suggest that, through such a resolution,
the Council would offer them strong encouragement to
step up their individual and collective efforts to
overcome the scourge of piracy and armed robbery
along their coasts, and strive to establish a common
framework of action. We think that the Council could
also pledge its full support and assistance to the
establishment of such a regional framework, in liaison
with the relevant regional organizations. It is well
known that the implementation of such measures
requires the mobilization of special expertise and
material and financial resources for the development of
strong capacities at national and regional levels.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that the
upsurge of piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf
of Guinea is a global challenge. It should not be left on
the shoulders of the countries affected, even if they
have demonstrated, as we have done, strong
determination to take action against this phenomenon
and their readiness to develop a regional framework to
foster the coordination of their collective measures
against it. In this sense, the States of the Gulf of
Guinea expect a lot from the debate being held today.
We are confident that the Security Council will assume
its responsibility to act to strengthen peace and security
in the subregion.

(spoke in French)

Having made this joint statement, I should like to
make a few comments in my national capacity.

I pay tribute to the Secretary-General, ECOWAS
and the Gulf of Guinea Commission for their
significant contributions to this debate.

The capacity of States to maintain order and
peace on their territory depends on their ability to fulfil
their sovereign function of ensuring human security
and the provision of public services. With the
entrenchment of regional integration, the threat of
inter-State conflict is now negligible, if not almost
extinct. However, the threats coming from scourges
such as maritime piracy and the growth in unlawful
activities that threaten the security of States are also a
genuine threat to international peace and security.

The upsurge in attacks against banks and peaceful
citizens going about their productive activities in
markets and the concomitant increase in attacks at sea
against commercial shipping and oil tankers have led
to a significant reduction in the number of ships that
berth in the autonomous port of Cotonou. The risk of
seeing the State of Benin and its young democracy
stifled under the impact of these illicit activities is
enormous. The autonomous port of Cotonou is the
main source of customs income, which represents more
than 55 per cent of the income funding the national
budget, which depends essentially on tax revenues.
There were genuine signs of this income being wiped
out because of the unsafe reputation of the port due to
the growth in unlawful activities off the coast of Benin.

Aware of the seriousness of the situation, the
President of the Republic of Benin, His Excellency
Mr. Boni Yayi, brought it to the permanent members of
the Security Council and the Secretary-General. Since
then, the Government of Benin has sought every means
possible to combat and eliminate piracy off the coast of
Benin.

Among the measures taken, I would like to
mention here the repair and putting back into service of
two patrol boats acquired by the Benin navy within the
framework of cooperation with China, and the
measures taken with Nigeria to conduct joint
surveillance patrols in the territorial waters of Benin to
make shipping activities safe. Since the launching of
these joint patrols, there has been no instance of piracy.

Furthermore, Benin has decided to invest in
strengthening maritime security and is taking measures
to increase its logistical capacities for its navy by
procuring new surveillance vessels, both maritime and
aerial. By the beginning of next year, the Benin fleet
will grow to six ships. Benin, through me, would like
to thank all the development partners who are
cooperating in building the capacity of our navy.

A year from now, the armed forces of Benin will
be able to ensure security within its territorial waters
and to contribute more to efforts in the subregion to
ensure, within the regional integration framework, the
security of people and goods both on land and at sea.
Clearly, the process of integrating naval forces and of
establishing a regional framework for cooperation, in
line with the maritime security strategy of the African
Union, will develop along the line of sharing means
and resources so that the States concerned assume
ownership of their maritime territorial waters and,
above all, so that an information exchange network can
be developed and local expertise built up to ensure the
effectiveness of individual and collective management
of threats at sea.

The Government of Benin thanks the Security
Council for sizing up the true scale of the threat
represented by piracy and the growth of unlawful
activities in the Gulf of Guinea, as it has demonstrated
in this meeting. Benin is convinced that as the Council
understands the global dimension of the problem, it
will draw the appropriate conclusions to help the States
of the region to effectively combat this threat to
international peace and security.
Benin very much hopes that, through the adoption
of a resolution on this issue under Chapter VIII of the
Charter, the Security Council will establish a clear
mandate for a determined commitment by the
international community to support the efforts being
made by countries in the region in order to establish
coordinated and coherent efforts to combat organized
transborder crime.

In this regard, we welcome the decision of the
Secretary-General to send an integrated technical
mission to Benin to examine the necessary forms of
assistance. I would like to assure him of the full
readiness of Benin to cooperate with the entire United
Nations system to totally eliminate the scourge of
piracy and unlawful activities off our coast.

