Mr. Adam (Seychelles): On behalf of President
James Michel and the people of Seychelles, I would like
to express our appreciation to you, Mr. President, the
Foreign Minister of New Zealand, for having provided
this platform to discuss the security challenges of small
island developing States (SIDS). We thank all members
for their support.

I would also like to convey our appreciation to
the United Nations, through the Secretary-General,
for the recognition of the specificities of SIDS, as
outlined in the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
(Samoa Pathway), adopted in 2014, and for situating
today's event as a continuation of efforts to improve
the framework available to build the resilience of small
island developing States.

The security challenges of SIDS are situated in the
context of our unique geographic character. Surrounded
by oceans, we are our planet's "blue guardians". But
the governance of the world's oceanic spaces is far
removed from the security expectations that the world
has regarding its terrestrial spaces. Lawlessness and
impunity are more often than not the norm on the high
seas. International criminality is often tolerated, and
prosecutions of international crimes at sea remain
uneven. Most of the world's illegal traffic is conducted
at sea, whether it be in people, drugs or weapons. Illegal
fishing continues to undermine both national and
international regulation. Respect for this shared space
is often extended only to the degree that economic
interests are not put into question. Meanwhile, the
threat of climate change undermines the productivity
of traditional marine resources and limits opportunities
for growth. Let us be clear: climate change is the
foremost security threat for SIDS, and, arguably, for
the world as a whole.

For SIDS, our smallness and our isolation are
structural elements of our vulnerability. The increasing
threats around our oceans and the relative lack of
governance enhance this vulnerability.

With 75 per cent of our planet made up by
oceans, the weak global governance of our oceanic
spaces undermines our global security. In fact, we
are all vulnerable. Seychelles, like many SIDS, has
not accepted, however, to simply be an observer to
these processes. We are embracing the opportunity of
being large oceanic nations, looking at our ocean as
an opportunity more than as a threat. We are aiming
to better manage our oceans, setting an example of
oceanic good governance. In the context of Seychelles,
our exclusive economic zone (EEZ) extends to
1.3 million square kilometres, while we have also
agreed a shared extended continental shelf with our
neighbour Mauritius, which extends to an additional
395,000 square kilometres.
Earlier this year, we created the blue economy
department, which is part ofmy portfolio as the Minister
of Finance. We are staking our economic future on
better harnessing the development potential of our
ocean. To achieve this, we must recognize that moving
towards sustainable development goals, as we hope we
will agree in September, requires breaking the existing
moulds of economic development and forging new
economic opportunities from previously unsustainable
practices. In relation to African and Indian Ocean
island States, that is what the blue economy promises.

In practical terms, we are implementing the
blue economy through the development of a marine
spatial plan, whereby we define the economic and
conservation activities to be developed throughout our
EEZ. This includes the security considerations that will
be required. We are also committing 30 per cent of our
exclusive economic zone as protected areas. We are
developing enhanced fisheries- management tools to
implement appropriate stock management, and we are
in discussion with international financial institutions to
raise a "blue bond" to help provide affordable financing
for such initiatives.

These initiatives are also situated within a regional
move to bolster the blue economy, notably through the
African Union's blue economy commitments under
Agenda 2063, as well as the African Union's Africa's
Integrated Maritime Strategy. The Indian Ocean
Commission and the Indian Ocean Rim Association are
also developing blue-economy approaches that build
sustainable economic opportunity through research,
trade, renewable energy, shared security and maritime
infrastructure.

The phenomenon of piracy in the Indian Ocean has
underlined the challenges of security in our region, but
also those of implementing the rule of law at sea. At
the start of the problem, many naval ships that were
operating in the Indian Ocean were frustrated by the
fact that while they could interdict pirate vessels at sea,
the lack of prosecution afterwards meant that pirates
had to be released, allowing them to regroup and attack
shipping on future occasions.

Despite our capacity constraints, Seychelles took a
lead role in piracy prosecutions, because we recognize
that the rule of law is the first step towards economic
stability and growth. As long as we allow our oceans to
be ruled by lawlessness, we will not be able to properly
harness their development potential.

Through our concerted effort with international
partners such as the European Union and NATO, we
have effectively broken the piracy business model
that was operating out of Somalia by ensuring that
prosecutions take place systematically. But we cannot
afford complacency. While piracy is on the wane, the
conditions that led to piracy are still in place. We are
seeing increased activities relating to drug trafficking
and associated criminal activities.

This leads me to also mention another major
security concern for many SIDS, which is the influx
of trafficked substances that create domestic demand
for narcotics. Our small societies are often inordinately
affected by the impact of addiction among young people
and the consequences in terms of reduced productivity
and increased criminality. We are actively engaged in
twin strategies of reducing local demand while also
aggressively targeting shipments into the country. But
these are global problems, and we have to enhance our
regional and international methodologies for combating
them.

As we work to address these issues, we must also
maintain vigilance in relation to potential terrorist
threats. Al-Shabaab in Somalia has profited from the
lack of maritime capacity in our region and has used
the sea lanes to bolster its position in certain parts of
Somalia while also creating profitable trades in illicit
goods. Our region is very reliant as well on tourism,
and we must work in concert to ensure that we protect
our livelihoods, while also ensuring that the people of
Somalia do not have to live in the fear that comes with
Al-Shabaab.

All of these security challenges require enhanced
regional coordination. Seychelles has been pleased
to host a Regional Information Fusion and Law
Enforcement Centre, which has helped build cases for
prosecution in Seychelles and across our region based
on crimes committed at sea. We thank members of the
Security Council that have supported this work.

We must continue to build this regional capacity,
and we look forward to the implementation of the
regional Maritime Security Programme, funded by
the European Union, which will reinforce and build
capacity across the East African and Indian Ocean
region. Seychelles will also continue to actively
promote regional partnerships as the current Chair of
the African Union's East African Standby Force, while
we also look forward to our forthcoming chairmanship
ofthe Contact Group on Piracy offthe Coast of Somalia,
where we will share our experiences with a view to
implementing practical solutions to counter impunity
and lawlessness.
At the heart of improved maritime security for
small island developing States is enhanced maritime
domain awareness. We depend on partnerships to
build this capacity, and one of the messages I would
like to emphasize today is to call on all members of
the Security Council to reinforce the building of this
capacity in small island developing States. To do so not
only empowers better management of our resources; it
also bolsters our position as sentinels of the sea.

Before concluding, let me also take a moment
to remind all our partners that effectively tackling
criminality and terrorism at sea also involves improved
financial governance - in terms of the better
application of anti-money-laundering best practices,
as well as enhanced tax transparency and the exchange
of information. By targeting the business model that
underpins criminal and terrorist activities, we can
better undermine those operations. Seychelles has
made a strong commitment towards those best practices
through strong anti-money-laundering legislation, and
we are complementing that through our commitment
to be an early adopter in terms of the exchange of
information for tax purposes.

In conclusion, it is essential that we contextualize
the debate on security issues on small island developing
States in relation to climate change. Climate change
is an ever present threat. The increases in global
temperatures are currently set to be well above two
degrees, which will literally wipe out the islands
of many of our nations. It will wipe out homes and
livelihoods, and I would like us today to affirm that
every island matters.

We cannot go to the Paris Negotiations on
Climate Change later this year with the idea that some
islands - that some homes - can be sacrificed at the
altar of political expediency and unsustainable growth.
We thank members of the Security Council for ensuring
that the security aspect of climate change is not ignored.
As with all security threats, the best strategy is to
pre-empt the threat. We have the opportunity to set a
standard for global governance and for enhanced global
security in Paris. Let us ensure that we take it.

Better governance of our oceans through the blue
economy can already help us ensure that we can build
climate-resilient, inclusive growth, and the fast track to
better maritime security is the fast track to establishing
our blue economy.

