Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I would like to thank the
group of the Non-Aligned Movement for taking the
initiative in seeking this debate. It is most important
that all Members of the United Nations have the
opportunity to state their views in the Security Council
on this critical issue.

Ireland fully associates itself with the statement
made earlier in the debate by the representative of
Denmark on behalf of the European Union.

Ireland is a strong advocate of the system of
collective international security enshrined in the United
Nations Charter. Under that system, the Security
Council has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

On the issue before us, as on every issue, Ireland
considers that it becomes all of us, whether serving on
the Council or not, to respect in every way the integrity
of the Council in the exercise of its duty. The primary
responsibility to make decisions in accordance with the
Charter regarding the maintenance of international
peace and security belongs to the Council, and it must
rest there. Likewise, the Council has the right and the
responsibility under the Charter to make the necessary
judgement if and when its decisions are not respected
or implemented in full. It is for the Council to decide
on the appropriate response.

To be a member of the Security Council is to be
especially aware - as all of us surely are aware - of
how Governments and people around the world look to
the Council for a clear lead on grave and sensitive
matters of which it is seized. It is also to be aware that
many Governments and people around the world-
people living their day-to-day lives, not just political
elites - very often define their positions and set their
moral and political compass by the judgements and
decisions of the Council. This is something that is new
in international affairs. And it is a trust we must in
every respect be worthy of.

The Charter provides that all United Nations
Member States, without exception, agree to accept and
carry out the decisions of the Security Council. It is a
matter of grave concern when any Member State
ignores the will of the international community and
continues over many years to disregard the resolutions
of the Council. It undermines respect for international
law. It weakens the international system that we depend
on for our individual and collective security.

This system was put in place to protect us all. We
are all made less secure when any Member State, on
any issue, flouts its rules. The Council has a clear duty
to address such situations and to ensure compliance, in
accordance with the Charter.

In the case of Iraq, Ireland has long been
concerned that legally binding obligations imposed
under Security Council resolutions remain
unimplemented. The effects of Iraq's failure to respect
the Council's resolutions have weighed heavily on the
people of Iraq. Having endured a cruel decade of war,
they have had to endure a decade of comprehensive
economic sanctions on their country. The blame for this
suffering rests primarily with the Government of Iraq.
If it had implemented all its obligations, if it had
cooperated fully and immediately with arms inspectors,
the sanctions would have been removed long ago. It
chose not to do so and it is the people of Iraq who have
suffered from this choice, made by those who govern
them.

The situation has also borne heavily on Iraq's
neighbours, and particularly on Kuwait. As long as the
Council's resolutions remain unimplemented, the
security of the region cannot be assured. The failure to
return or to account for all Kuwaiti and third country
nationals and to return all Kuwaiti property defies the
authority of the Security Council and calls into
question the sincerity of the commitments that Iraq
entered into at the Arab League Summit in Baghdad.

Ireland welcomed the fact that President Bush
came to the United Nations and laid before us the
concerns of his country regarding the threat posed by
Iraq's failure to comply with its obligations under
Security Council resolutions. It is right that the
Security Council give these concerns the most careful
consideration.

Iraq's failure to comply with its obligations has
long presented a challenge to the United Nations and
the Security Council. Ireland strongly commends the
Secretary-General for his efforts to secure Iraq's
agreement to accept weapons inspections, which, as he
himself told us in the General Assembly, is the
indispensable first step towards assuring the world that
all Iraq's weapons of mass destruction have been
eliminated.

We welcomed Iraq's agreement on 16 September
to accept the return of weapons inspectors
unconditionally. We strongly urge the Iraqi authorities
to back words with action. They must cooperate fully
with the inspectors, hold nothing back, and allow full,
free and unfettered access to all places in the country,
to all relevant documentation and to all relevant
personnel.

We also urge Iraq to make it clear that the
inspectors will be allowed immediate and complete
access to all parts of the country, including presidential
sites. Such access is necessary if the inspections are to
have the necessary credibility within the international
community. Iraq should, without further delay, confirm
that it accepts and will facilitate all the practical
arrangements required for the conduct of inspections.

Ireland has the strongest conviction that the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission and the International Atomic Energy
Agency, under the leadership of, respectively, Hans
Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei, will carry out the
inspections for which this Council has provided with
the required rigour and professionalism. We are
entirely confident that they will be guided solely by
their mandate and that their judgements will be
objective and impartial. Ireland believes that the
inspectors should enter Iraq as soon as possible and
begin the process of disarmament, in accordance with
resolution 1284 (1999) and any new provisions which
might be put in place by the Council. We also believe
that if Iraq, despite its recent commitment, again fails
to cooperate with inspectors, the Council must, as the
Secretary-General said, face its responsibilities.

As a member of the Security Council, Ireland is
deeply conscious of the overwhelming wish of the
international community that the solution to this issue
be found through peaceful means and in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations. We will weigh
very carefully the views expressed by the membership
in this debate.

We believe that this common goal can be
achieved and that it is well within the ability of the
Security Council to devise a resolution which will
create the necessary conditions to do so. In Article 24
of the Charter, the Members of the United Nations
agreed that, in carrying out its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
the Council acts on their behalf. The Security Council
is therefore entitled to expect the full support of the
international community, but it must also ensure that it
retains that support. The full authority of the Security
Council is greatly enhanced when its actions
correspond to the wishes of the broader United Nations
membership and are seen to enjoy their support.

In particular, in a matter of such moment as this,
the Security Council should make every effort to
command the widest possible consensus among its own
members. There could be no better demonstration of
the strength of the Council's resolve. The resolution
should insist on unfettered access for the arms
inspectors. It should clarify the modalities, remove
ambiguities and facilitate their work so as to ensure
effective inspection of all sites. The resolution should
leave no doubt that Iraq must come into compliance
and do so without delay or further attempts to evade
the obligations imposed on it by the Security Council.
The resolution should make it clear that the Council
will take any necessary decision to enforce compliance
if Iraq does not cooperate as required. Any such
decision must be taken by the Security Council in full
accordance with the Charter.

From our discussions with other Council
members, it is clear to us that the vast majority,
perhaps all, believe that such an approach would be
most likely to lead to the peaceful solution desired by
the international community and that they would be
willing to support such a resolution.

I have already referred to the suffering of the
people of Iraq, which is primarily due to the disastrous
choices made by their Government. This is why Ireland
actively supported the negotiation and adoption earlier
this year of resolution 1409 (2002), which established
the Goods Review List, setting the humanitarian
programme on a new footing.

That programme, however, depends on a flow of
oil sufficient to provide it with the necessary funding.
It is most regrettable that, for various reasons - chief
among them Iraq's interruptions of its oil exports,
Iraq's imposition of illegal surcharges and Iraq's sales
of oil outside the escrow account - funding for the
humanitarian programme remains inadequate. It is
most important that this issue be addressed by the
Council in the period ahead.

Finally, Ireland hopes that an effective and
thorough inspection process, with the full cooperation
of the Iraqi authorities, will lead on to an early
suspension of sanctions, in full accordance with the
provisions of resolution 1284 (1999).

The Government of Iraq has it in its power to
remove the present tensions and to end the suffering of
its people. All it has to do is to meet in full and without
delay its obligations under Security Council
resolutions. It should do so without any further
prevarication.

