Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We are
very grateful to you, Sir, and your delegation for
having convened this timely open debate on illicit arms
trafficking and its impact on peace and security in
Central Africa. We welcome this opportunity for the

Security Council to consider the pernicious effects of
that criminal activity, which have been described in
detail this morning by the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Costa and Mr. Sylvain-Goma.

My delegation will support the presidential
statement to be adopted at the outcome of this meeting.

Illicit arms trafficking is undoubtedly among the
most serious threats to peace and security in the current
international context. On the one hand, it helps to
strengthen organized crime and the illicit traffic in
drugs, undermining political, social and economic
stability in our countries. It also hampers peacebuilding
in situations of institutional fragility. On the other
hand, it is an obstacle to development and fosters the
serious and systematic violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law.

As we have stated in past debates of the Council
on this issue, given the increasingly obvious link
between drug trafficking and others manifestations of
organized crime - such as illicit arms trafficking,
money-laundering and terrorism - Governments and
the international community must design strategies that
enable them to address the specifics of any serious
crime and to identify the common and convergent
elements of such crimes in order to adopt a
comprehensive approach. In this way, it will be
possible to strengthen the rule of law and to clamp
down on the culture of illegality and impunity
throughout the world.

Of particular concern to Mexico, given the
pernicious effects of arms trafficking, is the harm it
causes to the civilian population. The price we pay for
our inability to eradicate this scourge is measured in
the human lives lost to it every day. It has been
calculated that hundreds of thousands of people are
killed every year by firearms, the majority of which are
purchased on the black market. Thus, the effective
implementation of resolution 1894 (2009) is of special
importance.
It has been noted that Central Africa is among the
regions that have suffered most from the destructive
effects of the illicit traffic in weapons and ammunition
and the irresponsible trade in weapons, in particular
small arms and light weapons. The subregion has been
shaken in recent years by protracted conflicts that have
weakened the States of the region and, on occasion,
impeded reconciliation and peacebuilding processes.
Sadly, the subregion has seen the conflation of
practically all the pernicious effects of such activities,
and weapons have circulated from conflict to conflict,
regardless of borders or jurisdictions.

The complex nature of the problem highlights the
importance of international cooperation to combat this
global threat. Arms produced in one region of the
world are sold illegally in another. It is of fundamental
importance to recognize that the measures we adopt to
counter the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons and ammunition must be designed on the
basis of shared responsibility involving States,
international and regional bodies, and arms
manufacturers, purchasers and users.

Over the past 10 years, the United Nations has
devoted great effort and many resources to addressing
the phenomenon under discussion. However, judging
by the extreme availability of these weapons on illegal
transnational black markets and in sorely affected areas
such as Central Africa, we continue to face major
challenges. Mexico believes that the United Nations
must play a more active role in the debate on how to
combat the scourge, not merely through its technical
forums, but also by promoting high-level commitment
to countering it.

In that regard, we now possess the mechanisms
and instruments necessary to respond politically and
legally to the challenges at hand. One such mechanism
is the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. The Fourth
Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action will be
chaired by Mexico in June this year. It will provide a
new opportunity to adopt specific measures to enable
us to advance in preventing and combating illicit arms
trafficking. We invite States and other actors in our
endeavours in this area.

In the legal sphere, we have global and regional
instruments, such as the Inter-American Convention
Against the Illicit Manufacture of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related
Materials. In a more general context, we must stress
the importance of the Palermo Protocol against the
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
their Parts and Components and Ammunition, to which
there are now 79 States parties, as we have been
informed today. We call on those States that have not
yet done so to ratify or accede promptly to that
important instrument.

We also welcome the progress made towards
negotiating a possible arms trade treaty. We commend
the efforts being made in Central Africa to establish a
binding legal instrument for monitoring small arms and
light weapons, ammunition and any material that could
be used in their manufacture. We trust that these efforts
will soon bear fruit. In that regard, we support the
proposal to draft a subregional list of arms traffickers,
which will make it possible in the future to initiate
investigations and bring the perpetrators of such illegal
activities to justice.

It is particularly important to consider the ways in
which the Security Council can contribute, within its
sphere of competencies, to the quest for better-
designed and coordinated responses against this
scourge. Thus, the Council, working Closely with the
General Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission and
other relevant United Nations bodies, must establish
specific mandates for peace and peacebuilding
missions. We therefore stress the importance of
enhancing cooperation between the peace missions and
integrated offices in the region - such as the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad, the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi and the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central
African Republic - and neighbouring countries in
undertaking joint work on implementing disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes for ex-
combatants of armed non-State groups and on security
and justice sector reform processes.

Cooperation and information exchanges between
the Security Council and regional and subregional
bodies must also be strengthened. In that regard, it
would be very useful to establish mechanisms for
ongoing dialogue between the Council and the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa.

It is particularly important that the African Union
and the Economic Community of Central African
States promote among their members the proper
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. They should also put in place
concrete measures to monitor borders or weapons-
crossing points and to investigate suspected embargo
violations in States under sanctions.

The year 2010 offers an opportunity to make
qualitative and quantitative progress in preventing and
combating the illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons. All of us - countries, organizations and civil
society - will have a chance to join efforts and take
part in important multilateral events, including the
Biennial Meeting on Small Arms and Light Weapons,
which has already been mentioned, as well as the high-
level meeting of the General Assembly on transnational
organized crime. We cannot waste those opportunities.

