Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the Regional United Nations Office for Central
Africa, Mr. Abou Moussa, for his briefing. Since this
is his last statement before the Council in that capacity,
I would like to take this opportunity to commend his
work to promote peace and security in Central Africa
over the past three years. I want to wish every success
to his successor, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily.

Over the past three years, significant progress has
been made in operations against the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA). The pressure, military operations and
many defections have weakened the group's combat
capability. However, the LRA continues to pose a
serious threat to the region, in particular to civilians.
As a result of the crisis in the Central African Republic,
LRA leaders based in the north-east of the Central
African Republic have been able to rebuild their
forces. We have also noted with concern the credible
information suggesting the presence of senior LRA
leaders, including Joseph Kony, in the Kafia Kingi
enclave on the border of the Sudan, South Sudan and
the Central African Republic.

In that context, we must redouble our efforts to
support the African Union's Regional Cooperation
Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord's Resistance
Army. While the crisis in South Sudan caused the
temporary redeployment of troops, we hope that the
agreement signed in Addis Ababa on 9 May to resolve
the South Sudanese crisis will allow all countries
participating in the regional intervention force
against the LRA to provide the necessary troops. It
is also necessary to mobilize the vital resources and
equipment for the effective functioning of that regional
force. In that respect, we commend the significant
support of the United States and the European Union,
which has just provided a new contribution of almost
€2 million to the African Union. For its part, in late
2013Luxembourg provided additional financial support
for the operation of the regional headquarters of the
regional intervention force located in Yambio, South
Sudan. Coordination between the United Nations, the
African Union and the States affected by the LRA is
essential, as is knowledge sharing and cooperation
between the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
and the African-led International Support Mission in
the Central African Republic (MISCA), which will
be rehatted as the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) on 15 September. Pending the
implementation of MINUSCA, it is imperative that
effective coordination is established as soon as possible
between the two African Union operations active in the
Central African Republic - the regional intervention
force against the LRA and MISCA.

Besides military operations, the international
community must continue its efforts to promote
the stabilization and development of LRA-affected
regions. We also encourage all States to cooperate
in implementing the arrest warrants issued by the
International Criminal Court almost nine years ago
against LRA leaders, including Joseph Kony. Accused
of war crimes and crimes against humanity, including
murder, rape and the recruitment of children, the main
LRA leaders must be brought to justice.

Women and children are the main victims of the
LRA. In that context, allow me to underscore the need
to fully integrate child protection in the activities of
the African Union's regional intervention force and
highlight the importance of programmes, such as
those of UNICEF, to help with the release, return and
reintegration of women and children abducted by the
LRA.

Finally, we remain concerned about the linkages
between the illicit trade in wild fauna and armed groups
operating in Central Africa, in particular the LRA. We
therefore encourage UNOCA to continue to support the
struggle against poaching and against ivory smuggling
in the region.

The situation in Central Africa continues to be
severely affected by the crisis in the Central African
Republic. Following her visit to Chad on 5 and 6 May,
Ms. Valerie Amos highlighted the humanitarian impact
of the crisis in the Central African Republic on
neighbouring countries, who are hosting a considerable
number of refugees. The absence of the rule of law and
the security vacuum in the Central African Republic
have made it a haven for armed groups.

On 10 April, the Security Council took the
important decision to establish the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic. Until the deployment
of the first Blue Helmets in September, we are
supporting MISCA on a bilateral level and through
our participation in the European Union military
operation in the Central African Republic. Similarly,
we commend the vital action of France's Operation
Sangaris. Given the persistent serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law, the
international community must remain vigilant and
active. The sanctions adopted on 9 May by the Security
Council against three key figures behind the crisis in
the Central African Republic are an important measure
to help end the climate of impunity prevailing in the
country.

In his report (S/2014/319), the Secretary-General
notes with concern the activities of Boko Haram, which
are not only a threat to the people in Nigeria, but have
spread to other countries in the region. We want to
reiterate our strongest condemnation of the kidnapping
last month ofmore than 200 schoolgirls in north-eastern
Nigeria. Those girls must be released immediately.
We strongly condemn the sexual and gender-based
violence, kidnappings and attacks against schools.
Some of those acts committed by Boko Haram could
constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity
under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, which Nigeria has ratified. All those responsible
must be brought to justice.
In conclusion, on a positive note I would like to
commend the work done by UNOCA and the United
Nations Office for West Africa in combatting piracy
off the coast of the Gulf of Guinea States, which is
now the African region most affected by piracy. We
welcome the progress achieved in the establishment
of the Interregional Coordination Centre with the
establishment, in April in Yaounde, of an interregional
action plan for 2014-2016.

