Mr. McLay (New Zealand): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening this debate, which is so
significant. Today's briefings by the Secretary-General,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and the
reprentative of the International Committee of the Red
Cross remind us that this agenda item is constantly
relevant to the Security Council. They also remind us of
mini-conflicts where the Council continues to struggle
for leverage and where the United Nations as a whole
is not delivering what is expected of it in its Charter.
Therefore, no one should be overly concerned that the
Council has already focused on this thematic issue, as
recently as earlier in 2013. Indeed, we look forward to
the Secretary-General's report later on in the year and to
an additional debate focused on his recommendations.
Nonetheless, it is important to recall that, since
February, when the Council adopted a presidential
statement under the leadership of the Republic of Korea
(S/PRST/2013/2), we have seen a number of important
and positive developments relating to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The first was the adoption
of the Arms Trade Treaty on 2 April 2013. That was
a landmark step, with really significant implications
for the protection of civilians, who can always be
threatened by those possessing conventional weapons,
including small arms and light weapons. New Zealand
was proud to work closely with partners in Africa, the
Caribbean, Latin America and the Pacific to help to
achieve that result.

Secondly, we welcome the Council's decision last
week to emphasize the role of regional and subregional
organizations, bodies with huge potential for improving
practical outcomes in the protection of civilians. The
Council must support their efforts.

Thirdly, we note an approach of using force robustly
for the protection of civilians within the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as another marker of the growing
commitment to the protection agenda.

Fourthly, the African Union's decision in July to
establish a new peacekeeping mission in the Central
African Republic, with a robust protection of civilians
mandate, is particularly welcome. We are acutely
aware of the ever-deteriorating, increasingly perilous
situation of civilians in that country. We echo calls
from the Secretary-General, Ms.Pillay and earlier by
the United Nations Assistant-Secretary-General for
Human Rights, Ivan Simonovie, that the Council pay
more attention to that issue. As we heard last week in
the Chamber from Valerie Amos (see S/PV.7017), it
is now critical that the Council deal with the African
Union's request for support with real urgency.

The Council must do more than just address the
protection of civilians as a thematic issue. It must
be more fully engaged in the implementation of this
agenda item in practice, in the field and within the
country-specific situations on its agenda. It must also
do more to lend practical support to the protection
efforts by regional organizations. As Emergency
Relief Coordinator Amos made clear, the situation in
Syria remains a glaring example of where the Council
is quite simply failing both to support the approaches
advocated by relevant regional organizations and to
live up to the standards that it set for itself in its own
thematic statements on the protection of civilians. In
those circumstances, it is important for each of the 15
members of the Council to be seen to be working to
address practical protection needs.

Under this agenda item, we must also emphasize
the ongoing importance of ensuring the safety of
humanitarian actors and their essential access to zones
where they can alleviate suffering. We have heard
Under-Secretary-General Amos's repeated calls for
access to civilians trapped in Aleppo, Horns and other
parts of Syria. We join Belgium in saying that access
must not be denied. Civilians trapped in those conflict
areas cannot wait for the successful conclusion of a
political process before they get assistance. We join
Estonia in saying that preventing access by deliberately
attacking humanitarian workers is a war crime, and
ensuring accountability for such violations, as has been
emphasized by many in today's debate, is an important
role of the Security Council. There can be no impunity.

Finally, on this World Humanitarian Day and its
very sad anniversary, it is important that we all pay
respect to the many humanitarian workers who have
risked - and far too often lost - their lives in trying
to alleviate the suffering of civilians. They command
our utmost respect, and all of us i the States Members
of the United Nations, the members of the Security
Council and the United Nations Secretariat - all of
us - must heed their example and be active and equally
courageous if we are to make a reality of the protection
of civilians.

