Mr. Badji (spoke in French): At the outset, Sir,
allow me to congratulate Libya, a brotherly country to
Senegal, on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. You have our
every wish for success. I also wish to express
appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador Yukio
Takasu, Permanent Representative of Japan, on the
exemplary manner in which he steered the work of the
Council in February.

While the massive Israeli assault and the shelling
of the Gaza Strip came to an end some two months
ago, the Palestinian people still cannot resume their
normal lives. We know that more than 1,400
Palestinians, many of them innocent civilians, were
killed. We also know that the destruction of homes,
farms and infrastructure has been so immense that
basic reconstruction will take years and billions of
dollars.

What is most shocking is not only the brutality
with which the Israeli army undertook its operations in
Gaza, but also its soldiers' gross disregard for human
life. Indeed, recent accounts by Israeli soldiers now
make it clear that there was, in their words, "unbridled
contempt for and forcefulness against the Palestinians".
As was reported in Haaretz, an Israeli squad leader
said that most of the men under his command felt that
the lives of Palestinians were "far, far less important
than the lives of our soldiers". Danny Zamir, head of
the Yitzhak Rabin pre-military programme, was quoted
by Reuters as saying that the soldiers who had
participated in the Gaza operation had also "talked
about unwarranted fire on Palestinian civilians".

Israel's decision to conduct an investigation into
the soldiers' accounts is welcome but, sadly, will do
little to relieve the horrendous suffering endured by the
Gazans and will not bring the many innocent civilian
victims back to life. Our Committee supports the
investigative missions established by the Secretary-
General, the Human Rights Council and the League of
Arab States, and welcomes similar efforts by a number
of international, Palestinian and Israeli non-
governmental organizations. We intend to devote one
of the international meetings planned for this year to
the issue of upholding international humanitarian law
and, in that regard, will pay close attention to the
results of the ongoing investigations.

Our Committee highly appreciates the
international efforts to assist the Palestinian people in
the economic and humanitarian areas. The international
donor community demonstrated its readiness and
generosity at the International Conference in Support
of the Palestinian Economy for the Reconstruction of
Gaza, held at Sharm el-Sheikh on 2 March, by pledging
some $4.5 billion to jump-start the immense and urgent
task of rebuilding the Gaza Strip. The Committee urges
the early fulfilment of these pledges in order to come
to the assistance of the Palestinian people in Gaza.

The Committee also commends the outstanding
work of United Nations personnel on the ground, first
and foremost the staff of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) in Gaza, but also their colleagues from other
specialized agencies striving to restore the fabric of life
of the thousands of Palestinians affected by the war.

For its part, our Committee recently held the
United Nations Seminar on Assistance to the
Palestinian People in Cairo on 10 and 11 March,
contributing to the wider international discourse on
ways of streamlining and coordinating efforts towards
recovery and reconstruction in the Gaza Strip.

While in Cairo, the Committee delegation paid a
visit to the Palestine hospital to bear witness to the
human toll of the Gaza assault. in a number of highly
emotional and heartbreaking encounters with wounded
Gazans 4 mostly children and young people - we
were horrified by the severity of their injuries and
shocked by the accounts, both from the patients
themselves and from the medical personnel, that a
number of these cases, for unknown reasons, did not
respond to the customary treatment protocols. This, in
our view, is something that the international
community and the Security Council should very
seriously look into. This morning's account by my
colleague the representative of Palestine was very
much to the point as we stress the responsibility of the
international community regarding this issue, which we
view as extremely serious.

Our Committee is deeply grateful to the
Government of Egypt for its determined support it
provides to the Palestinian people by promoting
international relief and reconstruction efforts for Gaza,
facilitating the much-needed ceasefire and prisoner
exchange and sponsoring talks on Palestinian national
reconciliation.

Our outrage about the assault on Gaza will not
overshadow the Committee's serious concern about the
situation in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. Israel's
ongoing and planned expansion of settlements,
demolitions of Palestinian houses, land confiscations,
construction of the wall on Palestinian land and
arbitrary closures continue. We call on Israel, the
occupying Power, to halt all illegal policies and
practices throughout the Palestinian territory. It should
immediately lift the siege on the Gaza Strip and allow
uninterrupted humanitarian assistance to enter. We call
on both sides to urgently cease all acts of Violence,
exercise the utmost restraint and agree on a sustainable
ceasefire.

The Committee stresses the permanent
responsibility of the United Nations, in particular the
Security Council, towards the question of Palestine
until it is resolved in all its aspects in accordance with
international law. We urge the parties to resume
negotiations on permanent status, leading to the
establishment of a sovereign and viable Palestinian
State within the 1967 borders and living side by side
with Israel in peace and security. The relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative
remain the legitimate foundation for a comprehensive,
just and lasting settlement of the conflict.

