Mr. Terence (Burundi): I am deeply thankful and
pleased, Sir, to be addressing the Security Council on
behalf of my Government under your presidency of the
Council. Your previous involvement in the peace
negotiations and your familiarity with African problems
and issues will certainly have a positive impact on the
Council's debate and its outcome.

Your predecessor, Mrs. Albright, offered me several
opportunities to deal with her, even at the climax of an
issue in which she was personally involved. I am thankful
to her for having listened to me several times in relation
to the Burundi crisis.

(spoke in Spanish)

I cannot fail to thank His Excellency Ambassador
Juan Somavr'a, last month's coordinator of the non-aligned
caucus, for his effectiveness, skilful coordination and
attentiveness, which I personally experienced and which
formed the basis of the draft resolution before the
Security Council today.

(spoke in English)

I am also thankful to the representative of Egypt and
his delegation, who have succeeded the delegation of
Chile in coordinating the activities of the non-aligned
caucus relating to Burundi.

(spoke in French)

A questioning of intentions, offensive to the
Government and the people of Burundi, has been the

 

basis for a series of negotiations in which you, Sir, have
been involved. In the wake of a flood of highly pessimistic
reports, in recent weeks a political and media hurricane has
been unleashed upon Burundi from the four corners of the
Earth.

In his report (S/1996/116) of 15 February 1996, the
Secretary-General strongly advocates a multinational
military force designed to descend upon Burundi on the
smallest pretext, like a vulture upon its prey. This extreme
proposal was dictated by a wish to protect Burundi from
Rwandan-style genocide. Those who prophesy such an
event would have it that its recurrence in Burundi is a near
certainty in the light of the geographic environment Burundi
shares with Rwanda and because of the ethnic, cultural and
social similarities between the two countries, and that it is
inevitable that the tragedy that took place in Rwanda in
1994 should be exported to its neighbour. For the people of
Burundi, this mechanical fusion of the two countries calls
its intentions into question and is offensive in many
respects. A number of clear facts illustrate how forced this
generalization is.

In fact, the genocide in Rwanda was spread over three
decades. It ebbed and flowed with an intensity that
depended on the times and on the country's leadership. The
first detonator was discharged in 1959 and the explosion
reached full intensity in 1994. Following the initial blast, in
1961, the people of Burundi by no means yielded to the
Rwandese trigger, but rather rose up in unity and set an
example to the world by unanimously rallying around a
single ideal - national unity - and around a single leader,
Prince Rwagasore.

Throughout the existence of the two previous
Rwandese Republics, persistent efforts to turn Burundi into
a sui generis apartheid State resulted in failure; however,
the opposition of the coalition of the people always ensured
the failure of periodic attempts by Burundi groups seeking
that goal.

In 1993, all the political entities of Rwanda - some
institutional, such as the Government, its army and its
party, and others circumstantial, such as the enraged militia
- held back nothing.

The media in Rwanda, both in print and on the air,
spewed their venom in Burundi with a view to the
assassination of our beloved President, in order to pit one
national community against another. The demonic and
excessive means used succeeded in stirring up certain
infected groups against innocent people. This deadly
madness caused dozens of human lives to be lost, both
Hutu and Tutsi. However, the progress of such means was
broken thanks to the visceral repugnance of almost the
entire people of Burundi at such a Nazi doctrine and
thanks to the organization, bravery and patriotism of the
security forces.

Despite the failings attributable to some irresolute
Burundis in their desire for political survival even on the
ruins of their country, the people of Burundi and the army
showed themselves to be utterly impermeable to the
lessons of Rwanda. Already hardened to and inoculated
against the incitements to genocide of the earlier
Rwandese regimes, the people of Burundi, its Government
and its army were aware down to their very marrow of
the supreme need to reject and repel even more strongly
that ignominious model. It is therefore shocking to impute
to them any intention or inclination whatsoever to model
the nation's future on the past of Rwanda. Burundi, by its
very character, identity and sense of honour, is not able
to duplicate that scourge.

In predicting disaster of genocidal dimensions, many
forget that the Government and the national army formed
a coalition to restore peace and security. There are three
new phenomena that give us hope that the dynamic of
peace will be irreversible, even if there should be new
developments.

The first of these phenomena is the strengthening of
governmental solidarity. At the very beginning of this
year, overcoming certain obstacles that in the past had
jeopardized the common good, the members of the
Government that emerged from the 12 political parties
that signed the Convention on Governance agreed on
strategies to be followed in order to restore peace.
Combining action and will, under the leadership of the
Head of State and the Prime Minister, the Ministers,
political leaders, members of the National Assembly and
State officials and functionaries have tried to outdo each
other in zeal throughout the Republic. In this full-bore
crusade, a standard message has been disseminated in
public meetings in order to rally the three main actors -
the population, the national army and the public
administration to a sacred, tripartite union. This triad is
allied unshakeably against the real enemy of the
homeland: any armed terrorist or violent fanatic. In just
a few weeks the campaign to mobilize for peace has
already produced very encouraging results, as was attested
to by the Government following its special meeting on 7
February last, which was devoted to an evaluation of
overall security and as was confirmed in a message from

 

the Head of Government to the Security Council on 18
February.

The second of these phenomena is the new and very
healthy rallying of the population to work towards peace.
After having been the first victim terrorizing, plundering
armed bands, the population shook off its torpor and rose
up massively in support of peace. Having identified the true
enemy and valiantly resisting any incitement to self-
destruction, peasants from all national groups have taken
charge of their own defence in the various parts of the
country where terrorists still dare to act.

Acting in good faith - out of ignorance or out of
complicity with rebel groups that have poisoned public
opinion - various diplomatic and media circles have
legitimized the demonization of the Burundi army. Our
military corps deserves treatment quite different from the
litany of defamation against it, which is promoted by armed
bands that are terrified of it. The President of the Republic,
a direct and privileged witness of the army's code of
conduct, as its supreme commander, wishing to pay it a
well-deserved tribute during a press conference on 16
February 1996, described the army of Burundi as "the most
positive institution of all society during this crisis". This
praise for the security forces by the President of the
Republic is shared by the population itself. Regardless of
what its unrepentant detractors may say, the fact is that the
army of Burundi is now the most powerful catalyst for
democratic institutions.

The third phenomenon is the burgeoning alliance
between the population and the army. Jealously attached to
its security, the population has unhesitatingly stood up to
the trouble-makers, tracking them down and beating them
up. As beneficiaries and privileged witnesses of the
patriotic dedication of the army, citizens have joined it in
the combat against terrorists by confronting them and
confiscating their weapons. Thanks to their confidence in
the army and to the shining fact that it is their sure and
mighty shield, the peasants who have felt threatened are
mobilizing against their assailants, in the expectation that
security forces will arrive, or they hasten to where the
forces are. There is thus a sacred alliance developing
between the population and the national army.

In the letter which I sent on behalf of my Government
to the President of the Security Council on 18 January
1996, I highlighted the war of nerves being waged in
Burundi by the chronic mention of the spectre of military
intervention. The Burundi Government's opposition to this
option is in no way a result of its army's powerlessness to
confront it. The army of Burundi is completely prepared
to confront any expeditionary corps, regardless of its
humanitarian or military label. It is also able to increase
its defence and counter-attack capacity with both human
and material resources. However, there are countervailing
reasons impelling the Government to militate against not
only foreign troops but also against any reference to such
a possibility.
The main countervailing reason is that, at a moment
when the campaign of mobilization for peace is in full
swing under the direction of our Government and all the
political bodies in the country, nothing could be more
harmful than a polarization over military options.
Although there can be no excuse for such solutions, even
at the high point of a crisis, they would be even more
damaging right now, when all the signs are that the
forced march towards peace is actually happening. Given
this extremely positive development, anyone would say
that it would be to the honour of the Security Council and
the Secretary-General not only to stay with this process
but to use diplomatic, political and financial means to
ensure that it succeeds overwhelmingly.

The Security Council as a whole supports the
Convention on Governance and the Government which
resulted from it. The various earlier pronouncements by
the Security Council and its recent resolution 1040 (1996)
of 29 January 1996 strikingly illustrate the Council's
constant concern to support the institutions of Burundi
which are based on the Convention on Governance. On
many occasions, the Secretary-General has emphasized
the obvious need to give the coalition Government all the
support it requires and to safeguard the Convention on
Governance at all costs. The positions of the Security
Council and the Secretary-General are in perfect harmony
with the socio-political imperatives now obtaining in
Burundi. The odds are that military solutions would
expose the Government to very great risk and that the
Convention on Governance would be seriously
jeopardized if not fatally undermined.

Amongst the damaging consequences that any
military option might have, we have to say that the
Government and the country would be put up for grabs
by it. Firstly, the armed bands - which have been put to
rout and are facing extinction - would do their
damnedest to raise the stakes, under the delusion that the
deteriorating situation would force the stand-by military
contingents to come in. Secondly, some pretenders to
power - who are to be found both within the presidential
majority and in the opposition - would leap at this

 

godsend and use it as a stick with which to beat a
Government standing accused of being in cahoots with the
pro-military-intervention lobby.

Having been constantly traumatized by chronic threats
of military adventures for nearly two and a half years, the
population and politicians would find even more difficult
the establishment of a foreign stand-by army designed to
intervene in Burundi.
The Charter would be flagrantly violated, as
paragraph 7 of Article 2 prohibits the United Nations from
interfering with the national sovereignty of its Member
States. In the case in point, this much lauded multinational
military force, which has been given a humanitarian cloak
to wear, would be tantamount to an affront to the State of
Burundi. In the event that the so highly dramatized
catastrophe occurs, it would be up to the Government of
Burundi and its army to decide when and if to ask for
humanitarian assistance.

Some of the main actors in the United Nations are
trying to justify their stated choice of an expeditionary
corps in Burundi by adducing their need to look like
Caesar's wife in front of the international community.
Using the same handy logic ourselves, I hardly need to
prove that our Government and our army too would be
absolutely bound to batten down the hatches against the
fury and the wrath they would call down on themselves
from people and politicians alike in the event of a military
adventure, even a far-off or hypothetical one. And for all
that, if we do commit national suicide, it would be the
people of Burundi themselves who would be blamed for it,
because it is in the first place and in the last resort up to
them to take responsibility for their fate.

Any military option would lead to the mediation
missions - those of the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative, the OAU, the European Union and the
prestigious N yerere-Carter group - being blocked or even
blamed. The very special importance that my Government
attaches to the roles of those former Heads of State has
been publicly highlighted by my ardent plea for an explicit
mention of the Carter Center in the draft resolution. I am
much obliged to the Security Council for heeding my
repeated appeals on this subject.

If we turn to the matter of the bipolar antagonism
between a United Nations contingent and the army of
Burundi, we must all be aware that any political decision of
historic scope and international dimensions demands that
we examine the most serious possible consequences
beforehand. In touting the idea of a multinational military
force, we are losing sight of the fact that it would give
rise to a state of constant alert between the force and
Burundi. A miniature cold war would result, like the one
between the former ideological blocs. Feeding on the
psychosis of fear they induced in each other, East and
West were constantly suspicious of and spied on each
other and constantly getting themselves ready to wipe
each other out. Given that forewarned is forearmed, any
open or covert machinations on the official level or
concocted in United Nations offices or hatched in foreign
capitals would force Burundi and its army to develop
parallel plans to review and even bolster its own arsenal
and troop numbers and, naturally, to conclude useful
alliances in order to deal with any eventuality. Under such
conditions, bipolar antagonism would become a
permanent feature and would sometimes flare in time to
the revelations of the two-way traffic in spying between
the United Nations contingent based abroad and the army
of Burundi operating on its own national territory.

Turning now to the national coalition against military
boosterism: the Secretary-General's report suggests that
the army of Burundi is split into two camps: one, under
the influence of Tutsi extremists, which is sworn to total
hostility against United Nations troops; and another made
up of moderates who are getting ready to welcome them
in. In fact, to attribute to any part of the army the
intention not only of consenting to but even tolerating a
foreign military presence on Burundi's soil would be like
saying the ground is up and the sky is down. From the
Minister of Defence to the Chiefs of Staff of the army
and gendarmerie and right on down to the rawest recruits,
the thought of an expeditionary force outside Burundi
quite literally makes the hackles of the entire military
rise.

The military response is almost unanimously echoed
by civil society. The massive demonstrations organized
last week in Bujumbura to pay a resounding tribute and
express immeasurable gratitude to all the honourable
members of the Security Council for their realism, which
dictated the measures contained in this draft resolution are
in accordance with national realities, the solemn
declarations of vigorous protest against the Secretary-
General's proposal by various political groups and
civil-society organizations - notably the League of
Human Rights and the Economic League - and the
stream of messages from many Burundian citizens within
the country and abroad constitutes resounding proof that
nearly all Burundian people reject in no uncertain terms
any military solution to the national problem.

 

In conclusion, the report (S/l996/ 116) of the
Secretary-General of 15 February last focuses almost
exclusively on the military option and repeats - I
emphasize, repeats - other alternatives already contained
in presidential statements or earlier resolutions adopted by
the Security Council. At a time when mankind is moving
inexorably towards the end of this century, towards the
threshold of the next millennium, is it not imperative that
the international community's proclivity and ability to
resolve all conflicts by peaceful means prevail over the
tendency to resolve conflicts with weapons? Would it not
be better to envisage the creation of a new world for our
future generations, of a better human race, given to
bringing peace through peace rather than achieving peace
by the sword?

