Mr. M'Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): Mr. President,
I thank you for having convened this open debate on the
working methods of the Security Council. I congratulate
you on the thorough concept paper (S/2013/6l3, annex)
that is guiding our discussions. This is the sixth open
debate on the matter, and it gives us a real opportunity
to evaluate the road covered in implementing the
note by the President in document S/2010/507, which
reviewed and completed note S/2006/507.
I welcome the substantial progress made since
2006 on a number of topics to respond to the concern
over ensuring the transparency and effectiveness of the
work of the Council and its interaction and dialogue
with non-member States.In this context, I welcome
the remarkable ongoing work of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, under the excellent chairmanship of
Argentina since the beginning of this year.

The points covered in note 507, and those adopted
since then, are numerous and are all equally important.
But in the framework of this debate I will focus on just
four points, since during the debate on the same subject
on 26 November 2012 (see S/PV.6870), we presented
our position at length on many of them.

The first point is the open debates. Open debates
take place in a formal setting that allows States not
members ofthe Council to express their views on issues
of major importance, for the settlement of which the
United Nations has delegated the power of decision to
the Council. Even if we acknowledge, after two years
in the Council, that only a quarter of non-members take
an active part in these debates, we nonetheless consider
that their usefulness is such that the Council should use
them more in order to promote more interaction with all
Members of the Organization.

These open debates have often ended with the
adoption of resolutions or presidential statements that
have been cleverly negotiated beforehand, solely by
members of the Council. However, note 507 suggested
that interested non-members, particularly countries
directly or indirectly affected by the issue, should be
consulted in order to get their views and contributions.
Therefore it is important - as numerous non-member
States expressed during previous debates - for the
documents that result from these meetings to be adopted
later in order to allow the views expressed by States and
interested bodies to be incorporated.

My second point concerns open briefings and
consultations. Open briefings provide an opportunity
for countries and other bodies affected by the topic to
share their views and intentions with Council members.
Closed consultations, on the other hand, take place
just among members of the Council, and do not offer
this opportunity. Therefore, those countries and other
bodies have perforce to wait around in the immediate
environs to collect, by any means they can, information
on the Council's deliberations.

To remedy that state of affairs, we would like
the members of the Council to agree systematically
on the information content to be delivered by the
President to the media in order to provide the same
level of information to all the interested States on the
result of such consultations. That would enable their
Governments to determine their position on those
matters. Moreover, needless to say, the consultations
are private in name only, since non-members know
shortly after the meetings the content of deliberations,
with precise details, and sometimes the views expressed
by each member.

Third is the interaction with other organs of the
United Nations and with regional and subregional
organizations. This issue is of major importance. My
country welcomes the various initiatives that have
been taken to date in this framework by the Council.
With regard to the General Assembly in particular,
the presentation of the annual report of the Security
Council does meet the concern about transparency, in
that it allows the sharing with all Members ofthe United
Nations the work carried out on their behalf during
the year. Therefore, it is important that all countries
actively participate, not only in drafting the report but
also during its presentation by giving statements and
suggestions. Greater cooperation with the Economic
and Social Council should also be encouraged.

During past debates, some delegations also stressed
the need for greater interaction between different
stakeholders in peacekeeping operations. In that
regard, we would like to commend the establishment
of an annual meeting with the commanders of different
missions around the world. We would like this sort of
meeting to be also organized with the Peacebuilding
Commission and with country teams in order to
evaluate their work on the ground .

In addition, regular meetings with troop- and
police-contributing countries are opportunities to
exchange views on existing problems and to report on
new measures, in the context of the harmonious and
coordinated implementation of mandates in order to
achieve the desired results. We welcome those excellent
initiatives and would like the time spent in these
meetings to really enable us to go through the item
on the agenda. Moreover, we would like cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations to be
strengthened and supported, because they enable us to
attain positive results in the maintenance of peace and
security.

The fourth point concerns Arria Formula meetings
and informal interactive dialogues. The usefulness
of such meetings is clear. In those meetings Member
States, international organizations, non-governmental
organizations and civil society can exchange opinions
on specific issues that are on the agenda of the General
Assembly and of the Security Council and that have a
real impact on the maintenance of international peace
and security. Their consideration enables us to better
understand them and to propose appropriate solutions.

Since those meetings promote a dialogue with
experts and specialists, we believe that they should be
encouraged. We commend the efforts of the Secretariat
to encourage their convening. In order to reduce costs
of participation of people are invited to participate, we
could perhaps use videoconferencing.

As mentioned earlier, the points of understanding
in the Informal Working Group, which were the subject
of the presidential notes, are as important as they
are varied. The note of 28 August 2013 (S/2013/515)
expresses the points ofview. We welcome the agreements
reached within the Council, but we think that the
hardest thing to do remains their implementation. Too
many decisions have already been taken without being
effectively implemented.

We express the strong hope, since we are discussing
this as an outgoing member, that the permanent
members will show themselves much more willing to
undertake a real reform of the working methods. They
have long experience of Council's working, and they
know better than anyone the limits of current working
methods. This internal reform will enable the Council
to successfully carry out the mission that the Charter
of the United Nations has conferred upon it, namely,
the maintenance of international peace and security. A
successful reform of the working methods could augur
a promising future for the discussions, which have
been going on for nearly two decades in the General
Assembly, on the question of the reform of the Security
Council.

