Mr. Villanueva Callot (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, we welcome your
initiative of convening this important meeting to hear
the views of the members of the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean countries on the conflict
afflicting Haiti. As well, we welcome the presence of
the Foreign Ministers of Jamaica and the Bahamas.

As the representative of the Government of the
Dominican Republic, I would like to state that the
acute and lamentable socio-political crisis afflicting the
territory of the brotherly Republic of Haiti is of
profound concern to the Dominican Republic since we
share the same island and that, as a result, the events
and the grave insecurity in Haiti will have great
repercussions for my country in the economic,
migratory and humanitarian areas.

The President of the Dominican Republic,
Mr. Hipolito Mejia Dominguez, spoke before the forum
of nations during the General Assembly's Millennium
Summit about the worrisome situation in Haiti and
asked the international community, in particular the
developed nations, to extend their assistance and
cooperation in order to find solutions to the economic,
social and humanitarian problems affecting our
brotherly nation. Our President and our Minister for
Foreign Affairs have reiterated this message in all
international forums. Had those appeals been heeded,
we could have avoided the chaotic situation in which
Haiti finds itself today. In that connection, we welcome
the Secretary-General's announcement that he will
appoint a Special Adviser on Haiti.

We express our fervent desire that Haiti will
overcome its political and humanitarian crisis within
the framework of international law and the norms of
peaceful coexistence. We support the Organization of
American States resolution urging Haiti to resolve its
internal crisis within the framework of its constitution,
and we support all the humanitarian initiatives
proposed by the Caribbean Community.

My Government reiterates its offer of its good
offices in the search for mechanisms that can help
resolve this foretold crisis and reiterates its call on the
international community, in particular the developed
countries, to extend immediate assistance to the
Republic of Haiti in order to prevent further disaster
and sorrow in the near future.

Finally, I inform the Council that the Government
of the Dominican Republic has decided to suspend the
repatriation of undocumented Haitians found in
Dominican territory.

