Mr. Bolton (United States of America): I would
like to thank Special Representative Pronk for his
briefing here today and to thank the Secretary-General
for his report dated 12 September 2006 (S/2006/728).
That report shows that the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan (UNMIS) and the wider United Nations
system have played a key role in support of the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA).

The parties' efforts to implement the CPA's
security provisions have reduced the likelihood of
future conflict in southern Sudan. While there is still
much to be done, the parties have shown they can
continue to resolve long-standing problems through
cooperation. That has been done in an atmosphere of
security buttressed by United Nations peacekeepers.

In the coming days, it will be crucial for a similar
de-escalation of conflict to occur in the Darfur area of
Sudan as well. We deplore the ongoing violence in
Darfur and the consequent deterioration of the
humanitarian situation. At this critical juncture, it is
imperative that the Security Council reiterate the need
for the transition of the African Union Mission in
Sudan (AMIS) to a United Nations operation consistent
with resolution 1706 (2006) and with the precedent of
resolution 1590 (2005).

Just as the Government of National Unity has
shown itself able to overcome decades of violence in
southern Sudan through respect for the CPA and
cooperation with the United Nations peacekeeping
mission, so should it be prepared to ensure a better
future for its citizens in Darfur through respect for the
Darfur Peace Agreement, through a strengthening of
the AMIS operation and through cooperation in the
deployment of UNMIS forces in Darfur.

This afternoon, we will circulate a draft
resolution on the Sudan on which we plan to convene
an experts meeting tomorrow, Tuesday, 19 September.
The draft resolution will be to renew the mandate of
UNMIS, set to expire 24 September, for a period of six
months, so that we can ensure continuity of United
Nations operations in the south. The draft resolution
will also take into consideration the expansion of
UNMIS through resolution 1706 (2006). It is critical
that we expand these missions concurrently to ensure
that urgent assistance to AMIS, as stipulated in
resolution 1706 (2006), is notjeopardized.

In addition, I would like to call the attention of
Council members to an invitation that was extended
today by Denmark and the United States, at the request
of our two foreign ministers, to invite the foreign
ministers of Council members to a meeting of
interested parties on the situation in the Sudan this
Friday, 22 September, at 4 pm. The Government of
Denmark and the Government of the United States
have invited ministers of all the members of the
Council as well as the foreign ministers of Canada,
South Africa, Nigeria, Senegal, Rwanda, the
Netherlands, Chad, Norway, Egypt and Algeria. We
very much hope that ministers will be able to attend.

