Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation welcomes the
Security Council's adoption of resolution 1817 (2008)
08-37563

on controlling the illicit trade in chemical precursors
used for drug production in Afghanistan. We consider
that this complements the Security Council's
systematic efforts to stabilize the situation in
Afghanistan and to bolster international support for its
Government in the fight against the threat posed by
terrorism and drugs. The Council's decision is
especially significant in the light of the international
conference in support of Afghanistan, to be held
tomorrow in Paris. We hope that the present resolution
will help give further impetus to enhanced international
action on a comprehensive solution to the Afghan drug
problem, including success in carrying out the tasks
agreed upon at the Ministerial Conference organized in
Moscow in 2006.

The expanded production of Afghan heroin,
which is gaining a monopoly on the world drug market,
is giving rise to growing demand for supplies of
chemical precursors. Without a smoothly functioning
international system for controlling the movement of
precursors, it will be impossible to halt the trend
towards growing drug production and the consequent
financing of terrorist groups in Afghanistan.

The Security Council has sent a clear signal in
support of smoother and more efficient international
efforts in this field. We believe it is fundamentally
important to pursue efforts to strengthen control of
transnational movements of funds derived from illicit
trafficking in drugs and precursors, as well as of
money laundering and other criminal activities. The
purpose is to break the technological and financial
links in the chain of the contemporary drugs industry in
Afghanistan and to create a single system comprising
anti-drugs and financial security belts. In that regard,
we support the appeal for comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1735 (2006), including
with respect to individuals who use resources derived
from the illicit trafficking of drugs and precursors to
support terrorist groups.

We also support the resolution's important
provision related to enhancing the role of regional
organizations in international efforts to counter the
flow of Afghan narcotics and to control precursors.
Successful counter-narcotics operations undertaken
with the participation of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, a wide array of its international partners
and the Afghan authorities show the importance of
tapping the potential of regional organizations. It is our
view that pooling the efforts of the Collective Security
3
Treaty Organization and the NATO-led International
Security Assistance Force could have a significant
positive effect.

