Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, on behalf of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, allow me to express my gratitude
to His Excellency Mr. Stefan Lofven, Prime Minister
of Sweden, for convening this open debate on the
important and timely issue of children and armed
conflict, and to express our satisfaction at the fact
that he has come to New York to preside over it. We
commend the exemplary work of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and commend Sweden's
sponsorship of resolution 2427 (2018), which we just
adopted and was also co-sponsored by Equatorial
Guinea. All of that demonstrates Sweden's strong
commitment to the protection of children. We also
thank Special Representative Virginia Gamba, as well
as our guest Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director
of UNICEF. Moreover, we thank Ms. Yenny Londofio,
civil society representative, for her emotional briefing.

Equatorial Guinea is deeply concerned by the
increase in the number and seriousness of violations
committed against children, as documented in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/465). According to
the report, there were at least 6,000 verified violations
committed by Government forces and more than
15,000 by non-State armed groups, including high
numbers of killing and maiming, recruitment, use of
sexual violence and abductions. Even more alarming
is the fact that, despite the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2017/2l) adopted after the open debate on the
same topic on 31 October 2017 (S/PV.8082), in which 63
statements were made, there was a 31 per cent increase
in the number of violations against children that year,
as compared to 2016. That is totally unacceptable and
must be reduced immediately.

That is why the Republic of Equatorial Guinea,
in line with the relevant instruments of the African
Union and drawing on lessons from specific cases
that occurred during conflicts in some countries in
our region, underlines the need to further develop a
criminal legal framework to protect children from
armed conflict in Africa and throughout the world.
In that regard, we stress the need for the international
community to ensure that violations of children's rights
do not go unpunished and for all Member States to
commit themselves to do their utmost to ensure that
those responsible for such violations against children
are brought to justice and pay for their crimes.

On the sad issue of violations against children,
our obligation not only lies in our mission to maintain
international peace but is a basic moral obligation
as human beings. The care and reintegration of
children must be a central part of any reconciliation
and peace process, with the support of the Security
Council. Solving problems relevant to children must
be an integral part of any agreement, understanding or
dialogue between the parties involved in a conflict.

We must not ignore international law and its impact
on children. All actors involved in the protection of
children's rights must redouble their efforts to continue
to protect children affected by conflict, in particular
against recruitment, abuse and violence. We believe that
it is important for Member States to join their efforts
and actions, including by implementing international
standards and norms on the protection of children, in
order to ensure special protection for children.

In that regard, Equatorial Guinea has established
national policies within the framework of its national
committee to support children in my country. Since
children and young people represent the future of a
country, they must be considered as peacemakers. That
is why it is important to involve them in peace processes
and socialize them as peacemakers from the beginning.

Meaningful participation in community life seems
to be an effective way for children and young people to
develop their potential, especially in times of conflict.
With adequate support and access to necessary
resources, they can become change agents and lay
the foundation for rebuilding lives and communities,
thereby contributing to the creation of a peaceful
society. Therefore, empowering family members is a
crucial component of the strategy to empower children
through educational programmes, since they depend on
their family members.

In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
will continue to support efforts to protect children in
armed conflict and calls upon all Member States to
support the implementation of action plans and other
commitments to strengthen the protection of children
in armed conflict. The important resolution that we
adopted this morning, sponsored by Sweden, constitutes
a most valuable instrument through whose effective
implementation, and together with other instruments
and plans of action that have been adopted and entered
into force, can make children safer and more protected
in the future.

