Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to begin by quoting a leader whom we
frequently honour, Nelson Mandela, who said that the
Geneva Conventions continue to remind us strongly
of the obligation that we all have to take care of one
another.

The adoption ofresolution 2139 (2014) last February
was a very important event. At that time, the Security
Council unanimously sent a clear message to all of the
parties without exception recalling their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, and requiring that they ensure rapid,
safe and unhindered humanitarian access to those in
need.

At that time, we all trusted that, unlike what
happened with respect to the presidential statement
adopted on 2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15), the voice
of a united Council would be heeded and lead to a
change in the trend of the accelerated deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in Syria.

Unfortunately, despite the adoption of several
measures, almost five months later that trend has,
in many aspects, not changed, but, rather, worsened.
The four consecutive reports of the Secretary-General
confirmed unambiguously that the parties to the
conflict continue to overlook and systematically violate
international law, and that the delivery of assistance to
areas controlled by the Government as well as by the
opposition has diminished instead of expanding.

That is why Argentina voted in favour of the
resolution, upholding the pledge made in resolution
2139 (2014) to take additional measures in case of
non-compliance. We did so convinced that with its
adoption, the Council is once again shouldering its
responsibilities and strengthening its determination
to protect civilians and ensure the provision of
humanitarian assistance, while reaffirming its
commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria.

At the same time, we would like to acknowledge the
fact that our concerns and proposals have been taken
into account and incorporated into the adopted text.
Today the Council has determined that the humanitarian
agencies of the United Nations can deliver assistance to
the millions of people who find themselves in certain
zones and regions that thus far have been inaccessible
or difficult to access. It is important to underscore that
many of those areas are controlled by armed opposition
groups, which have the duty to ensure that humanitarian
workers are able to carry out their work in a safe and
unhindered manner. We take this opportunity to pay
tribute to those who daily risk their lives to deliver
assistance to those who require it the most.

We fully agree with the statement that the full
implementation of the Council's requirements could
change the lives of millions of people within Syria
and contribute to alleviating the heavy burden that
neighbouring countries have, with deep solidarity, been
bearing.

But we must be clear. We cannot fall into the trap
of thinking that simply with the appropriate measures
and robust humanitarian action to assist refugees and
displaced persons, it will be possible not only to save
lives but also to contain the crisis within the confines
of Syrian territory and the immediate region. That is
because even in the unlikely event that all necessary
funding is provided, and if we could ensure unrestricted
access for assistance, it is clear that the consequences
of the conflict are measured not only in the number of
deaths, the destruction of the country and the millions
of people who require food, medicine and shelter. Its
impact is also reflected in the destabilizing effects of
the unbridled growth of sectarian tensions that we see
throughout the Middle East. This is reflected in the
expansion of extremist ideologies and terrorist acts
throughout the region and beyond, through the actions
of young people from different corners of the planet
who join the struggle in Syria only to then return,
inspired by violence and intolerance, to their places
of origin. It is clear, therefore, that all this cannot be
contained if the crisis is not resolved.

That is Why the resolution we are adopting today
clearly reaffirms that the humanitarian situation will
continue to deteriorate in the absence of a solution that
emerges from an inclusive political dialogue led by the
Syrians themselves.

We thus reiterate our call on all parties to resume
in good faith the negotiations begun in January and on
regional and international players to help to generate
the appropriate conditions for this to take place. As we
step up our efforts to deliver humanitarian assistance to
Syria, we must come up with ways to put an end to the
flow of arms and to the actions of foreign combatants,
which fuel the conflict, and ways to enable the Council to
be instrumental in contributing to a political solution to
the crisis, thus strongly backing the Secretary-General
and his new Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, whom we fully support.

A humanitarian resolution is a decision that is
neither based on nor legitimizes the struggle for power
or for competing geopolitical interests. A humanitarian

resolution finds its legal ground and ethical aim in
relieving and preventing human suffering and in
ensuring that those people and communities living in
conditions of extreme vulnerability can have access to
humanitarian assistance, not to live better but simply in
order not to die of hunger, thirst or disease.

That is why Argentina reaffirms its position and
conviction that military means will not resolve this
deep-rooted crisis. We sincerely hope that the step we
are taking today with this humanitarian resolution will
help to achieve that objective, which will help to pave
to way for a political solution and relieve the suffering
of millions of people.

