Mr. Annabi (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for giving me the honour and for kindly inviting me to
participate in this important debate on United Nations
peacekeeping. The informal document that you have
distributed is an excellent basis for discussion and
reflection, and will certainly prompt a fruitful debate.

Certain aspects of the document address the
internal operations of peacekeeping, which is, of
course, appropriate and necessary to any discussion
held at the Headquarters of our Organization. However,
given the fact that I am now a man of the field, I
should like to leave my colleagues at Headquarters to
address those aspects. Given the responsibilities they
bear, they are in a better position than I am to speak to
them, and they have in fact already done so.

For my part, I wish to attempt to set out the main
challenges that peacekeeping faces, addressing in
particular the three following questions.

(spoke in English)

First, when is United Nations peacekeeping the
right instrument? Secondly, what tasks can United
Nations peacekeeping accomplish? Thirdly, how can
we help United Nations peacekeeping become more
effective? I will try to highlight some areas where we
need to change, together with certain principles that
have been repeatedly validated over time. I hope that I
may speak openly, since I am among friends who share
a common vision of peacekeeping as a key dimension
of United Nations activities and as a means to advance
the goals of the Charter.

When should United Nations peacekeeping be
used? As reflected in the non-paper, the issue of when
to deploy a United Nations peacekeeping operation is
one of the most difficult questions that the Council
faces. Deployed appropriately, a peacekeeping
operation can achieve remarkable results in a relatively
short period. The people of Guatemala, El Salvador,
Namibia, Mozambique, Sierra Leone, Liberia,
Cambodia and East Timor - to name a few - can
testify to our ability to make a difference. Each
successful experience has, in turn, strengthened the
standing of the United Nations and its ability to
address future conflicts. But when United Nations
operations are deployed in the wrong circumstances,
the results can be disastrous for the population within
the conflict area, for the peacekeepers themselves and,
even more importantly, for the viability of the
instrument of peacekeeping.

How can we distinguish between those two kinds
of situations and know when peacekeeping is the right
solution? I believe, I am afraid, that the commonly
cited formula remains valid. Peacekeeping operations
can be deployed where there is a peace to keep or, at
the minimum, a viable political process that a
peacekeeping presence can help nurture and lead to a
meaningful conclusion.

Over the past decade, peacekeepers have helped
to tip the balance and have overcome some opposition
on the margins of a peace process. A display of
strength has sometimes made its use unnecessary. We
have responded vigorously to certain spoilers and
shown in several theatres - including Haiti - that
robust action by United Nations peacekeepers can at
times deter those who seek to foster instability.
Multinational and regional forces have also played an
important complementary role in that area.

These are valuable lessons, but they should not
blur a core understanding that United Nations
peacekeeping remains primarily a political, rather than
a military instrument. Its effectiveness demands that a
critical mass of those in the conflict area believe that
their interests can be most effectively pursued through
peaceful means rather than by violence. If this
precondition does not exist, Blue Helmets should not
be present. Every time we have overlooked this basic
premise, we have come to regret it.

While refraining from inappropriate deployments,
we must also avoid the opposite peril, which is an
undue hesitation to act when circumstances permit.
Even at a time of limited resources, the United Nations
must remain ready to assume its responsibilities under
the Charter. The world does not and will not forgive
the United Nations if it is seen to stand by when it can
make a difference.

Peacekeeping partners can sometimes contribute,
and it is sensible to share the burden when others have
a comparative advantage, but at other times there may
be no realistic alternative to a United Nations
operation. It is essential for the standing of the United
Nations that any decision on whether or not to deploy
or to downsize an existing operation be based primarily
on substantive concerns and not on financial
considerations.

Even from a financial perspective, a United
Nations operation can prove to be good value. Conflict,
as we know, is extremely costly, and a swiftly deployed
and appropriately mandated and equipped
peacekeeping operation can provide enormous savings
in the long term, even if it entails a significant short-
term expense.

In weighing decisions on deployment, both the
Secretariat and Member States have a key role to play.
The Secretariat must exercise due diligence, assessing
and reassessing the situation on the ground and
conveying its understanding faithfully to the Member
States. Moreover, as Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi - who
remains an inspiration for us all - wrote in his report
of August 2000 (S/2000/809), today's international
civil service must have the courage of its convictions
and must tell the Security Council what it needs to
know, and not merely what it wants to hear.

Member States can make a vital contribution by
providing information that may assist in decision-
making. They should also seek to listen with an open
mind to the Secretariat's recommendations, giving
them serious consideration, and should resist undue
pressure to act in a way that is politically expedient but
that may be fundamentally unsound.

Secondly, I would like to discuss which tasks
peacekeeping should undertake. Broadly, a United
Nations peacekeeping operation should assume those
tasks that are indispensable to cross a threshold
towards lasting peace and that they are best equipped
to discharge. What this means in practice has evolved
rapidly over the past decade, alongside our
understanding of the requirements for stability and of
the capacity of peacekeeping operations. Many
activities that we once would have regarded as beyond
our responsibility or reach have now become standard
fixtures in the peacekeeping repertoire. Operations
have become more active politically; they have taken
on more ambitious roles in security; and above all they
have engaged in institution-building, particularly in the
area of the rule of law, which is now a core part of our
mandate in many conflict areas.

This expanded activity has helped us to meet
multifaceted challenges on the ground and has
represented, I believe, a wise investment. But further
reflection is required to address other shortcomings. In
the area of institution-building, it is important to
strengthen institutions of governance beyond those
concerned with the rule of law. In many conflict
countries, the dearth of technical administrative
capacity affects the society's ability to address its
problems effectively or to manage its resources in a
way that permits lasting stability. Bilateral and
multilateral technical assistance programmes will
generally remain the most appropriate means to remedy
such weaknesses, but it may be necessary to
complement these traditional approaches with other
mechanisms to help local administrations to deliver
urgently-needed services to the population in the short
term while jump-starting a coherent programme of
institutional reform in the long term.

One experiment that may offer useful ideas for
the future was the framework for international
assistance that was elaborated in Liberia, known as the
Governance and Economic Management Assistance
Programme (GEMAP). Other interesting experiences,
including our efforts in East Timor and Kosovo, where
a small corps of well-placed technical advisers
remained in place after the initial transfer of
administrative authority to strengthen the capacity and
performance of local governing bodies.

A second area where further efforts are absolutely
indispensable is socio-economic development. In many
post-conflict areas, including Haiti, political tensions
and insecurity are compounded and fed by socio-
economic privation and inequality. My current
functions have reinforced my conviction that, in such
areas, support for early recover, reconstruction and
development constitutes an integral component of the
search for peace, and that stability will be consolidated
only when the local population can see a tangible
improvement in their daily lives.

Socio-economic development cannot realistically
be achieved during the lifespan of a peacekeeping
operation. But we must find ways to accelerate aid
processes from the outset of a peace effort so as to
generate what we call a peace dividend: the kind of
visible results that foster public confidence and hope
and reinforce the legitimacy of local authorities while
laying the groundwork for future progress. Important
related innovations within peacekeeping operations
include the use of quick impact projects and the
community violence-reduction programme in the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). Other positive results have been
achieved through closer cooperation between
peacekeepers, United Nations agencies and
international financial institutions. Examples include
MINUSTAH's collaboration with the United Nations
country team to conduct a nationwide vaccination
campaign in Haiti and a joint project now under way
with the World Bank, following a similar successful
experiment in Liberia.

More coherent action by all elements of the
United Nations system in support of peace and security
priorities can be fostered by Member States through
their representatives in the governing boards of all
those bodies. It may also be timely to engage other
actors in a wider debate on how to make a difference
within post-conflict environments, combining
international aid, effective national decision-making
and private-sector activity. The need to address the
social and economic dimension of stability is shared by
others who can assist, including the World Bank and
various members of the private sector and the
non-governmental organization community.

Even in a difficult global financial environment,
an effort to step up aid programmes should be pursued
as a matter of urgency. This can save a lot money in the
long term, by preventing relapses into conflict. It can
also buttress the global cooperation envisaged in the
United Nations Charter, by highlighting the
commitment of industrialized countries to complement
and support the work of the Blue Helmets, who include
a very high representation of troops from developing
countries.

Finally, I would like to offer a few brief thoughts
on the functioning of peacekeeping, speaking from a
field perspective. From my current vantage point, the
key measurement of the effectiveness of the
peacekeeping machinery is its ability to support
missions in obtaining what they need to do the job -
in other words, a political framework for their
activities, a tight institutional support structure and
provision of the necessary human and material
resources.

In Haiti, we have received strong overall political
support in the form of coherent, practical and well-
crafted mandates that identify the core areas where
progress is critical and give us the scope required to
act. I have also profoundly appreciated the strong
support we have received at every level from Member
States and the Secretariat, particularly at difficult
moments of crisis in 2008. The assistance of colleagues
and friends in Port-au-Prince, New York and national
capitals was indispensable in responding to unrest over
rising prices in the spring and to the destruction
wrought by hurricanes in the autumn.

The institutional support structure has also
provided valuable assistance. As noted in the
non-paper, Member States have delegated significant
authority to the Secretariat, which has in turn given the
mission considerable latitude to make necessary
operational and tactical decisions on the ground. At the
same time, a number of existing structures provide a
good framework for a regular and vigorous exchange
between the Security Council, troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat, although the potential of
those structures tended in the past to be significantly
underutilized.

These arrangements are thus an appropriate
subject for review by Member States. However, from
the perspective of MINUSTAH, the current
organization of decision-making and dialogue has
worked well and constitutes a key element of our
effectiveness. It has ensured our credibility as impartial
servants of the Charter, acting on behalf of 192
Member States. It has also enabled us to respond
appropriately to rapidly changing circumstances on the
ground. Meanwhile, drawing on new technology,
Headquarters has worked to enhance information flow
in peacekeeping, enabling mission staff to form
"communities of practice" with colleagues around the
world and helping troop-contributing countries to
harmonize and update national peacekeeping training
programmes.
At the same time, since peacekeeping situations
are by definition ad hoc, experience on the ground will
often inevitably be ahead of policy instruments. It is

therefore essential to retain a flexible approach,
recognizing that guidelines and doctrine should
ultimately support practical solutions and not become
an end in themselves.

Finally, in terms of material support, we have
seen progress in enhancing the availability of key
equipment and personnel. In MINUSTAH we are
grateful for the provision of experts in such relatively
new areas as corrections and border management, and
we appreciate the efforts to enable us to undertake riot-
control efforts with restraint and professionalism.

Peacekeeping will continue to face new and
unexpected situations. It is therefore important that
Member States be ready to provide new skills and new
capabilities as they become necessary and to facilitate
a swift response to urgent needs in pursuit of mandated
activities.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, I wish to thank you again,
Mr. President, for having allowed me to participate in
this debate. I am convinced that it is possible to
continue to enrich and adapt United Nations
peacekeeping operations to enable them to fully
respond to the needs and problems of tomorrow.
However, we must see that that adaptation is done in
the spirit that, I am sure, is inspiring our debate today,
that is to say, first, by being open to change but without
renouncing certain fundamental principles that have
demonstrated their usefulness; secondly, by committing
ourselves to the practice of effective multilateralism,
which, in keeping with the letter and spirit of the
Charter, involves the balanced participation of all in
working for peace; and finally, by committing
ourselves to strengthening and protecting this valuable
instrument of peacekeeping.

