The President (spoke in Russian): I should like,
at the outset of the meeting, to extend a warm welcome
on behalf of the Council to the new Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations, His
Excellency Mr. Tsuneo Nishida. We look forward to
cooperating closely with him.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Somalia

Report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1918 (2010)
(S/2010/394)

The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives Denmark, India, Kenya, Norway,
the Philippines, the Republic of Korea, Seychelles,
Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Ukraine
and the United Republic of Tanzania, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Duale
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Patricia O'Brien,
Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and United
Nations Legal Counsel.

It is so decided.
I invite Ms. O'Brien to take a seat at the Council
table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from Mr. Peter Schwaiger, in which he
requests to be invited, in his capacity as charge
d'affaires of the delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations, to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Schwaiger.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the Permanent Representative of
Uganda to the United Nations, dated 24 August 2010,
in which he requests that the Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations, His
Excellency Mr. Tete Antonio, be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda in accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 to Mr. Antonio.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2010/394, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution
1918 (2010).

I welcome the presence of the distinguished
Secretary-General of the United Nations, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and invite him to take
the floor.


