Mr. Mendez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful
for the convening of this meeting on post-conflict
peacebuilding and for the presentations of Ambassador
Antonio de Aguiar Patriota and Ambassador Olof
Skoog.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela wishes
to acknowledge the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission in promoting and maintaining political
attention, mobilizing resources and fostering coherence
among the various agencies of the United Nations in
order to improve the stability and development of the
countries on its agenda. We note with appreciation
the report of the Commission on its eighth session
(S/2015/174). We would also like to recognize the work
of the Peacebuilding Fund in allocating $99.4 million to
16 countries in 2014. We note that since the Fund was
established, it has distributed more than $500 million
to more than 20 countries, thereby contributing to their
security and development.

Peacebuilding requires long-term international
political, financial and technical support. Lack of
funding and political support in areas critical to
peacebuilding, with particular emphasis on the
underlying causes of crises, poses a significant
challenge to international efforts to prevent the relapse
of countries emerging from conflicts.

The case of South Sudan reflects the consequences
of a lack of sustained political, financial and technical
support. According to the Secretary-General's report of
September 2014 on peacekeeping in the aftermath of
conflict (S/2014/694), "sustained international support
was lacking".

"Successive United Nations missions and
the country team received limited support for
efforts to support the development of the State's
institutional capacity and improve mechanisms of
governance. Successive attempts at disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration lacked sufficient
funding and political support as well as approaches
better suited to the political context." (ibid., paras 17 and 18)
There is often a discrepancy between needs at the
national level and the actions of international donors.
National involvement in and ownership of peacebuilding
priorities, which must be defined by the host country
on the basis of political consensus, are essential. As
the Secretary-General points out in the same report
in relation to South Sudan, the fragmented security
sector interventions from international, regional and
subregional actors did not work properly because they
were not grounded in a national vision for State reform.

We are aware of the need to guarantee sustained
funding by the international community for
peacebuilding objectives, processes and institutions
throughout the continuum of post-conflict engagement.
We note, for example, in the Secretary-General's 2014
report on peacebuilding, that the United Nations is
expanding its partnerships and collaboration with
international financial institutions, including regional
development banks, to support post-conflict recovery
and promote coherence and long-term financial
assistance. While we welcome the initiative, we can
only express a certain amount of caution on the basis
of our national and regional experience. We mention in
that regard that, historically, funds from international
financial institutions have been accompanied by
conditions disadvantageous to States and that although
such funds can resolve short-term problems or financial
needs, they harm long-term development.

Venezuela emphasizes that all developed countries
must honour their governmental commitments in the area
of official development assistance. We also reiterate the
call for donors and institutions in the developed world
to undertake to provide more such assistance and more
unconditional debt-relief programmes. In particular,
the mechanisms designed to ensure that countries
receiving assistance use the funds in accordance with
national development policies must be enhanced. Such
assistance is essential to peacebuilding processes.

A new South-South development paradigm based
on cooperation, the sovereign equality of States,
complementarity and solidarity has resulted in
significant progress in financing for development and
could be effective in the funding of peacebuilding
processes. We therefore support such cooperation, which
we see as complementing North-South cooperation.

Venezuela agrees that the local capacity to
mobilize peacebuilding resources must be enhanced by
establishing national institutions for revenue generation
and financial management. A sustainable source of
resource mobilization and internal expenditure is
essential for establishing State legitimacy, but, like
South-South cooperation, it cannot replace North-South
assistance. Developing countries, particularly those on
the road to peacebuilding, need the sustained political,
financial and technical support of developed countries.

In that connection, it is absolutely essential that the
interests and priorities of host countries be protected in
the negotiation of contracts with multinational mining
companies. We therefore welcome the initiative of the
Development Bank of Southern Africa to establish a
fund of $22 million to assist African countries in the
negotiation of contracts in the area of natural resources.
That and much more is needed

My country looks forward to the report of the
Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture, and trusts that that
process will result in substantive initiatives to address
the underlying causes of conflicts, including poverty,
inequality, the legacies of colonialism, foreign
interference, economic dependency, illegal exploitation
of natural resources, and power imbalances that affect

the negotiation of contracts for the mining of such
resources.

