Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his participation in today's discussion.

The promotion and protection of human rights,
along with the maintenance of peace and security and
development issues, are fundamental activities of the
United Nations.My statement contains the same quote
from the Charter of the United Nations that has just
been cited by the Permanent Representative of Sweden.
I am glad that our delegations consider it equally
relevant today. However, I am not sure that the rest of
my statement will coincide with the comments we have
just heard.

Over the years, the Organization has developed and
operated a vast toolkit for the protection and promotion
of human rights. The Security Council has never been
and is not now a part of that toolkit, and this must be
borne in mind when the Security Council raises certain
issues relating to human rights. During the entire period
of the existence of the United Nations, the members
of the Security Council have avoided including the
topic of human rights protection in its agenda. That is
not accidental.

Various aspects ofthe issue are indeed present in the
work of the Council. They are periodically addressed
during thematic or country discussions. However, the
Security Council is not intended to fulfill the tasks of
ensuring the observance of human rights and is not
adapted to a substantive analysis of the situation in
this sphere. It is an organ with unique powers to make
decisions, including those providing for the use of force
in situations that pose a threat to peace, a breach of
peace or an act of aggression. Under this mandate, the
Council cannot serve as a forum for discussions about
human rights situations, wherever they may be.

No international human rights instrument provides
for the imposition of any oversight or other functions by
the Security Council in this field. We cannot agree with
the assertion made in the concept note prepared for the
meeting, according to which violations of human rights
should be considered as an issue related to the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for maintaining
international peace and security, in accordance with
the Charter.

The Council has only those powers with which
member States endowed it. Seeking to go beyond those
powers inevitably encroaches on the competence of
States or other bodies of the United Nations system,
each of which has its own tasks and role. The Security
Council held meeting in August 2014 at which it adopted
resolution 2171 (2014), on conflict prevention was
adopted (see S/PV.7247). The permanent representative
of the Russian Federation, Ambassador Churkin,
commented on the discussion as follows:

"Based on some of the proposals we have
heard, one could conclude that many of the bodies
and structures of the United Nations could be
eliminated, with the exception of the Security
Council" (S/PV. 7247, p. 20).

It seems that such a conclusion would be relevant and
applicable to today's meeting.

We share the fears of those who are concerned
about the inclusion of human rights issues in the
Security Council and how that inclusion might be
an attempt, distorted through the lens of preventing
risks to international peace and security, to acquire
an instrument for exerting political and military
pressure on other countries. The expansion of the
human rights component within the Council will lead
to further criticism. That criticism would be quite
justified on the grounds of its going beyond its mandate,
its politicization and the double standards in its work,
which, in sum, undermines trust in the Security Council
itself.

Conflict prevention is an important issue in
the context of maintaining international peace and
security. Indeed, without guaranteeing sustainable
peace and security and successful conflict prevention,
it is impossible to ensure respect for human rights.
It is impossible to work effectively on the promotion
and protection of such rights where blood is shed and
civilians die. The prevention and settlement of armed
conflict are the main prerequisites for correcting human
rights situations, and not vice versa.

We do not share the approach of considering
human rights violations as the main precondition for
armed conflict or human rights protection as a key
instrument for preventing them or as a panacea. Practice
demonstrates otherwise. The goal of conflict prevention
is completely contrary to interfering in the domestic
affairs of countries and undermining their sovereignty,
often under the pretext of protecting human rights.
Such examples abound. In recent years, we have seen
similar tragedies in Iraq, Libya and elsewhere. They
result in serious crises, the destabilization of entire
regions, a rise in terrorist threats and the creation of
large areas of chaos and violence, where it is impossible
to guarantee not only political and economic rights, but
even the basic right to life.

The main responsibility for preventing armed
conflicts and for promoting and protecting human
rights lies with States. The goal of the United Nations
is to foster cooperation that improves the international
legal base and facilitates the establishment and
development of the potential of State institutions, while
respecting their sovereignty and the division of labour
within the Organization itself. Our delegation supports
the opinion that it is important to have goals for conflict
prevention and for guaranteeing human rights. What we
cannot accept, however, is the proposed interpretation
of the link between them and far-reaching conclusions
based on an artificial construct. In our opinion, the best
contribution that the members of the Security Council
could make to protect human rights is that of working
effectively, in accordance with the Council's mandate
to guarantee international peace and security.

In conclusion, as usual, I would like to make some
comments on the statement made by the representative
of Ukraine. It was a good confirmation of our message
that attempts would inevitably be made to politicize
the Council's debate on human rights and use it to
achieve goals very different from the objectives of
the discussion. It perpetuates the propaganda and
information campaign against Russia and is aimed
at implanting genuine hatred for everything Russia-
related in Ukraine, and is a clear illustration of the
practice of double standards.

The Government of Ukraine has been seriously

criticized by United Nations structures - including
the Monitoring Mission, which the representative
of Ukraine mentioned i and by non-governmental

organizations for blatantly violating human rights.
The relevant reports cite illegal arrests, forced
disappearances, the torture and inhumane treatment of
prisoners and sexual violence towards them, some cases
of the authorities and radical nationalists pressuring
the judiciary, a lack of progress in investigating the
tragedies in Odessa and other atrocious crimes, with
Ukrainian authorities conniving with radical nationalist
groups, further restrictions on freedom of expression,
the exclusion of the Russian language - which is a
native language for million of Ukrainians - from the
media, and imposing a genuine economic blockade in
the eatern regions of the country. The list goes on, but
the Ukrainian delegation preferred to remain silent on
those facts.
With regard to Crimea, I would like to assure the
Council that, fortunately, in that Russian region people
are living peaceably and any issues relating to armed
conflict are not at all relevant to Crimea. Equally
irrelevant are the insinuations that were made about
some human rights issues on the peninsual since its
reunification with Russia. As for the Crimean Tatars,
for more than 20 years of its independence Ukraine
has done nothing to improve their situation, despite
numerous recommendations from international human
rights mechanisms. It is only now that Kyiv has become
an active advocate of their rights at the international
level, trying to use that issue to advance its own
political agenda.

