Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): After the issuance of the Secretary-General's
sixteenth report (S/2015/468) on the implementation of
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014),
on the humanitarian situation in Syria, there are still
some Member States in the Organization that deal
with that painful situation in isolation from the foreign
interventionist, political, economic and military
backdrop. Perhaps that situation reaches its utmost
level of absurdity when those Member States present
themselves as both the opponent and the judge at the
same time. It is currently clear for everyone that many
of those who lament the misery of the Syrian people
are i in reality - the ones causing such misery. The
cards are now on the table, the veil has fallen, and the
shedding of Syrian blood in the north and south of the
country is coordinated through attacks organized in the
operational military and intelligence headquarters in
both Jordan and Turkey.

That reality proves the lack of correctness and
credibility in the approach adopted by some parties,
since the beginning of the crisis, in dealing with the
situation in Syria in general and with the humanitarian
issue in particular.

To settle political scores with the Syrian
Government is one thing, while to adopt internationally
unacceptable coercive measures against the Syrian
people is something else.

To disagree with the Syrian Government is one
thing, while to deny Syria's role in protecting its people
and maintaining its sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity - and to refuse to coordinate the
fight against terrorism with Syria and provide it with
humanitarian assistance - is another thing.

To see the reality and deal with it as it is - in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and the rules of international law - is
one thing, while to be obsessed with targeting the Syrian
Government with baseless allegations and to interfere
in Syrian domestic affairs is something else.

To deal with the catastrophic consequences of the
humanitarian crisis in Syria is one thing, while to ignore
the root causes of the crisis and to be preoccupied with
marginal issues is something else entirely.

There is no doubt that improving the humanitarian
situation in Syria - in concrete and real terms - entails
abandoning the wrong approach that I have just referred
to. We cannot talk about ending the suffering and
hardships of Syrians or about ending the humanitarian
crisis in Syria against a backdrop of silence on Turkey
and Jordan's continued use of their territories as bases
and conduits for foreign terrorists and mercenaries.
We cannot end the humanitarian crisis as long as the
regimes in Saudi Arabia, Qatar and other countries
still prefer to support terrorism generously and call it a
revolution instead of funding the humanitarian response
plan - funding for which has not yet exceeded 25 per
cent.

How can we improve the humanitarian situation in
the country in the light of the fact that the American
Central Intelligence Agency spends $1 billion annually,
according to the Washington Post, on training terrorists
in camps in Jordan, Qatar, Turkey and Saudi Arabia, as
well in some European States, so as to form an army of
10,000 so-called moderate terrorists?

That was not included in Mr. Ban's report and
would never be included in his reports.

The sponsors of terror try to link every heinous act
on earth to the Syrian State; they have fabricated false
witnesses; they have organized formal and informal
conferences and meetings within and outside the United
Nations. The last meeting of that type was the recent
Arria Formula meeting, organized by France and Spain.
The goal of those meetings has been to tarnish the
image of the Syrian Government. However, they have
deliberately neglected the role of the armed gangs that
they brought into Syria to commit murder, slaughter,
looting and ethnic and religious cleansing. They have
ignored the massacres and murders committed by
those gangs against civilians before each meeting of
the Security Council on Syria. They have conducted
interviews with takfiri and terrorist warlords, with
gunmen, with those armed with machetes and swords,
with those who eat human livers and hearts, and have
given them legitimacy. They have presented them to
the media as revolutionaries in order to cover up the
slaughter, bloodshed, rape, captivity, bombings and
beheadings. They have ignored the indiscriminate
mortar shells that fall daily on civilians in Damascus,
Aleppo and other Syrian cities, killing thousands of
innocent people.

The Saudi documents newly leaked through
WikiLeaks prove that Turkey, Qatar and Saudi Arabia
have been working since the first months of the crisis
in Syria to militarize the situation by providing money,
weapons and support to terrorist groups. They have
successively referred to that as the "Arab spring",
peaceful mobility and then moderate movement.
WikiLeaks has also revealed that those three regimes
in particular have formed a joint military committee for
that purpose. It might be useful for some colleagues in
the Council to familiarize themselves with the contents
of the telegram sent by the Saudi Ambassador to
Lebanon to his capital on 1 March 2012, during the first
year ofthe crisis in Syria, while some delegations in the
Council were maintaining that what was happening in
Syria was a purely peaceful "spring" movement.

Here I will quote an excerpt from the cable sent by
the Saudi Ambassador:

"We must continue to support the Syrian armed
resistance by offering a high salary to each recruit
defecting from the regular army and providing
weapons equal to those possessed by the regime.
We must support the neighbouring countries of
Syria, especially Jordan, and also provide financial
support to the populations living close to the
Syrian borders with Lebanon and Iraq in order to
promote an environment conducive to the Syrian
revolution".

Before the leaking of the Saudi documents, the
Turkish press revealed certain videos that proved
the involvement of the Erdogan regime in smuggling
weapons into Syria by way of convoys intended
to contain medical aid. By the way, those convoys
passed through the border checkpoints requested by
OCHA at the time of the adoption of resolution 2165
(2014) on humanitarian access. At that time, we had
requested guarantees on the communications and
nationalities mechanism, but they were never provided
by the Secretariat. However, they did provide weapons,
instead of humanitarian assistance, through the border
checkpoints that OCHA had insisted on in the light of
resolution 2165 (2014).

Judge Aziz Takci, one of the four Turkish judges
arrested by the Erdogan regime after the scandal, has
confirmed that more than 2,000 trucks loaded with
missiles, rockets and bombs have been sent to Syria
through Turkey. Also, the leader of the Turkish People's
Democratic Party has confirmed that the massacre that
took place in the town of Ayn al-Arab/Kobani last
week, which claimed the lives of dozens of Syrians,
was a result of the years of support by the Turkish
Government to Daesh extremists. The Daesh terrorists
travelled to Ayn al-Arab through Turkish territory.

Prior to the aforementioned scandals, United
Nations reports revealed the smuggling of weapons
from Libya to Syria via Turkey and Lebanon. Prior
to the current report, we forwarded to the Secretary-
General and to the Council all of the documents and
information proving the involvement of Turkey, Qatar
and Saudi Arabia in the smuggling of weapons and
facilitating the entry of terrorists into my country,
Syria.

However, we have encountered and continue
to encounter the flagrant denial of that by some
members of the Council. Yet with each passing day, the
correctness and credibility of our statements made since
the beginning of the crisis, both within and outside the
Council, have become increasingly clear, and now the
crimes of terrorism have reached the countries of those
that were denying its presence in Syria.

I would like to emphasize that the Syrian
Government is ready to cooperate with all sincere
stakeholders in the Security Council to improve the
humanitarian situation in Syria, despite our awareness
that some members of the Council have gone too far in
their support for terrorism and have thus become part
of the problem rather than part of the solution. Some
of those members have used their support for human
rights and the provision of protection and assistance to
civilians as a tool to exert pressure in order to settle
political scores with the Syrian Government.

In order to prove the hypocrisy and double standards
related to the efforts of those countries in dealing with
those noble principles, it is enough to note that they
not only hid the Saudi regime's support for terrorism
in Syria, but they went even further by covering up
the Saudi war crimes in Yemen. In fact, such actions
have prevented the delivery of humanitarian aid, thus
causing widespread famine in Yemen, especially in
the holy month of Ramadan. The Saudi regime has
prevented even aircraft operated by the Red Cross from
delivering medical aid to Yemen.

Despite all of that, we have not seen any of the
Member States that have appointed themselves the
promoters of human rights and the protectors of
civilians in Syria say a word to condemn such Saudi
practices. Yet those Member States have not missed an
opportunity to hold fabricated emergency meetings and
side events in order to direct false allegations against
the Syrian Government, which has so far signed six
humanitarian response plans with the United Nations
enabling it to provide humanitarian assistance to nearly
10.5 million Syrian citizens in April, May and June.

Of course, the report did not mention the Syrian
Government's cooperation. All of the assistance that
was described in the report was indicated as being
provided by United Nations agencies, disregarding the
Syrian Government's efforts to provide protection to
the agencies that are providing aid.

In Syria, we are fighting terrorism on behalf of
humanity as a whole. The Syrian army, by eliminating
foreign terrorists in Syria, is protecting dozens of
innocent people who could become potential victims of
those terrorists when they return to their countries to
carry out such activities there. The recent tragic events
in Tunisia, France and Kuwait have proved us right.

Those who seek to discredit that illuminating truth
are partners in spreading the scourge of terrorism.
However, Syria's steadfast Government, people and
army have led the Security Council to adopt three
important resolutions under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, on combating Daesh,
the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist organizations,
as well as on combating the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters.

Despite the lack of implementation of those
resolutions and despite the many groups that are
conspiring against us in Syria and continuing to provide
misinformation and false allegations, we will continue
to fight our war against terrorism in order to protect our
people and to rid the world of that scourge. The terrorist
war has been unleashed and is now hitting targets in
Damascus and Baghdad and spreading to Abuja and
Tunisia. It has reached Kuwait and Paris and Sydney
and Boston. The Council is therefore called upon to
wake up before it has regrets, at a time when regret will
have no benefit.

Finally, the Government of Syria is exerting its
utmost effort to end the crisis in Syria via the peaceful
means adopted by the Security Council and, naturally,
approved by the Syrian Government and by all of
those with good intentions. We will continue to exert
peaceful efforts towards a peaceful resolution of the
Syrian crisis, without foreign intervention in Syria's
domestic affairs.

