Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to applaud the persistent efforts of the United
States, which worked tirelessly to ensure that resolution
2285 (2016), which we just adopted, represented a
response adequate to the difficulties we have witnessed
in the past few weeks in relations between Morocco
and the Secretary-General regarding the issue of
Western Sahara and the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO). The
goal, after all, is to create the conditions conducive to
restoring an atmosphere conducive to calm and to the
proper functioning of MINURSO, to which we are all
very committed.

Thanks to the decision we have just taken,
MINURSO's mandate has been renewed for a year and
for the entire Mission. That could be crucial, since the
Mission does essential work on the ground, and I would
like to commend the work of the Ms. Kim Bolduc,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Western Sahara, Mr. Christopher Ross, Personal Envoy
of the Secretary-General, and the Secretary-General
himself. They have all contributed within their areas
of responsibility to ensuring that the ceasefire is
maintained and to advancing the situation towards a
settlement of the dispute, which is so necessary to the
people of Western Sahara and to the stability, security
and prosperity of the region, which is in any case
facing major security challenges. As a result, France
will continue to support the political process, led by the
United Nations and aimed at making progress towards a
just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution,
in accordance with international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

On the substance of the issues, France believes
that the plan for autonomy presented by Morocco
in 2007 represents a serious and credible basis for a
negotiated solution. Now that the mandate has been
renewed, steps must be taken as quickly as possible to
enable MINURSO's mandate to be fully implemented,
and specifically resolving the issue of its personnel,
particularly the civilian component, which in the past
few weeks has been the subject of discussion between
Morocco and the Secretary-General. For its part, the
Council should continue to follow the issue actively
and to work to establish a climate of trust and positive
momentum conducive to political negotiations, the
responsibility for which lies in the United Nations with
the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy. France
will continue to support every effort in that regard.

