Mr. Draskovic (Serbia and Montenegro): I
should like to underline two issues in particular.
The first issue is that of final status, which was
mentioned by many members. For the Government of
Serbia and the Government of Serbia and Montenegro,
the final status of the province of Kosovo entails very
specific models for local autonomy and self-rule of
Albanian Serbs and other non-Albanians,
reconciliation, forgiveness and repentance, in the
framework of Serbia and the European Union.

With respect to the framework of the European
Balkans, which my Government sees as a region in
which State borders would exist on maps only, not in
practice, my Government is for the project. We in the
Balkans must become Europeans from within. We must
start to act and think in the European way; that is the
condition for us to be accepted by Europe. The
interdependence of States, nations, cultures, religions -
that is the future. Independence that is rooted in past
attempts at ethnic and religious domination must be
consigned to history.

Secondly, let me turn to the issue of privatization.
Of course, this is very important. But the United
Nations, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and Mr. Holkeri must be
very careful, because we in Kosovo need, first of all, a
restitution law. After the Second World War,
communists took land, property and houses from many
people and institutions that were against communism.
Some might now say, well, that happened a long time
ago. But no - a restitution law must be the condition
for privatization.

The main victim of that communist crime in
Kosovo was the Serbian Church. The Church's land
must be given back to it. Individuals' land must be
given back to them, regardless of who they may be -
Serbs, Albanians or others. It will be up to them to
decide later what to do with their property.

I studied the law, and I should like to say to the
Council that restitution and the rejection of the
legalization of any crime is the basis of the law. It is
stated in an article of the Codex Justinianus that, if
something is criminal in the beginning, it cannot be
legalized by the passing of time.

The Government of Serbia and Montenegro and
the Government of Serbia are grateful for the
opportunity to speak about such an important and
painful issue as Kosovo.

