Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation has supported the
Republic of Serbia's request to convene an emergency
Security Council meeting. We fully understand the
reaction of President Tadic' and the Serbian leadership
to the Kosovo developments, and we support
Belgrade's legitimate demands to restore the territorial
integrity of the country.

The Russian Federation continues to recognize
the Republic of Serbia within its internationally
recognized borders. The 17 February declaration by the
local assembly of the Serbian province of Kosovo is a
blatant breach of the norms and principles of
international law - above all of the Charter of the
United Nations - which undermines the foundations
of the system of international relations. That illegal act
is an open Violation of the Republic of Serbia's
sovereignty, the high-level Contact Group accords,
Kosovo's Constitutional Framework, Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) - which is the basic document
for the Kosovo settlement - and other relevant
decisions of the Security Council.

The unilateral declaration of independence and its
recognition are incompatible with the provisions of the
Helsinki Final Act, which clearly specify the principles
of inviolability of frontiers and territorial integrity of
States. The provisions allow changes to State frontiers
only in accordance with international law and by
peaceful means and by agreement.

The situation developing as a result of the illegal
steps of the province's leadership poses a threat to
peace and security in the Balkans.

We believe that resolution 1244 (1999) remains
fully in force and that in accordance with it the
Secretary-General's Special Representative and Head
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) must continue to carry out
functions and responsibilities of the provisional
administration of Kosovo assigned to the Mission, not
least of all the implementation in the province of the
democratic standards approved by the international
community.

We insist that the international presences in
Kosovo, in order to implement their mandates under
resolution 1244 (1999), must take immediate steps to
bring the situation in Kosovo back to what existed
prior to the illegal act of the province's Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government. We reaffirm our
demand that the Secretary-General's Representative
and Head of UNMIK declare the unilateral declaration
of independence by the Kosovo Albanian leadership
null and void in accordance with his mandate under
resolution 1244 (1999) and prerogatives arising from
the Kosovo Constitutional Framework for Provisional
Self-Government, and in order to prevent negative
consequences.

The Kosovo Force (KFOR) functioning in
Kosovo under the aegis of the United Nations must
comply strictly with their mandate in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999), on the basis of which KFOR
must assist UNMIK and the parties to implement -
but not to breach - that resolution. KFOR, together
with the United Nations Civilian Police, bears the
primary responsibility for preventing and stopping
violence in the province and for ensuring security of
the population and the international personnel.

We are particularly concerned about the situation
in the Serb municipalities in Kosovo, above all in
northern Mitrovica. We regard as categorically
inadmissible and illegal any attempts by the
international presences to take, in Violation of their
mandates under resolution 1244 (1999), repressive
measures against non-Albanian minorities and their
leaders in case of their expected non-compliance with
the process of this Serbian province becoming
sovereign. We address this warning also to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo.

The European Union's so-called Rule of Law
Mission has been launched without the necessary
decision of the Security Council. The parameters of the
EU mission in Kosovo, above all from the viewpoint of
the mandate given to it in Brussels, do not agree with
the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Council's subsequent decisions on functions and
composition, including modalities on the distribution
of contributions among United Nations partners and,
most importantly, on the mandate of the international
civil presence in Kosovo.

The Security Council has not authorized the
launching of this operation. Nor can EU mission be
part of the international civil presence as defined in
resolution 1244 (1999), since, according to paragraph 1
of the Secretary-General's report in document
S/1999/672, UNMIK covers all of the space allocated
by this resolution to the international Civil presence.
The illegal acts of the Kosovo Albanian
leadership and of those who support them set a
dangerous precedent. They raise the risk of an
escalation of tension and inter-ethnic Violence in the
province and destructive consequences for
international relations that took decades to build.
Russia firmly believes that a durable and sustainable
solution to the Kosovo status issue can be achieved
only on the basis of a decision to be worked out with
the United Nations Security Council taking the leading
role, a decision that would fully comply with the norms
of international law and be based on agreements
between Belgrade and Pristina.

We hope that with regard to Kosovo affairs a
legal, not a unilateral, solution will prevail. We are
convinced that all United Nations Member States that
cherish their own territorial integrity are interested in
the same thing.

