Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I wish to thank
Special Representative Lamberto Zannier for his very
clear and comprehensive briefing to the Council, and
both His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Mrs. Vlora Citaku,
Acting Foreign Minister of Kosovo, for their
statements and for the elements they have brought to
our attention.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/43) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) presents
us with a picture of a country that is facing serious
challenges on its way 4 as we all hope - to peace and

ll-23603
prosperity. It also draws attention to the work UNMIK
has been doing together with the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and several other players on the
ground in Kosovo.

Portugal would like to convey, as a contributor to
EULEX and KFOR, as well as a country with a long
involvement in the stabilization of the Balkans, our
sincere appreciation for the work accomplished so far.
Our joint efforts remain vital in order to consolidate
peace and to draw the region closer to integration in
the European institutional framework - an ambition
that we share.

As regards political life in Kosovo, the December
general elections are the main event on which to base
an analysis of this period. Unfortunately, the elections
suffered from some serious shortcomings and a high
number of irregularities, as stated in the Secretary-
General's report. The overall climate was peaceful,
however, and the reaction by the Central Elections
Commission and the Election Complaints and Appeals
Panel was swift and managed to overcome some of the
irregularities.

We believe it is important for Kosovo institutions
and international players to continue working together
in order to consolidate democratic institutions and
foster solid commitment to democratic values and
practice. It is also noteworthy that the participation of
the Kosovo Serb community was higher than in 2007,
in spite of scant turn-out north of the Iber/Ibar River.

I took good note of the Special Representative's
comments on the pressing economic and fiscal
problems Kosovo is facing and the need to address
these issues, lest they become an added element of
instability.

Political uncertainty in Kosovo has also delayed
the much-needed Pristina and Belgrade dialogue.
Portugal urges both parties to start comprehensive
negotiations under the auspices of the European Union,
with a view to settle all of their differences in the spirit
of General Assembly resolution 64/298, and to do so at
the earliest possible occasion. This would undoubtedly
be in the interests of both Pristina and Belgrade, and of
the region and Europe as a whole.

Beyond the elections, other facts remain - more
enduring and far-reaching in their consequences.
Incidents between communities still occur, with
victims on both sides, and other elements that may
trigger new tensions abound. UNMIK's efforts and
dedication to ensure peace and security must be duly
noted and appreciated. We therefore urge all actors on
the ground to work with UNMIK fully and in good
faith and to engage seriously in the process to settle
their differences.

These incidents notwithstanding, it must be said
that several indicators are encouraging, especially with
respect to the development of municipal power. We
hope that further investment in education and human
and financial resources will generate strengthened
institutions and capabilities. We expect that national
and local authorities will find balanced solutions to the
issues that inevitably arise between the communities.

I would also like to stress the importance of the
ongoing cooperation between Kosovo authorities and
EULEX regarding the rule of law. Again, the task
facing Kosovo's Administration is one of institution-
and capacity-building. We commend and support the
efforts of the European Union Special Representative
in this context.

Concerning the report of Mr. Dick Marty to the
Council of Europe, I took note of the Special
Representative's references to the seriousness of these
allegations and I paid careful attention to what Minister
Jeremic' said to the Council on this subject. I took
special note of his comments concerning the possibly
wider regional dimension of this issue and the need to
extend effective protection to witnesses. The
allegations are indeed extremely disturbing, and if
proved would amount to particularly despicable crimes.
They deserve a very thorough investigation. We
welcome the readiness expressed by Kosovo and
Albania to cooperate in that regard.

We fully support EULEX's investigations on this
matter that are already under way, and we hope that
they will allow for a full clarification of the allegations.
But we also believe that we must follow this issue
closely and keep an open mind on any future action
that the investigations may require. In line with what
we have always maintained concerning other serious
crimes, whether in the region or elsewhere, impunity is
not only intolerable in itself, but also an obstacle to
peace and to a healthy and cooperative political
environment.

The work done by UNMIK in securing religious
and cultural sites in Kosovo stands out as a particularly
successful aspect of this Mission's mandate. It can be a
very important contribution to interfaith contact and
dialogue. Portugal expresses its optimism towards the
continued good results of UNMIK's work on this issue.
We also praise the role played by the Council of
Europe's Reconstruction Implementation Commission,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, KFOR and EULEX so that Kosovo's rich
heritage, which shines well beyond its borders, is
safeguarded from turmoil and endures for centuries to
come.

To conclude, the report we are discussing today
reminds us once more how important it is for Kosovo
and Serbia to start a European Union-facilitated
dialogue. It will eventually close this chapter of their
history, reinforce peace and stability in the Balkans and
help the whole region in fulfilling its European
integration objections.

