Mr. Matuszewski (Poland): May I begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of June. Let me
assure you of the full cooperation and support of the
Polish delegation. I should also like to pay tribute to
Ambassador Qin of China for the excellent manner in
which he presided over the Council in the month of May.
Our thanks also go to all members of his delegation.

The Polish delegation voted in favour of the
resolution that the Security Council has just adopted. We
are convinced that the continuing presence of the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) in
Tajikistan will contribute to the stabilization of that
country and assist the parties in their attempts peacefully
to resolve the conflict.

Our approach to the extension of the mandate of
UNMOT is also based on some encouraging, although
still weak and inconsistent, signals coming from

 

Tajikistan. I refer to the renewed commitment of the leaders
of both parties to a political settlement of the conflict. In
this context, we welcome the apparent readiness of the
Government and the opposition to resume the inter-Tajik
talks. The decision of the Government and the opposition
to extend the cease-fire also influenced our position on the
resolution, although the parties have yet to prove their
sincerity in this respect.

This prompts me to make a couple of other remarks.
While discussing the proposal of the Secretary-General to
extend the mandate of UNMOT, the members of the
Security Council made a number of grim observations
concerning current developments in Tajikistan. Some of
these developments are particularly disturbing. Large-scale
ongoing fighting has been causing enormous human
suffering, loss of life and destruction. According to the
Secretary-General, the present situation in Tajikistan is at
its worst since the end of the civil war of 1992.

The parties to the conflict seem to be untouched by
the appeals and requests of the Security Council contained
in the two presidential statements on Tajikistan, issued
respectively in March and May this year. This is true, for
instance, of the parties' dealing with UNMOT, resulting in
the restriction of movement of the Mission's personnel and
in the lack of adequate security and safety conditions. We
expect this situation to improve immediately.

In conclusion, let me pay tribute to the Secretary-
General for his efforts in assisting the parties on their
difficult way towards peace and reconciliation. May I also
thank the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Gerd Merrem, for what he has achieved since
his recent appointment and assure him of our support in his
further endeavours. Last, but not least, I would like to
express our gratitude to UNMOT personnel and their
partners from the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) Collective Peace-keeping Forces.

These are the comments which the Polish delegation
had to make in addition to the statement delivered by the
delegation of Italy on behalf of the Presidency of the
European Union, with which my delegation associated
itself.

