Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We would like to thank
Bolivia, as President of the Council and Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), for convening today's vital debate. I would also
like to commend Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu
and Mr. Ballard for their insights and to pay tribute to
their commitment to ensuring a safe and secure world
for us.

Kazakhstan urges that we ensure the full and
effective implementation of resolutions 1540 (2004) and
2325 (2016), which we consider extremely important.
The international community must make a concerted
effort if it is to comply with their provisions, for these
two resolutions have a special contribution to make
to strengthening the international non-proliferation
architecture. Our country has experienced first-hand
the horrifying consequences of the testing of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) and is determined to
be at the forefront of the global fight against their
proliferation and the risk of their use. Strict adherence
to all the obligations to prevent the proliferation of
such weapons and relentless efforts to improve national
systems of control over materials that could be used to
produce WMDs are more important than they have ever
been.

I would first like to draw the Council's attention to
the following achievements and specific activities that
we have undertaken at the national and regional level.

Thanks to its stringent nuclear-security measures,
Kazakhstan is among the top 20 countries in the world
in its security levels for nuclear facilities and materials.
All our nuclear facilities are under the comprehensive
control of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and accompanied by strong controls of our
borders with neighbouring countries as well as of
aviation and other transit modes. The IAEA's low-
enriched uranium bank will launch in Kazakhstan
on 29 August and is a clear indication of the global
commitment to halting the proliferation of such
sensitive technologies.

Through the Global Threat Reduction Initiative of
the United States and the Russian Federation's Energy
and Security Centre, active steps are being taken to
ensure the security of nuclear facilities and materials in
Kazakhstan and Central Asia. Early in May, Kazakhstan
hosted a two-day seminar in Astana on strengthening
the safety of radiation sources with a view to preventing
illicit trafficking in radioactive materials in Central
Asia. The participation of all our neighbours will ensure
a well-coordinated intra-regional collaboration in this
area. Very recently, on 12 May, we opened the first
regional nuclear security training centre in Almaty.
With the support of international organizations such
as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
INTERPOL and other specialized institutions, it will
play a valuable role in providing expertise to specialists
in relevant fields for the entire Central Asian region and
beyond.

Secondly, while commending the considerable
progress that has been made on implementing
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016), we must
acknowledge the fact that there is still much more to be
done. In that regard, we would like to propose What we
feel are the most salient steps for the way forward. We
are confident that individual interactions with every
country, increased outreach activities and the provision
of sufficient financial resources will contribute
significantly to ensuring strict control over the
implementation of national commitments in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions. Given
the importance of capacity-building among Member
States, Kazakhstan has decided to make a voluntary
contribution to the United Nations Trust Fund for
Global and Regional Disarmament Activities, with the
goal of helping States to implement their obligations
under resolution 1540 (2004).

Taking the evolving nature of the risks of the
proliferation of WMDs into account, including the
use by non-State actors of the rapid advances that are
being made in science and technology, we would like
to emphasize the initiative we have taken to establish
a United Nations register of scientific developments
that can lead to the creation or advancement of WMDs,
designed to track such dangerous discoveries. Since
funding for travelling and regional outreach is limited,
much progress could also be made through the creation
of online training modules, to be offered in a number of
languages on the 1540 Committee website for various
categories of Government personnel - lawmakers,
executives, law-enforcement officials, border-control
agents and criminal prosecutors. We believe that the
Committee's limited resources and staff could be
supplemented by the academic, scientific, technical and
legal communities, providing valuable input on new
trends and training on the completion of matrices and
on standards verification and assessments.

Lastly, I would like to reaffirm Kazakhstan's
firm commitment to consolidating the international
community's efforts to rid the world of weapons of
mass destruction. To achieve that, we must consistently
strengthen and expand the non-proliferation regime,
primarily within the framework of resolution 1540
(2004).

