Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation is extremely concerned
by the lack of progress towards a political settlement of the
conflict in Tajikistan and, in particular, by the wide-scale
hostilities in the Tavildara region. The Tajik parties must
indeed reaffirm their declared dedication solely to a
peaceful political settlement of the conflict on the basis of
mutual concessions and compromises. We welcome the
statement just made by the representative of Tajikistan
containing such assurances. We are firmly convinced that
only full and unswerving implementation by the parties of
all the commitments they have undertaken and of Security
Council resolutions can create the requisite conditions for
successful progress in the negotiating process. We firmly
condemn the terrorist acts against the civilian population
and the Peace-keeping Forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS). Terrorism must come to an end.

Russia is in favour of making the inter-Tajik
dialogue truly continuous and dynamic. We welcome the
agreement on the resumption of the Ashgabat round of
inter-Tajik talks. We call upon the parties to take a
responsible attitude towards their participation and to
demonstrate the political will to achieve compromise
solutions to key problems in the settlement.

We wish all success to the Secretary-General's
Special Representative in his noble efforts. As an
observer State at the inter-Tajik talks, Russia will render
him all possible support.
The Russian delegation attaches great importance to
the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan, whose activities are
an important factor for restraint and stabilization and
provide indispensable support for constructive political
dialogue. The Collective Peace-keeping Forces of the CIS
and the Russian border forces will continue to support the
Mission's efforts in implementing its mandate. The Tajik
parties must immediately eliminate all obstacles and
create the requisite conditions for the Mission to function
effectively and for the speedy resumption of the Joint
Commission's activities in monitoring the implementation
of the cease-fire agreement. We note the reaffirmation by
the Government of Tajikistan of its dedication to the
principle of freedom of movement of the United Nations
observers and of the provision of security guarantees for
opposition members of the Joint Commission.

The Russian delegation expresses its gratitude to all
members of the Council for their support of the
fundamental provisions of the draft resolution we have
introduced and for their important proposals and
additions, which have substantially enhanced its political
weight.

We trust that the Tajik parties will show full
responsibility and will note and heed the unanimous
position of the Security Council.

