Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on the Russian presidency of the Council
this month. I thank you and the members of your team
for convening many important meetings under your
presidency. I also thank you for convening this meeting
and allowing us to participate in it.

The briefing provided by the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator reminds me of a well-known verse
concerning a man at sea, shackled to his vessel and
unable to move, who is warned not to get wet. Under-
Secretary-General Amos presented a partial account
of the humanitarian situation in Syria, on which I will
brief the Council myself.

This meeting affords us an important opportunity
to inform the members of the Council and of the United
Nations as a whole on the reality of the humanitarian
situation in Syria in all its dimensions, as well as the
serious falsehoods and gaps contained in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2014/427) on the implementation
of resolution 2139 (2014) . In order to avoid irritating
certain representatives present in the Chamber by
referring to particular scandals, I shall confine myself
to referring to certain parts of the report itself.

Paragraph 3 of the report refers to the ongoing
fighting between so-called "armed opposition
groups and extremist forces". Paragraph 7 states that
"[i]nfighting between opposition groups also
intensified, as the Islamic State in Iraq and Al-Sham
(ISIS) gained ground in the east". Paragraph 12 refers
to "armed opposition groups, including Ahrar Al-Sham
and Jabhat Al-Nusra".

As a matter of fact, it is scandalous that an official
report issued on behalf of the Secretary-General refers
to certain organizations, classified by the Security
Council as terrorist groups, as "armed opposition
groups" in Syria - Jabhat Al-Nusra and other terrorist
groups. This is not an unintended oversight. In fact,
the Secretary-General's Spokesperson has used the
same language, despite our having dispatched, in vain,
numerous official correspondences emphasizing the
impropriety of using such language.

We would like to ask the Under-Secretary-General
why her report does not refer to the actual names of those
terrorist groups, which are affiliated with Al-Qaida.
She has classified them as "armed opposition" and
"extremist" groups. For example, the report labels the
terrorist group Jabhat Al-Nusra "armed opposition",
meaning that it is not part of the extremist groups. In
the opinion of Ms. Amos, what exactly constitutes an
extremist group?

The report cites new exaggerated numbers
regarding people in need in Syria, as compared to
previous figures. The number of those in need is said
to have increased, rising suddenly to 10.8 million - an
increase of 1.5 million. The number of people in need
residing in areas that are difficult to reach is said to
amount to 4.7 million - an increast of 1.2 million.
The report does not mention how they arrived at those
inflated numbers.

My Government has lodged a complaint with
the United Nations Resident Representative in Syria
with regard to the perfunctory way in which some
senior United Nations officials have arrived at the
inaccurate and undocumented statistics concerning
the humanitarian situation and people in need in
Syria, as well as about the dishonest dissemination of
that information by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in Damascus just as
deliberations are taking place to adopt a new resolution
on the humanitarian situation.

The drafters of the report have gone beyond their
mandate in mentioning the presidential elections in
Syria, which have nothing to do with resolution 2139
(2014). They are a sovereign, constitutional right and do
not run counter to the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). To the contrary, the elections are in line with
that document: to preserve Syria's constitutional
institutions. That is a main element of the communique.

Another strange paradox in the report is evidenced
in the following statement:

"The United Nations remains unable to provide
a verified assessment of the presence and activity
of non-Syrian fighters on a nationwide scale."
(S/2014/427, para. 9)

Despite my Government's hundreds of official letters
to the Secretary-General and the Security Council and
the open official Western statements about documented
numbers of so-called "foreign fighters" in Syria, the
Secretary-General and OCHA continue to be unable to
verify the veracity of the situation.

In addition to all that, we are also surprised that
the report ignores the fact that the main reason for the
emergence and worsening of the humanitarian situation
is rooted in the rise and escalation of terrorism in Syria.
Terrorist armed groups have targeted safe civilian
areas, pushing out the population and destroying
infrastructure and institutions. Addressing the
humanitarian crisis in certain areas in Syria cannot be
carried out just by providing assistance.

Those who drafted the report would have done
better to ascribe responsibility to the States supporting
terrorism in Syria, including Israel, Qatar, Turkey and
Saudi Arabia, instead of questioning the presence of
foreign fighters and the effectiveness of the steps taken
by our Government to address humanitarian needs.

Among the other paradoxes in the report is its
ignorance of the imposition by certain States of illegal,
unliteral and coercive measures against our people,
which has directly impacted living conditions. It is
therefore necessary to point out the dangerous impact
of the sanctions, which serves to expose the double
standards on the part of some senior Secretariat officials
in addressing the humanitarian situation in my country.

Some States claiming to care for the Syrian people
have chosen throw enormous amounts of money at
buying weapons for the terrorists in Syria, rather than
devoting those resources to the 2014 humanitarian
appeal - which is funded at just 29 per cent. A
headline in yesterday's The New York Times reads,
"After Opening Way to Rebels, Turkey Is Paying a
Heavy Price". Yet the Secretary-General and Ms. Amos
have no proof that there are foreign fighters in Syria.

The Syrian Government provides 75 per cent of
the humanitarian assistance in Syria. The Government
has taken a number of steps to enable the United
Nations to expand its activities, including developing
a new implementation mechanism to organize relief
assistance convoys in a way that can provide assistance
to our people as soon as possible, establishing a branch
ofthe Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees in the governorate of Al-Suwayda to
cover the southern region, as well as facilitating United
Nations access to many areas throughout most parts
of the country, including the governorate surrounding
Damascus, as well as Aleppo and Dar'a.

A report by the World Food Programme states
that many improvements have been made in seriously
troubled areas. Ms. Amos stated that millions of
people had received assistance, that children had been
immunized and that food had arrived. She did not
say how all of that happened. Did it happen without
the assistance of the Syrian Government? We have
continued to accede to the demands of the international
community to deliver assistance from Syria's borders
with Iraq, Lebanon, Turkey and Jordan, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 46/182. It is clear that
her report ignores the obstacles the Turkish authorities
have created to allowing humanitarian assistance to
enter Syria through the border crossing at Nusaybin
while using the same crossing to let terrorists through.

My Government is committed to its responsibility
to alleviate our people's humanitarian burdens, and we
are ready to take whatever measures are necessary to
achieve that, as long as they comply with our national
laws and our sovereignty. In that regard, we would like
to welcome positive involvement by the United Nations,
by which I mean its involvement in a way that mitigates
the humanitarian situation in Syria. We categorically
reject some States' use of the machinery of the United
Nations in order to implement narrow political agendas
that run counter to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, just as we reject the
efforts of some States to manipulate the Organization
to target certain countries. The invasions of Iraq, Libya
and some other States were allowed to go through
very smoothly, and there are some who have found it
easy to interfere with the Organization. The United
Nations belongs to its Member States, and we are one
of its founding States. The United Nations is not part
of the private sector, to be exploited by the powerful
and influential in order to achieve domination and
bloodshed.

