Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
am pleased to have this opportunity to brief Council
members in my capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1572 (2004), concerning C6te d'Ivoire.

I would like to begin by summarizing the main
elements contained in the final report (S/2015/252) of
the Group of Experts on Cote d'Ivoire established in
accordance with resolution 2153 (2014), as well as the
discussions that took place in consultations on 10 April.

Generally speaking, the Group of Experts noted
improved cooperation with the C6te d'Ivoire authorities
during the second part of its mandate, which they
believe was attributable to the visit of the Chair of the
Committee in November 2014. The Government of
Cote d'Ivoire has made progress in implementing the
arms embargo and providing relevant information on
notifications and requests for exemptions addressed
to the Committee, as well as in informing the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the
Group of Experts on the arrival of material.

The Group expressed its concern about the ongoing
presence of elements linked to the radical pro-Gbagbo
group, and about the incorrect information that the
authorities of Cote d'Ivoire provided to the Committee
in some notifications or requests for exemption. It also
expressed concern about the material in the possession
of the fourth infantry battalion under the command of
Martin Kouakou Fofie, who is on the list of persons
subject to the sanctions regime, and about the lack
of access of the Group and UNOCI to team sites and
facilities in accordance with paragraph 22 of resolution
2153 (2014). In its report, the Group stresses the
danger posed by the existence of numerous weapons
and ammunition that remain in the country without
adequate control.

Regarding security sector reform (SSR), the Group
recognized the progress made by the authorities of
Cote d'Ivoire. However, it noted the continuing lack
of capacity and equipment for the police and the
gendarmerie, especially in view of the presidential
elections scheduled for October. The Group also noted
the lack of cohesion in the ranks of the army, caused
by negative influences from earlier affiliations and 01d
antagonisms, which could hinder the SSR process.

Regarding disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR), the Group welcomed the efforts
of the Authority on Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration to plan a more comprehensive and
inclusive process of reintegration, and in the marking
of weapons held by the security forces. However, the
Group emphasized the negative role played by members
of the Forces republicaines de Cote d'Ivoire, which
are not registered and which have performed illegal
activities. The Group also felt that the DDR process
would probably be unable to reinstate all veterans by
June, which could have a negative impact on security
conditions in the country.

In relation to border measures and control, the
Group expressed concern about the links between
former elements of the security and defence forces,
the Young Patriots, the Ivorian militias and Liberian
mercenaries. Moreover, the military structure and
capacity of mercenaries and militias in Liberia and
C6te d'Ivoire, respectively, would remain intact.

The Group of Experts indicates that smuggling
between Cote d'Ivoire and neighbouring countries
persists, particularly in cacao and gold. The Group
also expressed concern about human rights violations,
including child labour, and extrajudicial executions in
mining areas.

On 10 April, the Committee held a meeting
to discuss the report of the Group of Experts. The
Committee also heard from the Charge d'affaires of
the Permanent Mission of C6te d'Ivoire, Ambassador
Ouattara, on the situation in Cote d'Ivoire, which
included comments on the final report of the Group
of Experts. The participation of Ambassador Ouattara
deepened the dialogue that was reignited following my
visit to the country.

Ambassador Ouattara thanked the Committee for
taking steps to remove Mr. Djedje and Mr. N'Guessan
from the sanctions list of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004). He also indicated
doubts about some of the conclusions reached by the
Group. However, Ambassador Ouattara reconfirmed
the full commitment of cote d'Ivoire to cooperating
with the Committee and the Group of Experts,
especially in view of the forthcoming presidential
elections, and expressed the desire of his Government
for the sanctions to be removed as soon as possible
after that electoral event. He also stressed the positive
impact of my visit in November last year, which sent a
strong message of cooperation between the Sanctions
Committee and Cote d'Ivoire.

In the ensuing discussion, members of the
Committee acknowledged the progress made by Cote
d'Ivoire, but stressed the problems currently being
faced, particularly in matters relating to DDR, the fight
against impunity and the slow implementation of the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme. I intend to
pursue my communication with the Government of
C6te d'Ivoire. I wish to assure Council members that
my visit to the country was not an isolated event, but
the beginning of a new active and meaningful dialogue
that will succeed only if the key stakeholders continue
to demonstrate an ongoing commitment to the peaceful
transition of the country and national reconciliation.

Finally, the recommendations contained in the final
report of the Expert Group are still being considered by
the Committee members.

