Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like
to thank you, Sir, for presiding over this afternoon's
resumption of the meeting in person, which we greatly
appreciate. We would also like to express our sincere
thanks to Bolivia for convening today's important open
debate on a crucial and urgent issue.

The Netherlands aligns itself with the statements
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union
and by the representative of Spain, on behalf of the
Group of Friends of resolution 1540, as well as with the
points made by the representative of Italy in the context
of our split term on the Security Council. In addition,
the Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to make the
following remarks.

Unfortunately, the use of chemical weapons by
terrorists has become a dreadful reality. The Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) has used chemical weapons
in Syria and is trying to expand those capabilities. We
firmly condemn the use of chemical weapons both by
ISIS and by the Syrian Arab Republic. Those horrendous
acts have reminded us of the importance of resolution
1540 (2004), and this open debate continues the work it
requires. The comprehensive review carried out under
Spain's presidency of the Council and adopted under
resolution 2325 (2016) in December was an important
step in that process. As I have said before, we are
grateful for Spain's transparent and inclusive conduct
of the review.

I would like to focus on three issues
today - implementation, nuclear security and the
threat of biological weapons. The first of these is
the importance of ensuring the full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). We have come a long way
since the resolution was adopted, but reaching full
worldwide implementation by 2021 will still require a
tremendous effort from all of us - first and foremost
from Member States, but also from international and
regional organizations and industry. With so many
actors, considerable coordination will be needed to
ensure efficient and effective implementation and to
prevent overlapping or competing efforts by different
organizations. In that regard, the work that has been done
by the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and its Panel of Experts is indispensable.
And where implementation is concerned, we also have
a great instrument at our disposal - our national
action plans. They help Member States approach
implementation comprehensively and can also improve
the effectiveness and efficiency of international
technical assistance. This is a truly forward-looking
instrument that can help us put the emphasis on action
rather than reporting. We therefore strongly encourage
other Member States to use national action plans.

That brings me to my second point, nuclear security.
Of course, we are all aware of the horrific effects that
a terrorist attack using nuclear or radiological weapons
would have. Nuclear security is key to addressing that
threat. It is a prime example of how the implementation
of resolution 1540 can count on solid international
organizations, above all the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). Its work is indispensable and deserves
the international community's full support. We would
like to stress the importance of close cooperation among
the IAEA, Member States and the 1540 Committee in
strengthening nuclear security worldwide.

My third point is about biological weapons. The
possibility of a biological attack by non-State actors is
real, and the need to address this threat is more pressing
than ever. That is why we should make the most of the
existing international framework for addressing the
threat of biological weapons. Its implementation must
be improved and its existing framework strengthened,
especially given the rapid pace of technological
development in the biological sciences. All States
parties to the Biological Weapons Convention should
pursue those ends in good faith, as well as working to
universalize the Convention.
In conclusion, we need full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and better cooperation with the
IAEA on nuclear security. We also need to strengthen
the existing framework on biological weapons. The
Netherlands will continue to be a partner to the Security
Council in further work on this important topic.

