Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Ambassador Mufioz for
his briefing. During the first half of this year, the
sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) continued to pursue an active and robust
policy in ensuring the effectiveness of the restrictive
measures that the Security Council has imposed against
the Taliban and Al Qaeda and associated individuals
and entities.

Resolution 1526 (2004), adopted in January,
assigned the Committee a series of new tasks, which
are now being prepared and carried out. We note with
satisfaction the Committee's report (S/2004/349)
analysing the reasons why a great number of Member
States were unable to submit, pursuant to paragraph 6
of resolution 1455 (2003), reports on all steps taken to
implement the measures of the sanctions regime. In
that context, we also welcome the beginning of work
by the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, which actively cooperated in the preparation of
the report. We believe that the Team will provide the
Committee with needed expertise in all its basic
spheres of activity, that it will help to identify possible
cases of insufficient adherence to sanctions, and that it
will formulate useful recommendations to further
improve measures against the Taliban and Al Qaeda. In
our view, its first steps in fulfilling its mandate have
been promising.

We attach high value to the Committee
Chairman's recent visit to a number of countries
pursuant to paragraph 10 of resolution 1526 (2004).
The consultations conducted during his trip followed
up the Committee's dialogue with Member States on a
variety of aspects of this complex sanctions issue. Such
dialogue provides us not only with a first-hand view of
the status of implementation of the Council's demands,
but also with an opportunity for detailed conversations
with interested Governments on the practical
difficulties they face in meeting those requirements.
We endorse the Chairman's view that such cooperation
between the Committee and Member States must
continue in the future.

We wish to draw special attention to the need for
greater care in our approach to the consolidated list of
individuals and entities affected by the sanctions
measures. Adding to the list and incorporating detailed
information on terrorists are tasks not only for the
sanctions Committee, but also for Member States at
large. Let us not forget that the list is among the most
effective instruments in the Security Council's
campaign against threats to international peace and
security stemming from terrorism.

Among the most complex tasks facing the
Committee is that of preparing written evaluations of
Member States' implementation of the sanctions
regime, pursuant to paragraph 13 of resolution 1526
(2004). We note that there has been significant
progress in the submission by countries of their
national reports in that regard. Now, the Committee
must assess all the information it has received from
States, with the assistance of the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team. We hope that such
assessments will enable the Security Council to take
further steps to enhance the effectiveness of the
sanctions.

