Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me the floor. I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Arab States
to explain its position on the issue of the maintenance
of international peace and security and the impact of
climate Change.

At the outset, I wish to express our support of the
statements made by the representatives of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and of Argentina
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.

Statistics and reality confirm that developing
countries 4 particularly the least developed countries,
African countries, landlocked countries and the small
island developing States 4 are most harmed by the
negative effects of climate change. The Arab States
stress that the potential consequences of climate
change will have adverse effects on the Arab region,
especially in arid and semi-arid areas.

The Arab Group would like to stress the
following points.

 

First, the responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security falls primarily on the
Security Council, specifically as per the mandate in the
Charter of the United Nations, while taking into
consideration the role of the General Assembly in this
area, particularly in accordance with Assembly
resolution 377 (V) of 3 November 1950. on the overlap
of the role of the Security Council with the roles and
responsibilities of the other principal bodies does not
conform with the principles and purposes of the United
Nations Charter and may infringe on the authority of
those bodies and the rights of Member States as a
whole.

Secondly, climate change is also of an integral
part of sustainable development in its three aspects:
economic development, social development, and the
protection of the environment, which must be tackled
in a holistic way.

Thirdly, the issue of climate change is of the
utmost importance for sustainable development.
Responsibilities for sustainable development are borne
by the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and their relevant subsidiary bodies, including
the Commission on Sustainable Development and the
United Nations Environment Programme. The United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change is
a binding agreement on climate change, and there is
the Kyoto Protocol. There is no role provided for the
Security Council in any of that.

We believe it necessary for all Member States to
support sustainable development by adhering to the
Rio principles, particularly the principle of common
but differentiated responsibilities, and by fully
implementing Agenda 21 and other commitments
related to the provision of financial resources,
technology transfer and building the capacities of
developing countries. These commitments were made
at Rio, Johannesburg and other major United Nations
conferences on economic and social issues.

The Arab Group firmly believes that the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change is
the best forum in which to deal with the dangers of
climate change and to consider measures to be taken on
the basis of the principles therein. Measures must be
taken in accordance with the Convention, particularly
the need for developed countries to take urgent
measures to fulfil their commitments to reducing
emissions in accordance with the Kyoto Protocol.

 

Developed countries that have yet to adhere to the
Protocol should do so. The Arab Group stresses the
need to agree on a second commitment period for the
Kyoto Protocol and to ensure that there is no gap
between the first and second periods.

In this regard, the Group stresses that it supports
the two letters to the President of the Security Council
from the Non-Aligned Movement (S/2007/203) and the
Group of 77 and China (S/2007/211) regarding the
Council's open debate on energy, security and climate
on 17 April 2007 (see S/PV.5663). It also supports the
letter of 14 July 2011 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, to the President of the Security Council
concerning the open debate entitled "Maintenance of
international peace and security: the impact of climate
change" (S/201l/427).

The Arab Group also emphasizes that no Security
Council presidential statement or press statement
should be issued nor any action taken after the open
debate, especially any statement or action that may
undermine the authority or mandate of relevant organs,
processes and instruments or that might in any way
effect the cause of climate-change negotiations,
including the 17th Conference of the Parties to the
Framework Convention scheduled to be held in South
Africa at the end of 2011.

