Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for attending
today's meeting.

We thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Mladenov, for his informative
briefing. China welcomes His Excellency President
Abbas of Palestine at today's meeting and thanks him
for his remarks.

The question of Palestine is the most protracted
regional hotspot since the Second World War. It lies at
the heart of the Middle East issue and is fundamental
to achieving peace in the region. Only by establishing
a genuine State of Palestine can Israel enjoy lasting
security. Only a comprehensive settlement to the
question of Palestine can bring about a fundamental
shift in the situation in the Middle East. China
is gravely concerned about the situation between
Palestine and Israel, which remains tenuous, and the
dire humanitarian situation in Gaza.

All parties should faithfully implement resolution
2334 (2016), cease all settlement activities in the
occupied territory and act to prevent further violence
against civilians. All parties should remain calm,
exercise restraint and move towards each other, thereby
helping to foster the necessary conditions for the
resumption of talks. We believe that a two-State solution
represents the right way forward towards resolving the
question of Palestine. The international community
should uphold the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative, while jointly exploring ways and means to
promote peace so as to achieve an early, comprehensive,
just and durable solution to the question of Palestine.
The international community should offer
guarantees regarding Israeli-Palestinian peace talks.
Parties with major influence on the Middle East
should all play a constructive role in that regard. China
remains committed to supporting and facilitating the
Middle East peace process. We support the Palestinians
establishing a fully sovereign and independent
Palestinian State on the basis of the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

In July last year, Chinese President Xi Jinping
put forward a four-point proposal to promote the
resolution of the question of Palestine, calling for the
advancement of the political process on the basis of
the two-State solution, adherence to the philosophy of
shared, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security, greater coordination of international efforts to
maximize synergy for peace, and a holistic approach
for peace through development. Work is in full swing
to implement that proposal. In December last year,
China successfully hosted a symposium of Palestinian
and Israeli pro-peace actors and will continue to
push for a political settlement to the question in a
constructive fashion.

The question of Jerusalem is complex and delicate,
but it underpins the future solution to the question of
Palestine. All parties should respect historical plurality,
uphold fairness and justice, implement international
consensus, strive for peaceful coexistence and act upon
the relevant United Nations resolutions so as to reach
a solution that accommodates all parties' interests
through final-status negotiations. Palestine and Israel
should respect each other's right to live and avoid any
action that may aggravate the current situation.

The international community needs to continue
providing humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian
people and refugees, which can help improve the
political, security and humanitarian situation there.
Over the past six decades and more, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) has played an indispensable role in
easing the humanitarian crisis in the occupied territories.
We call upon all parties to scale up their support for
UNRWA and countries hosting the Palestinian refugees
so as to steadily improve the humanitarian conditions
in which the refugees are living.

