Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): The
question before the Council today has been on the
United Nations agenda for more than a decade. Today's
debate is being held on the eve of the fourth high-level
meeting between the United Nations and the regional
organizations on the theme "Cooperation for peace-
building". My delegation is grateful to the President of
the Council, as well as to the delegation of Tunisia, for
taking the initiative of organizing this open debate of
the Security Council on "Peace-building: towards a
comprehensive approach". I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his important statement.

I would like to refer to a few issues that in the
view of my delegation require special attention. The
first is the need to deal with the root causes of conflict.
Today it is acknowledged that peace-building does not
solely involve post-conflict situations but also
encompasses a whole series of long-term activities in
the political, institutional and development fields.
Actually, the implementation of such measures helps to
do away with root causes of conflict, in particular
internal conflict. This is why it is important that we
establish programmes for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants.

Similarly, special attention should be given to the
problem of the circulation and illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons. These weapons in
circulation in developing countries, especially in
Africa, are responsible for 90 per cent of deaths caused
by conflicts in the post-cold war period. The struggle
against this trafficking is a peace-building activity. The
international community must mobilize and work
towards the elaboration of normative international laws
that are progressive and effective in nature to take
control of the situation of illicit trafficking of this
category of arms. To this end, the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which will be held
here in New York in July 2001, to be a success -
something we all hope for - should deal with all the
aspects, including those pertaining to the legal trade,
and with the transparency that is required for that.

The Security Council Summit in September 2000
emphasized that in order for the Council to be effective
and to carry out its responsibilities for maintaining
international peace and security effectively, it is
essential to cope with conflicts at all stages - that is,
from prevention to settlement, and then to peace-
building.

Another aspect just as important in this problem
of peace-building pertains to the need to adopt a global
and integrated strategy. To this end, it is important for
all those involved in this sphere - including United
Nations bodies and agencies and regional and
subregional organizations, as well as international
financial institutions - to lend their assistance to do
away with tensions before they lead us to the outbreak
of a genuine armed conflict. Similarly, when the
Council decides to deploy a peacekeeping mission, it is
important to elaborate the strategies for the
establishment and consolidation of peace, including for
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants, especially child soldiers, as well as
other groups in society that have been excluded from
productive activities that generate income.

In the same vein, my delegation is of the view
that we should carry out that conflict-prevention and
peace-building strategy in close cooperation and
coordination with the relevant regional and subregional
organizations. In that regard, the recommendations set
out in the report of the Secretary-General entitled "We
the peoples: the role of the United Nations in the
twenty-first century" (A/54/2000) and in the report of
the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations
(S/2000/809) deserve our full support. Recent events in
Sierra Leone indicate the valuable role that regional
organizations can play. Their efforts should thus be
supported through regular consultations and more
frequent contacts between the Security Council and
officials from those organizations; these would be
useful opportunities to exchange information and to
consider the situation ifjoint peace-building action is
deemed necessary.

