Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia is grateful for the
briefing we received from the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Mali and Head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), Mr. Mahamat Saleh
Annadif, on the situation in the Republic of Mali and
developments concerning the activities being carried
out by the Mission on the ground. We also welcome
the briefing we heard from the Ambassador of
Sweden, Mr. Olof Skoog, in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017) concerning Mali. We would also like to take this
opportunity to welcome His Excellency Mr. Tieman
Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Republic of Mali.

Before beginning our statement, we would like to
express our condolences and regret to the Governments
of the Niger and Chad, as well as to the families and
relatives of the MINUSMA staff who lost their lives in
the deadly attacks that took place in Gao and Kidal in
recent days.

Bolivia commends the important efforts made by
the Government of Mali as it seeks to strengthen its
institutional framework, achieve substantial progress in
the legislative and electoral fields, and set benchmarks
for the effective implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and its respective
provisions in the context of inclusive political dialogue.
We are hopeful that the strengthening of those processes
will continue to encourage the Security Council, the
international community and, of course, the people and
Government of Mali.

We also welcome the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali
and the Head of MINUSMA for the efforts that he
has undertaken to achieve peace and stability in that
brotherly country. We welcome the cooperation of the
countries that contribute troops and police contingents
to serve in MINUSMA. We would like to express our
gratitude to the MINUSMA peacekeeping staff who
risk their lives, and we pay tribute to those who have
sacrificed their lives in fulfilling their duties.

We acknowledge that the challenges faced by
MINUSMA have evolved since the Mission was
deployed in 2013. The Mission is not only faced with
the violence unleashed by armed groups but must
also counter the growing threat posed by terrorist
groups and transnational crime. The terrorist threat
continues to put at risk the well-being and the very
lives of the civilian population and has put the brakes
on the economic growth and social development of the
country, which has contributed to the proliferation of
transnational organized crime and its repercussions
in the subregion, in addition to having significantly
depleted the capacities of the Malian security forces,
which have been the subject of horrific attacks.

Asymmetric attacks using improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) and small arms and light weapons
continue to worsen conditions on the ground. We are
deeply concerned to see that the insecurity in the north
and centre of Mali has continued to grow. Attacks on
State authority and Government institutions make it
abundantly clear that there is a need to craft strategies
that would provide for more effective and efficient
security mechanisms in the more vulnerable sectors
and regions.

MINUSMA's priority should be to protect civilians
who live under the threat of physical violence, bearing
in mind that the main responsibility in that area lies
with the Malian authorities. We deem it vital to point
out that the Malian forces have suffered the most lethal
attacks and saw an increase in the number of casualties
and injuries. According to the most recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/273), 45 soldiers were
killed and 80 injured, compared with the 23 killed and
eight injured in the previous reporting period. This
underscores the vital need for MINUSMA, in line
with resolution 2364 (2017), to adopt a more active and
proactive stance in order to be able to fulfil its mandate.

On that understanding, we encourage MINUSMA
to continue to promote the implementation of the
memorandum of understanding with the Malian
Government, which will allow it to support the Malian
armed forces in the operational field as well as in
terms of intelligence-gathering, medical evacuation,
the elimination and handling of explosive ordnance,
and demining.

We therefore call on the Mission to redouble its
efforts in the area of coordination and exchange of
information with the Malian Government, so that
concrete, factual data can be obtained that can then be
captured in the relevant reports to be received by the
Security Council. The goal here is to maintain support
and enhance confidence-building measures between
the host State and MINUSMA.

In the light of the aforementioned, it is clear
that the security situation in Mali and in the broader
Sahel region is riven with major challenges. Bolivia
highlights the efforts made by regional and subregional
organizations, led by the African Union, in cooperation
and coordination with the Group of Five for the Sahel
joint force. We believe that such cooperation is vital in
order to combat transnational organized crime and to
ensure better and safer living conditions for the local
civilian population.

To conclude, it is vital to underscore that in this
particular instance the deep-rooted causes of conflict
that led to the volatile security situation in the region
are intrinsically related to the consequences of the
policies of interventionism and regime change.
Indeed, in the wake of the 2011 conflict in Libya, the
collateral destabilizing effects led to chaos, terrorism
and the militarization of the Sahel, with regrettable
consequences that persist to this day.

We call on and encourage the international
community to continue to lend its assistance, through
technical support and economic and humanitarian
cooperation, to all initiatives aimed at benefiting the
Malian people, with a view to achieving definitive
peace and stability in the region.

