Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to thank
Mr. Tanin, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his informative briefing and continued
service. I also appreciate the statements made by First
Deputy Prime Minister Dacie and Ambassador Citaku.

As an Ambassador to the United Nations residing
in New York, I have one important lesson in mind when
attending any Security Council meeting, which is that
we should conduct discussions based on the realities on
the ground and, when appropriate, call for measures
to be taken. The Council should always pay attention
to developments on the ground. One such is that the
local elections held throughout Kosovo were conducted
in a fairly peaceful manner, including in areas with
Serb majorities, despite some challenges, and that the
new Government of Kosovo, formed in September,
is embarking on a smooth political administration
transition. Another is that Kosovo has long faced a
number of challenges, including the need to createjobs,
expand foreign direct investment, normalize relations
with Serbia and demarcate its border with Montenegro.
The Government therefore has no time to waste in
squarely facing those challenges.

Another important reality is that the risk of
violence in Kosovo is far lower than in other regions on
our agenda, such as the Middle East and Africa. Since
its establishment in 1999, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has
greatly contributed to the development of self-governing
democratic institutions and ensuring the conditions for
peaceful and normal lives for the citizens of Kosovo.
Today Kosovo has its own Constitution, democratic
Government and parliament. UNMIK is undeniably a
success story for the Security Council.

At the same time, the Council has the responsibility
for determining UNMIK's future. The Mission must
be reviewed so that we can assess which functions
and mandates it alone can provide. We must address
UNMIK's possible duplication of the rule-of-law
activities of the European Union (EU) and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
and consider a physical reduction ofUNMIK personnel.
In addition, an adjustment to the briefing cycle is long
overdue. A half-year cycle or longer is more than
sufficient. Japan very much hopes that the Council
will discuss UNMIK's future functions and make the
necessary decisions calmly.

Of course, while almost 10 years have passed
since Kosovo gained its independence, the realities in
Kosovo are far from rosy. The crucial issues include
reconciliation between Kosovo's Albanian and Serb
communities, which is far from complete, and the
normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia.
In that connection, Japan welcomes the oath taken by
Serb judges and prosecutors and their integration into
Kosovo's justice system last month, in accordance
with the agreement between the two leaders in the
EU-facilitated dialogue in August. The Government of
Kosovo must now accelerate the establishment of the
long-awaited association/community of Serb-majority
municipalities in order to honour the 2013 agreement
on the subject with Serbia.

Regarding the relations between the two sides,
Japan appreciates President Vueie's recent remarks on
his commitment to a final resolution of the conflict, and
we have taken note of the commencement last month
of an internal dialogue. The environment for dialogue
between the two sides on their status has been gradually
improving, thanks in part to the call by President Thaci
of Kosovo for an internal dialogue as well. Japan hopes
very much that with the assistance of the EU, the two
sides will succeed in normalizing their relations in the
near future through high-level, serious dialogue, while
promoting tolerance and refraining from provocative
ethnic rhetoric.

In conclusion, Japan is confident that Kosovo
will achieve reconciliation among its ethnic groups
under democratic governance, and sustained economic
growth by exploiting its abundant natural resources and
facilitating a predictable business environment. Japan
fully supports Kosovo's efforts to that end, as well as
its aspirations for European integration.

