Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): Permit me at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. Your diplomatic skill
and great experience are a guarantee of your beneficial
work within this United Nations organ. In addition, my
delegation wishes to thank Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for presenting this
morning the objective and substantive report of the
Secretary-General to the Security Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2004/431).

I am grateful for the opportunity given my
delegation to address this important United Nations
organ and to express our concerns and our views on
one of the most momentous problems afflicting the
international community. Undoubtedly, this problem is
most appalling and abhorrent, because it reflects
conduct that is absolutely foreign to humanity's most
basic ethical and moral principles and that is
diametrically opposed to all considerations and
principles established by humanity throughout the
centuries as the basic premises of civilized coexistence.
Among them, we must give priority to respect for life,
for human dignity and for the rights that belong to and
protect men and women, children and the elderly,
prisoners, displaced persons and refugees - in short,
every member of the human race - in times of peace
and in times of war. This momentous problem, which
the international community must face urgently, firmly
and enduringly, relates to the situation of civilian
populations in armed conflicts, who suffer the worst
and most unimaginable atrocities, which are revolting
to human dignity and to the human conscience and
rend the social fabric of nations.

Until recently, wars and conflicts took place
mainly between States, which to some extent observed
international law and international humanitarian law -
with exceptions, of course. However, internal conflicts
have now proliferated all around the world, but mainly
in the developing world, with total disregard and
disrespect for international law. They are tragic, and
they prey on populations, societies, cultures and the
future of many nations, subjecting women and children
to violent atrocities by recruiting them for evil
commercial and economic interests, mainly foreign, by
breaking up entire families and by destroying the
fundamental nucleus of any society - the family. Even
worse, all these atrocities are committed primarily in
nations whose people during a great part of their
history have faced merciless enemies like hunger,
poverty and unsanitary conditions while being mere
spectators of the devastation of their natural resources
by outside forces.

It is time for the international community and the
United Nations to show strong political will and attach
the highest priority to facing, mitigating and, whenever
possible, eliminating all atrocities that every day drown
entire societies in pain and despair in full View of the
distant and impassive eye of those who have the power
to stop them and to end the rampant impunity of their
authors.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts, contained in
document S/2004/43l, is eloquent and reveals a tragic
reality. Its contents must shake the collective
conscience of the international community, especially
of States that, although they are in a position to make a
timely and significant contribution to the financing of
United Nations stabilization, peacekeeping and
humanitarian assistance operations, do not do so. They
ignore the fact that, in zones where armed conflict
occurs, human lives are lost every day, and every day
the whole international legal system is further damaged
and debilitated.

Could it be that Chapters V, VI and VII of the
Charter are not enough to ensure rapid and effective
United Nations and Security Council action to maintain
international peace and security and impose the rule of
international law? Or could it be, perhaps, that political
interests of various sorts have more weight than the
legal system whose formulation and adoption cost the
international community of nations so much effort?

The Secretary-General states very clearly in his
report that,

"In the five years since the framework to
strengthen the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts was initiated, the system of public
international order has been under unprecedented
pressure",

and that

multilateral approaches to peace and
security have been challenged. Greater public and
international awareness of the Geneva
Conventions on the conduct of war and the
Additional Protocols thereto has not been
translated into action. In the 18 months since the
issuance of my last report, the very fundamentals
of international humanitarian law and human
rights have been under great pressure and there
are concerns that counter-terrorism measures
have not always complied with human rights
obligations." (S/2004/43], para. 57)

To that end, Ecuador welcomes the Secretary-
General's decision to appoint a Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide in order to provide the
Organization with a better early warning system in
situations that cause concern and to improve the basis
of action of the United Nations. At the same time, it
supports his call to ensure that "large-scale or systematic
international crimes do not go unchallenged and are
prevented or stopped as early as possible" (para. 39).

Ecuador also agrees with his statement that "The
need for reconciliation in post-conflict situations must
be tempered with a clear commitment to ending
impunity for serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law" (para 55).

It is up to the Security Council, in accordance
with its mandate under the Charter of the United
Nations and with the commitment undertaken on the
elements of the 10-point platform that the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs presented
to the Council in December 2003, to strengthen the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts. Otherwise,
the whole international legal framework could be
derailed and violence and discrimination could spread
all over the world, not only for ethnic, racial, religious,
cultural or political reasons, but, above all, because of
the hunger, poverty and despair of the population of
three fourths of the world.

Let us be consistent and act in accordance with
the highest ideals that led the States Members of the
Organization to endorse the Charter. We the peoples of
the United Nations should strengthen international
instruments, broaden the scope of their application and
find suitable mechanisms to ensure that those legal
instruments bind not only the States members of the
international community but also the irregular groups
that use, exploit and commit atrocities against human
beings and civilian populations. Let us repudiate the
participants in conflicts who violate moral and ethical
principles and the legal norms related to civilian
populations.

