The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Senegal.

In voting unanimously in favour of resolution
2321 (2016), thereby strengthening and expanding the
sanctions imposed on the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, our Council has shown strong unity in its will
to urge the North Korean authorities to give up their
nuclear and military programme, which violates the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, as well as
the non-proliferation regime.

That very strong and unanimous message was
possible thanks to the United States delegation, our
facilitator, which cooperated closely with the Chinese
delegation. We hope that the additional measures
of resolution 2321 (2016) will lead the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to fully cooperate with the
Security Council, and thereby allow for the resumption
of negotiations within the framework of the Six-
Party Talks, so as to denuclearize and stabilize the
Korean peninsula.

We have said on many occasions that sanctions are
a means and not an end. With the objective of paving
the way for a political process, the humanitarian aspect
of the new measures is quite telling. The complexity
and scope of the measures specified in the resolution
will require, as was indicated by the Secretary-General,
technical assistance, as well as capacity-building, in
order to make it possible for Member States ofthe United
Nations, and the international community as a whole,
to implement them effectively. It will also be a test of
the determination and will of the Security Council.

As we are talking about non-proliferation, my
delegation would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate Senegal's commitment to full respect by all
for the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty. Echoing the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt, I call for the establishment
of nuclear-weapon-free zones throughout the world,
including in the Middle East. To conclude, Senegal
calls for total nuclear disarmament.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Republic
of Korea.

