Mr. J a'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me, Madam President, to begin by
congratulating you on your country's presidency of the
Security Council this month. I would also like to thank
the speakers who have briefed us this morning.

The Syrian Government continues to do everything
possible to shoulder its responsibility and duty towards
its people in order to meet the humanitarian and
basic needs of its citizens. It is doing so in spite of
economic, political and media pressure, including of
course the arbitrary unilateral economic measures that
have been imposed against the Syrian people by some
States Members of this international Organization.
That is in addition to the pressure exerted against the
Syrian economy and the manipulation of our national
currency, as well as the continued support being
provided to armed terrorist groups entering Syria
across our borders from neighbouring countries in
order to undertake acts of destruction, terrorism and
violence and to obliterate every means of survival for
Syrian citizens, including our infrastructure, crops and
ability to provide humanitarian assistance.

The Syrian Government participated seriously
and effectively in the negotiations that led to the
adoption of the fifth humanitarian support plan. It has
also continued its constructive cooperation with the
United Nations system to address the humanitarian
consequences of the events in a positive and pragmatic
manner. We welcome the extension of the objectives
under the assistance plan, including projects aimed at
supporting the Syrian Government in revitalizing key
sectors and to rebuild our infrastructure, which has
been systematically targeted by armed terrorist groups.

Allow me now to turn to some of the steps taken by
the Syrian Government since the previous briefing to
the Council (see S/PV.6949).

In an attempt to coordinate our national and
international efforts to provide comprehensive
international assistance to all those who deserve it, the
competent authorities of the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic have established a high commission on
assistance made up of national committees. Its purpose
is to ensure the return of displaced families to their
homes or to provide them with temporary housing in
order to meet their basic needs and provide them with
the necessary financial assistance. As of 17 June,
the Government of Syria had set up approximately
803 temporary housing units throughout the country.
Those include community centres, schools and
governmental buildings. There are now approximately
918,000 displaced families throughout Syrian territory.

In addition, there is also a governmental committee
in place to address reconstruction issues and serve those
whose properties have been destroyed. That committee
also helps to rehabilitate and maintain infrastructure
and several Government buildings.

The Government has also taken steps to facilitate
the work of United Nations agencies in providing
relief by increasing the number of non-governmental
organizations to 14. That is in addition to the 82 national
groups working throughout the country.

We have also allowed international organizations
to carry out approximately 800 visits to evaluate
needs and provide assistance. Three hubs have been
established, and the Government is considering the
opening of additional ones. That is in addition to the
work being carried out by the World Food Programme.

The cooperation of the Syrian Government with the
United Nations is governed by the Charter of the United
Nations and General Assembly resolution 46/182,
including the Guiding Principles for Humanitarian
Assistance and the revised humanitarian relief plan.
The Government is fully committed to working
within that framework. However, at the same time,
the Government is calling upon the Secretariat and the
Member States to show the same level of respect for the
Charter of the United Nations, including full respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

Dealing with civilians should not be done in
a selective, opportunistic or politicized manner.
Statements to the effect that there are approximately
2,500 persons trapped in Homs, when the Syrian
Government is ensuring their security and that they
have access to assistance, as well as doing everything
possible to open up the area and clear it of terrorist
actions, should not divert our attention from the
blockade that has been imposed by armed terrorist
groups against hundreds of thousands of Syria's
inhabitants. We have not heard any comment from the
United Nations on that issue.

With regard to the humanitarian tragedy caused by
armed terrorist groups and their supporters, including
States Members of the Organization, I should like to
mention the towns of Nebbol and Al-Zahraa, which have
been under blockade for more than a year by such groups
crossing into our territory from Turkey. The 2 million
citizens of Aleppo, who suffer from terror imposed by
extremist terrorist groups known to everyone through
social media, including Al-Qaida - do they not also
deserve a mention by the Secretary-General? Do the
citizens of Nebbol and Al-Zahraa not deserve even a
limited response from the United Nations in order
to break the blockade? Interest has been shown with
regard to the thousands of people living in Homs, while
hundreds of thousands of others in northern Syria are
ignored.

Returning to Homs, the Government of Syria
has extended a formal invitation to the International
Committee of the Red Cross to provide emergency
relief, in cooperation with the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent, to help people under blockade in the old city,
who are being used by armed terrorist groups.

Some in the United Nations justify their
determination to provide humanitarian relief across
international borders by asserting that the Government
has not provided assistance to all regions. However, the
figures speak for themselves. The statistics ofthe World
Food Programme, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Committee of the Red Cross speak for themselves.
Sixty per cent of assistance is being channelled to
regions where the armed terrorist groups are operating,
while only 40 per cent is being sent to other regions.

A report dated 23 May by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees referred to
14 joint United Nations convoys gaining access to hot
spots that were not previously accessible in Aleppo,
Idlib, Homs and Dayr Al-Zour, in order to provide
assistance to approximately 975,000 persons. The
World Food Programme is also providing assistance in
Nashabiya, Al-Moadamyeh and Duma, in the vicinity
of Damascus, as well as in Al-Mayadin district of Dayr
Al-Zour. According to United Nations sources, during
the first half of the year, 10 convoys were deployed to
assist approximately 1 million inhabitants, including
in A'zaz, Akramah, Bab Al-Hawa and Atma, along
the Turkish border, as well as Talbisah, in Homs and
Sarmin in the governorate of Idlib.

The lack of financing continues to be the major
obstacle to implementing the relief plan. We are
surprised that, following the largest humanitarian
appeal launched by United Nations agencies and
their partners in recent times, financing has to date
reached only 35 per cent of the amount required for the
implementation of the relief plan. According to a report
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, if financing is not received in time, the basic
relief needed for survival will be jeopardized by the
beginning of September.

Displaced Syrians continue to return to their
homes on a regular basis, in particular refugees in
neighbouring States. In that connection, I should like
to refer to some statistics documented by the United
Nations and its agencies. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has reported
the voluntary return of thousands of Syrians from Iraq,
Jordan and Turkey. Sixty-eight thousand persons have
returned to Syria, 9,000 arriving in the month of June
alone, mostly from the Zaatari refugee camp. Forty-five
thousand Syrians have returned from Turkey, while
9,000 have come back from Iraq. We regret the fact that
some Governments have seized Syrians' identification
documents to prevent them from returning to their
country. Worse still, those people have been intimidated
and dissuaded from returning voluntarily to their
homes.

The diplomatic-political-media machine gives us
unreliable and fabricated statistics and information as
to the number of dead, refugees and prisoners in Syria.
Those statistics come from unprofessional sources.
Moreover, an American company has been officially
entrusted with preparing the statistics, in spite of the
fact that it is associated with a State whose hostility
towards Syria is well known. Such institutions are not
interested in knowing where each refugee or person
killed came from, or whether they were from the Syria
Arab Army or the police force.

Our army faces unprecedented terrorism from
extremist groups that have come from all four corners
of the Earth to destroy Syria and kill Syrians. This is a
historic moment that requires the courage to recognize
the reality we face and to stand against the international
terrorism confronting Syria, which is underming all
international efforts to combat terrorism.

We are seeing a new face of terrorism that is quite
different. Some call it a jihad, others call it an armed
struggle and others still call it sexual jihad. This is
transnational terrorism and it has a negative impact on
everyone. That is well known to the States Members
of the Organization. Opposition forces today stated
that the Al-Nusra Front, which is linked to Al-Qaida,
intends to declare an Islamic Syrian State in the north
of the country by the end of the month of Ramadan.
Those terrorists, who come from abroad via our border
with Turkey, have Takfiri and Salafist tendencies. They
are jihadists and are sponsored by Governments hostile
to Syria, which finance terrorism that is killing only
Syrians. However, as has already been the case for
some States, that terrorism will reach the doors of those
who sponsor it. If Member States do not recognize
the dangers of that type of terrorism, then there will
not be peace for anyone and the day will come when
the Governments of some Member States will regret
their actions against the Syrian people from a social,
economic and infrastructure standpoint.

We are fighting Salafist terrorism on behalf of
the entire world. Others have had to do the same in
Afghanistan, Mali, the Niger, Nigeria, Iraq, Lebanon,
Egypt, Libya and Tunisia. That is the terrorism we face
today in Syria. It is not dissociated from the terrorism
that all Members face. Lybian weapons arrive through
official convoys, aeroplanes and ships to neighbouring
States Members of the Organization. Some say that
there are 2,500 individuals in Horns whom the Security
Council needs to intervene to save. In fact, hundreds of
thousands of Syrians are suffering from terrorism. That
is today's reality.

