Mr. ngowe (Botswana): The recent Summit
meeting of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) was an important milestone in the
search for peace in Liberia. The outcome of the meeting
reflects the unity of purpose of the States of the subregion
and their resolve to help Liberians find a permanent
political solution to the crisis which has bedevilled their
country for far too long. Botswana commends ECOWAS
member States for the monumental work they have done
to give Liberia yet another chance to settle its political
problems, even after several such chances were in the
past squandered by the faction leaders.

We particularly welcome the decision of the Heads
of State of ECOWAS to impose measures on those
leaders who obstruct the peace process. The active
participation and contribution of the organizations of civil
society at the Abuja Summit is an important development
in articulating the voices of the disenfranchised people of
Liberia. They represent the hopes and aspirations of the
silent majority that we have been calling on the
international community not to abandon, and it is time the
faction leaders paid close attention to what they have to
say.
The commitment and determination of the member
States of ECOWAS to resolve the crisis in Liberia is
beyond reproach. The revised schedule for the
implementation of the Abuja peace Agreement is a
demonstration of the importance ECOWAS attaches to the
peace process in Liberia. Significant adjustments have
been made to the mandate of the Economic Community
of West African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) to
enable the subregional peace-keeping force to meet any
challenges and obstacles it may encounter in the
implementation of the revised schedule. Moreover, several
States of the subregion have stated their readiness to
contribute additional troops to strengthen the operational
capability of ECOMOG. ECOWAS has thus responded
constructively and creatively to the suggestions made by
some members of the international community to stay the
course. It is only fair that the international community
should respond appropriately to the needs of ECOMOG
to enable it to deploy its troops in accordance with the
revised schedule.

The humanitarian situation in Liberia requires the
continued attention of the international community.
Humanitarian organizations have been at the forefront of

 

the efforts to deliver much-needed assistance to the people
of Liberia, sometimes at great risk to the personal safety of
their personnel. The Council is therefore right to make a
clear and unequivocal demand that the faction leaders
strictly respect the status of personnel of the humanitarian
organizations. The wanton looting of equipment belonging
to United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations dealt a severe blow to the work of the
humanitarian community. This is an intolerable pattern of
behaviour which the Security Council cannot condone. It
must stop. It is only right that the Council insist on the
return of all stolen property. It is important for the faction
leaders to realize that they cannot escape responsibility for
the actions of the combatants they unleashed on the citizens
of Liberia, on their property and on equipment belonging to
the international community. We therefore look forward to
the report of the Secretary-General on this matter.

Botswana fully supports the extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL) for a further period of three months. The States
of the subregion deserve the strong support of the United
Nations. It is important that the United Nations should
continue to play an active role in the resolution of the
political crisis in Liberia. The United Nations has an
important contribution to make in the implementation of the
Abuja Agreement. The cease-fire, the disengagement and
the demobilization of the combatants, the return and
resettlement of refugees and displaced persons and the
electoral process are the major phases of the Abuja peace
Agreement which need the support and close involvement
of the United Nations system. The United Nations will also
help bludgeon the Liberian faction leaders to implement in
full and on time the commitments and obligations they
undertook under the Abuja peace Agreement. The faction
leaders must not be allowed to hold the whole nation
hostage to their desire to rule at all costs. The Liberian
faction leaders must not be allowed to frustrate the efforts
of the international community to resolve the political crisis
in Liberia. They must not be allowed to realize their
objective of forcing the United Nations out of Liberia. It
must be made clear to them that they will be held
personally accountable for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights.

In conclusion, I wish to congratulate Ms. Ruth Perry
on her assumption of the chairmanship of the Council of
State. Ms. Perry assumes the onerous tasks of guiding
government business at a crucial moment in the history of
the Liberian peace process. She has the full support and
best wishes of Botswana as she nurtures the very delicate
process of turning despair into hope.

