Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open meeting of the Council, which will allow the
Member States to express their views on this very
important issue.

For the past few weeks, the larger membership of
this Organization has been closely monitoring the issue
from the sidelines. We watched with great interest and
growing unease the developments in the Council which
threatened to jeopardize the continuing mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH). We were gratified that on 3 July the
Council agreed to extend the mandate of UNMIBH
until 15 July. The 12-day technical rollover will allow
more time for consultations among Council members
so that a compromise could be worked out.

It cannot be denied that since its establishment
UNMIBH has made a tremendous contribution towards
consolidating the rule of law and political stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is also clear that UNMIBH
is rapidly moving towards completing its core tasks by
the end of the year. Nevertheless, as also noted by the
Secretary-General, the Bosnian State and its
institutions are still fragile and under pressure from the
so-called nationalist forces. The continuing failure to
apprehend indicted war criminals also remains an
obstacle to permanent peace and national reconciliation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is important, under the
present circumstances, for the Council to continue its
support for Bosnia and Herzegovina by extending, as
planned, the mandate of the Mission.

The continuing existence of UNMIBH would
allow the United Nations to proceed without
interruption its planned activities for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including the holding of national
elections on 5 October 2002. That would be an
important day for the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and it would be a shame if the elections
were marred by the Council's failure to extend
UNMIBH's mandate. Such an outcome would be a
great mistake, tantamount to the Council abandoning
its responsibility towards the maintenance of
international peace and security in the still unstable
Balkans.

As a country that has consistently supported
United Nations and international involvement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Malaysia hopes nothing will
be done by the Council that would jeopardize peace
and security in that country and dash the hopes and
aspirations of its people.

We regret that the Security Council has been
placed in a difficult and untenable situation with
respect to the continuance of UNMIBH and, more
specifically, to the future of United Nations
peacekeeping operations in general. We understand and
respect the concerns of the United States pertaining to
the International Criminal Court (ICC); we also have
concerns and reservations, and it would have been
convenient for us not to participate in this debate.

Notwithstanding its position on the ICC,
Malaysia views the enactment of the Rome Statute and
the establishment of the ICC as significant to the
development of international law to address the
impunity of war crimes, genocide, crimes against
humanity and crimes of aggression, which are major
concerns for Member States, without exception.

Therefore we consider it inappropriate for the
future of UNMIBH, and possibly other United Nations
peacekeeping operations, to be linked to the issue of
the jurisdiction of the ICC. The objectives of the ICC
and peacekeeping operations do not contradict each
other, and the existence of one should not preclude the
other.

Malaysia is particularly concerned about the view
that the ICC is a threat to peacekeepers in that they are
vulnerable to "politicized prosecutions". Should this
view gain currency, it would seriously undermine
United Nations peacekeeping operations or even lead
to their demise, as no State would be willing to put
their troops at risk.

Malaysia believes that giving immunity to the
peacekeepers would send a wrong and unacceptable
message, that they are above the law. No category of
persons serving in United Nations peacekeeping
missions should be above the law. We believe there are
sufficient safeguards, mentioned by previous speakers,
to ensure that the ICC does not obstruct the functioning
of peacekeeping operations. We believe the fears and
concerns of the United States are unfounded. We also
believe these fears and concerns have been allayed by
statements made in the Council as well as by the
Secretary-General's letter of 3 July, and we hope that
the United States will be able to reconsider its position.
Like many others, we attach importance to the role and
participation of the United States in UNMIBH and
other United Nations peacekeeping missions and
express the hope that it will continue to be actively
engaged in current and future United Nations
peacekeeping missions.

Peacekeeping is, and remains, an essential and
indispensable tool available to the United Nations for
maintaining international peace and security. However,
its viability and effectiveness would be seriously
affected if it were to allow different sets of rules to
govern different groups of peacekeepers. Consistency
and universality are essential elements in ensuring the
success of United Nations peacekeeping operations, in
as much as they are essential in the operationalization
of international law. There is no room for special
exceptions or exemptions under international law.

What is at stake is a fundamental principle of
international law. It is vitally important for the Council
not to take a decision that would have the effect of
changing or amending the terms of an international
treaty, which the United States draft resolution sets out
to do in respect of the Rome Statute. Such changes or
amendments could only be effected in accordance with
procedures established by the treaty, with the full
consent of the States parties, as provided for by the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. We do not
believe that the Security Council should be empowered
to override the intention of the parties to any treaty.
That would establish a bad precedent, with serious
future ramifications.
We fear that adoption of the United States
proposal would place the Security Council in a difficult
position. Its credibility would be questioned, as a
number of parties to the Rome Statute have indicated
they would be compelled to re-examine the legality of
such a decision of the Council. Therefore, we hope the
Council will be able to find the collective wisdom and
political will to resolve the matter amicably as early as
possible without jeopardizing UNMIBH's extension
and the functioning of other United Nations
peacekeeping missions. We trust, Mr. President, that
your own leadership role and well-known creativity
and resourcefulness will enable you to resolve this
impasse in the Council without compromising
fundamental principles and norms of international law.

