Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, let me join others in congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of March. Please be assured of my delegation's full support for your presidency. I would also like to extend my delegation's appreciation to the Permanent Representative of Belgium, His Excellency Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve, and his whole team for their excellent presidency in the month of February. I would also like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her comprehensive briefing. There have been many encouraging signs of progress in the reconstruction and reform process in Iraq. We welcome those developments, as we are convinced that, if we all invest more broadly in the people of Iraq, success will be attainable. To that end, Indonesia reaffirms its support for Iraqi sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity, and would like to underscore the following points. First, with regard to the importance of stability and security in Iraq, stability and security are the prerequisite conditions for successful post-conflict recovery and economic development in the country. In recent months, we have witnessed how fragile those conditions are; any miscalculation could derail any progress that has been achieved so far. However, we are encouraged that the parties are exercising maximum restraint and remaining committed to supporting Iraq in its quest for peace and prosperity. Conflict and military operations are not an option for a country that has been affected by war for so long. Indonesia strongly supports Iraq's effort to combat the remnants of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) with the support of the international community. The focus must now be on eliminating every threat posed by ISIL in the country. We believe that the support of all, particularly neighbouring countries, is crucial, and we commend Iraq's efforts in continuing to strengthen its relations with its neighbours. Secondly, with regard to Iraq's nation-building efforts, my delegation would once again like to voice its support of Iraq's journey to democracy and prosperity for its people. We urge that the measures undertaken by the Government to meet public demands be continued. We also support the steps being taken in connection with electoral reform and welcome the adoption of the law on the Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC) and the appointment of the new IHEC Chief Executive Officer, who is a woman. We encourage the appointment of more female officials in the upper ranks of governance. We also hope that the designation of a new prime minister and the formation of a new cabinet will soon be realized, with a view towards swift action being taken to develop and implement reforms that meet the aspirations of all groups, including minorities. Thirdly, with regard to the humanitarian file, as reported by the Secretary-General (S/2020/140), recent political upheaval posed some operational and security challenges for humanitarian operations. In that regard, we call on the Government of Iraq to continue to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance by United Nations agencies and partners. Indonesia also continues to express its support for vigorous efforts aimed at making further progress concerning missing Kuwaiti persons and third-country nationals, as well as the return of Kuwaiti property, including the archives. Not only is that an important humanitarian concern, it is also of great importance for further reconciliation between the two countries. In conclusion, we would again like to express our support for the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. We encourage its various reconstruction and reform programmes in support of the people and the Government of Iraq undertaken in pursuit of its mandate.
