Mr. Ybafiez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the presidency of New Zealand and to you, Minister
McCully, for convening this meeting. I also congratulate
the Foreign Minister of the United Kingdom, Minister
Johnson, and his team on their good work in introducing
and facilitating the adoption of resolution 2309 (2016),
which we have just adopted. I also thank Ms. Fang Liu,
Secretary General of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), for her excellent briefing.
Spain is aware of the threat posed by terrorism
to civil aviation, and has therefore supported and
co-sponsored todays' resolution from the start. It is
obvious that civil aviation is a priority target of terrorist
groups around the world. It is a critical sector of our
economies and no State is free of this threat. Aircraft
in flight are particularly vulnerable, and they and their
passengers are far from their own national security
forces during long periods. The terrorists know this
and try to take exploit the opportunities offered by
this weakes link in the chain of protection. Often, they
have an edge over the States that are entrusted with
protecting their civilians.

Every State knows that, no matter how effective their
security measures may be, the security of its nationals
depends on the effectiveness of the measures in the
States where they embark, transit and land. Citizens
of all countries can be threatened in any corner of the
world in the air spaces subject to the sovereignty of one
or several States, not one of which may be the issuer
of their passports. Terrorism is indeed a global threat
and, by definition, its threat to civil aviation makes it
a global threat. Joint responses from all Governments
and the same security protocols, standards and codes of
conduct are therefore critically important.

By adopting resolution 2309 (2016), we are hoping
that when we fly the security framework will be the
same for all citizens, regardless of where they come
from or where they are going. We must seek to avoid
the vulnerabilities that may arise in any region and
do so pursuant to the spirit of ICAO and its motto that
no country will be left behind. For reasons of clear
solidarity, but also because citizens of any country may
be at risk wherever they are, it is in all our interests
to ensure that no Government lacks the necessary
capacities to address this threat.

We commend the extraordinary work of the
International Civil Aviation Organization. Our
objective in supporting today's resolution is to give full
backing to its work. Indeed, we see here a wonderful
example of good practices and cooperation among
various actors of the United Nations system that are
responsible for the fight against terrorism. We therefore
believe it important and strategic for ICAO and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
to maintain and strengthen their cooperative efforts
against terrorism that targets civil aviation.

The Security Council reminds countries to abide by
the ICAO recommendations and to give it the support
it needs not just to prevent but to anticipate this ever-
changing menace, ever ready to come up with new
threats to security. My country is an active participant
in various national and international projects related
to the terrorist threat to aviation that are consonant
with the provisions of resolution 2309 (2016), which
we have just adopted. We are working on areas such
as methodologies and the use of technology to detect
explosives. We are also working on man-portable
air defence systems, drones and ways of identifying
terrorists at border points. We are also implementing
advanced passenger recognition systems. We believe
that the more information we can exchange, the
greater and more immediate the effect on improved
flight security.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing that with
the work that is currently under way, coupled with
today's resolution, civil aviation is likely to be ever more
safe and secure, but we must ensure that every State
complies faithfully with the resolution's provisions.

