Sir Jeremy Greenstock: I am very grateful to
you, Sir, for calling this general debate on this subject a
year on from the creation of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), because I think it has been both
informative and, I am glad to say, very supportive of
the programme which the CTC has set itself. That
broad support is very necessary to me and to members
of the Committee because the best way for mandatory
obligations to be fulfilled is through active and
voluntary cooperation between Member States.

I have been impressed by the evidence in this
debate that the unity of United Nations Member States
in condemning and combating terrorism has been fully
sustained over this past year. I am very pleased that the
CTC's programme has been warmly supported both
within the Security Council and by Member States
outside it. It is a programme of coordination, of
stimulation of activity, of assistance to those who need
it and, of course, of assessment of where the gaps are.
On that last point - and I think the Permanent
Representative of Nepal has just referred to this - we
will begin, over this next period, to get more pointed in
calling for effective action to fill the gaps that our
experts and we identify.

I am glad that, in several interventions, there has
been a continuing focus on human rights - on the
denial of human rights that terrorism itself represents,
as the Permanent Representative of Peru pointed out -
and on the need for us to remain aware of human rights
obligations. There have also been many references - I
am glad to say some proud references from those who
have achieved it - to the 12 conventions and to the
need for widespread ratification of those conventions
by Member States. I wish, however, to say once again
how important it is that each Member State, in taking
on board the obligations under those conventions,
understand that it is also necessary to move on to
operational action to give expression to what those
conventions call for. Actually taking measures to
combat terrorism on the territory of each Member State
is a requirement of resolution 1373 (2001). The
conventions are a necessary step on this road, but not a
sufficient one and I think that the Council is united in
both realizing that and in calling for that action.

I am very pleased to hear of continuing activity,
not just on the regional but on the subregional level as
well. We heard this morning from members of the
Georgia Uzbekistan Ukraine Azerbaijan Moldova
Group in Eastern Europe; of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development in North-East Africa; and of
the Southern Africa Development Community in
southern Africa. The Economic Community of West
African States is also taking measures as a subregion in
this area to complement the work which the great
regional organizations are doing in the continents. I
hope that every Member State within its own region
will consider subregional activity with its immediate
neighbours, because collective activity among those
who depend on each other to keep the defences up
against terrorism is very important. Within that, of
course, as the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia
pointed out, it is vital that assistance be available not
just to Member States individually, but also to their
regional and subregional organizations.

I would like to remind Member States with
respect to the approach of the CTC that we will
facilitate such assistance - call for it, identify the need
for it and point to the sources of it - but that we will
not be the operational purveyors of assistance. Those
who need it must be responsible for getting it; those
who give it must make contact with those who require
it; but the CTC will be the active facilitator,
coordinator and supplier of information about such
activity.

Lastly, there were several references to the wider
picture, which is not for this debate to enlarge upon.
But, as the Permanent Observer of the African Union
eloquently pointed out, poor development and poverty
are a growth medium for support for the kind of
activities which terrorists undertake. There is no doubt
in my mind that the effective eradication of terrorism
would both contribute to and be enhanced by effective
sustainable development policies. These are the
responsibility of the whole United Nations
membership, individually and collectively, but anyone
wanting a successful effort against terrorism must be
prepared to contribute to them.

I believe that this has been a useful and
encouraging debate, and I reiterate my thanks to the
Council for its support for the work of the CTC and for
the leadership of the Bureau in that work for the six
months to come.

