Mr. Diabre (spoke in French): It is my honour to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) on
the important issue of East Timor's transition to
independence and the support needed from the
international community to ensure the viability of this
first new State of the millennium. This is an especially
rare privilege because the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Ireland, a country that is a valued partner of UNDP,
is presiding over this meeting.

United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
are well established in East Timor and are determined
to support that nation during the transition period and
the time of independence. Everyone can see how
necessary external assistance will be for many years to
come. To date, offices in Dili have been opened by
UNDP including the United Nations Volunteers
programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Health Organization, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
International Labour Office, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the World Food
Programme, the United Nations Development Fund for
Women and the United Nations Population Fund; they
have implemented major programmes in support of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and the Second Transitional
Government in East Timor in their respective areas of
competence and expertise.

Their activities are coordinated by the United
Nations Development Coordinator, who also represents
UNDP in East Timor. With independence, that post will
become a normal post of United Nations resident
coordinator and UNDP resident representative. The
incumbent will serve as assistant to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and will be
charged with enhancing the cohesiveness of the work
of the United Nations system in East Timor and with
ensuring close cooperation among the United Nations
mission and United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes. A draft country programme has been
prepared, and a United Nations framework plan for
development assistance should be approved by the new
Government as soon as independence is attained. Then,
regular programmes can be submitted to the governing
bodies of the funds and programmes before the end of
2002.

Let me say what a great contribution the personal
commitment, open-mindedness, intellectual capacity
and tirelessness of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, have
made to the work of the United Nations funds and
programmes. I thank him once again, and I assure him
that we stand with him as he carries out his important
mission, the success of which has been hailed by all.

Over the past two years, assistance provided by
the United Nations Development Group has shifted
from emergency support to reconstruction and
development. Now there is an emphasis on capacity-
building, particularly training, institution-building and
formulating policies, all of which are at the forefront of
concerns for the new nation. With UNDP support, an
overall framework for capacity-building in the public
sector has been formulated and officially adopted.
Health, energy, water, natural-disaster management, the
legal system and the establishment of an inspector-
general's office are among the areas that have received
assistance with a view to building national capacity.
The electoral process too has benefited from
considerable assistance. A coordination unit has been
set up within the Government with a view to ensuring
good coordination of activities and to support efforts to
mobilize donor resources.

(spoke in English)

With the ongoing withdrawal of UNTAET
civilian personnel and the establishment of the Second
Transitional Government, it has become increasingly
obvious that in order to sustain the current success of
the UNTAET mission beyond independence, East
Timor will continue to require significant international
personnel support for an interim period.

For reasons well known to all, there simply are
not enough qualified and experienced East Timorese to
ensure the Viability of the new State and to embark
upon the daunting task of nation-building and ensuring
sustainable development in one of the world's poorest
countries.

As indicated by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and by the Chief Minister, UNDP
has, at the request of the transitional authority,
completed a technical study of human-resource needs
in the short term and the medium term. The study
shows that to ensure political stability, 96 positions
will be required for periods of up to 24 months. Some
of those positions will have line functions, but the
majority will focus on mentoring and advisory services
to develop the skills and knowledge of East Timorese
officials to enable them to take over line positions
immediately. The study also provides illustrations,
using standardized formats for job descriptions related
to the required positions.

In addition to those positions, UNDP estimates
that some 200 positions will also be required to
effectively address issues of poverty reduction and
sustainable development as part of the nation-building
process. More work will be done by UNDP in close
collaboration with the Government to define such
positions in greater detail. A preliminary report will be
ready before the next donor conference on East Timor,
which is due to be held at Oslo in mid-December.

I should like to take this opportunity to reaffirm
the commitment of UNDP to continue to support
efforts to mobilize the financial resources required to
fund the estimated 200 positions for nation-building
from voluntary sources. But we need to be realistic
about the likelihood of meeting all the development
needs of East Timor in the future. The amount of funds
available for East Timor is clearly finite, and tough
choices on priorities will have to be made within the
framework of the overall envelope. Furthermore,
conflicting demands on scarce resources for
development and the emergence of new global
priorities will clearly make the task more difficult. The
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes have
only limited financial resources of their own, and will
have to rely on additional contributions from bilateral
and other donors to secure full funding for the
programmes in East Timor now and in the future.

The inclusion of a civilian personnel support
component in the planned successor mission will
clearly be a major contribution to ensuring continued
political stability in East Timor after independence. It
is our considered opinion that, without that guarantee
of support, critical government functions will be
compromised.

The United Nations was entrusted with the
responsibility of ensuring the successful transition of
East Timor from the emergency of 1999 to
independence as a full member of the community of
nations. While we in the United Nations Development
Group know that our relationship is just beginning as
the nation begins its new independent life, we know
too that we are as yet unable fully to fulfil our normal
role in the absence of counterparts to work with in
many areas. The East Timorese themselves have now
elected their first Constituent Assembly, and its leaders
have concluded that considerable external support must
be guaranteed by the international community if the
new Government is to carry out its responsibilities. The
United Nations Development Group and the people of
East Timor trust that the Council will find the means to
guarantee that the United Nations, complemented by
generous voluntary contributions, can complete the
tasks it was charged with: to put in place not only
support elements for the fledgling civil service, but
also major programmes for long-term capacity-building
and poverty eradication. Thus will we help put in place
a strong, confident and capable Government in East
Timor with the capacity and the commitment to meet
the needs of all its citizens.

(spoke in French)

That is UNDP's analysis and explanation of the
recommendations that have been placed before the
Security Council. Again, it has been a great honour and
privilege for me to address the Council today.
