Mr. Fathalla (spoke in Arabic): At the outset allow,
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on China's
accession to the presidency of the Security Council
this month and to thank you for organizing this open
debate to consider the important issue of terrorism and
its impact on the maintenance of peace and security. I
would also like to thank and commend the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive briefing this morning.

This meeting is taking place at a time when the
world, especially the Arab world, is at a historically
dangerous crossroad as a result of terrorist acts whose
causes are varied and whose hotbeds are on the increase.
That means that we, as the international community,
must consider seriously and decisively how to strengthen
international cooperation and coordination in order to
combat the phenomenon of terrorism and put an end
to its destructive activities, which threaten all of our
civilizational, cultural and historic foundations. That is
why it is important to pool global efforts in this respect
in order to cut off terrorism financing, in line with the
relevant United Nations resolutions.

The world today is deeply concerned as we
continue to see an escalation in terrorist activity. The
wave of terrorist acts that began in the late 1980s was
not adequately addressed at the time. The phenomenon
therefore spread like cancer throughout the world,
across continents and borders. The extremist ideologies
and practices of those groups can in no be associated
with any religion, ethnicity or civilization. The most
damning evidence of that are the heinous acts that were
committed in France, Brussels and other countries
in North Africa and in our region, and that bear the
signature of a societal phenomenon that is foreign to
our cultures and civilization.

Terrorist groups use every possible means
to threaten international peace and security by
terrorizing and killing peaceful civilians. We are
meeting here today in the Security Council in order to
figure out how to combat extremist terrorist groups and
their ideologies and practices. Agreement among the
international agreement on the concept of terrorism has
become an absolute necessity, given that the United
Nations has to date failed to agree a clear definition of
terrorsim, which has led to the spread of this destructive
phenomenon. The concept of terrorism cannot be
linked to the legitimate right of peoples living under
occupation to resistance and self-determination.

This meeting reflects the resolve ofthe international
community to continue to promote international peace
and security, which I mentioned at our last meeting on
the subject. Today's meeting also serves to emphasize
the need to change many international concepts and
working methods. It is essential that the Council put
in place new policies to implement its own resolutions
concerning combating threats to peace and security, so
as to ensure that the implementing mechanism is more
effective.

We also hope that the United Nations review of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June will
contribute to strengthening serious international
efforts in order for national and regional strategies
to complement national ones while avoiding double
standards, reaffirming the importance of not
associating terrorism with any specific religion,
nationality or civilization and strengthening regional
and international cooperation in combating terrorism,
without prejudice to the rights of peoples living under
occupation to self-determination or their legitimate
fight against foreign occupation. We must also
endeavour to cut off the means and sources of funding
for terrorist activities of those entities designated in the
various relevant Security Council resolutions.

The League of Arab States and its bodies place the
fight against terrorism and the protection of people's
rights at the core of our priorities. That has been
reaffirmed on several occasions at League summits
and ministerial meetings, and expressed in its relevant
resolutions. At the most recent meeting of the League's
Ministerial Council, all acts of terrorism and all forms
of terrorist activity were denounced in all their shapes
or forms, perpetrated by whomever - including foreign
terrorist fighters - and regardless of the motivations.
It affirmed the need to refrain from providing any form
of support, active or passive, to those entities or persons
involved in terrorist acts. I would mention, in particular,
paragraph 11 of the League's resolution No. 8018,
promulgated on 11 March, which invites Arab States to
criminilize the movement of its citizens and the transit
of foreign terrorist fighters across their territories
for the purpose of joining terrorist organizations, as
well as to put in place the appropriate legal systems
and administrative measures to punish those fighters
and limit the threat they represent to their countries of
origin, transit countries and destination countries.

It is unfortunate that the international
community - with all of its mechanisms and
resources, including military - remains powerless
against non-State actors and to put an end to acts of
terrorism, which challenge the whole world through
the destruction of peoples and State structures. The
diversity of the techniques used by terrorist entities
and associated individuals have provided them with a
flexibility of movement. That requires the international
community to step up its efforts to develop a media,
technical and technological network to confront the
ideas of these terrorist entities and to prevent them from
being able to recruit or engage the minds of people via
the Internet.

The League of Arab States, at its most recent
Ministerial Council during the one hundred and forty-
fifth session, via paragraph 14 of the same resolution,
renewed its invitation to Arab States to

"cooperate in order to prevent terrorists from using
information and communication technologies and
the Internet to incite support for terrorist activities,
financing and planning, and to put in place a
national mechanism to deal with electronic sites
related to terrorist organizations".

That is in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions on measures to combat terrorism and to
counter this phenomenon through social media. I would
point in particular to resolutions 2253 (2015) and 2178
(2014), in which the Council refered to this threat in
three paragraphs.

The non-implementation of various Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, especially
the inability to put an end to or to limit the aggravation
ofthe problems and conflicts in the Middle East in order
to re-establish stability, would without a doubt lead to
an increase in the frequency of terrorist operations
around the world, which was evident in the recent
terrorist events in Brussels.

Recognizing the role that can be played via
communication and social media, the League of
Arab States, in the framework of its cooperation with
the United Nations to preserve international peace
and security by following up regional and global
development and its impact on the Arab world, organized
the first Arab media forum on on the theme "The role
of media in combating terrorism", in cooperation with
the United Nations and its bodies, in particular the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task force, held in New York on 3 June
2015. The conclusions of that forum underscored the
importance ofcontinuing dialogue with all stakeholders,
including the United Nations, regional organizations,
all Member States and private sector communication
and technologies companies, on the need to address the
misuse of media to propagate terrorism.

