Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I hope that you, Mr. President, will allow me
to begin my statement not by exclusively addressing
the important Afghan issue. I would like to join my
colleagues in expressing our gratitude to you not only
for convening today's meeting, but also, above all, for
your eminently effective and productive work as
President of the Security Council and as Permanent
Representative of Turkey to the United Nations. Your
activity has been truly extremely fruitful. You indeed
know the very warm feelings that we, the entire
Russian delegation, the Russian Federation, have with
respect to you and your diplomatic activities. We
believe that that standard of diplomatic work has most
clearly raised the bar very high.

Once again, we would like to wish you every
success and all the best in your future activities, and
we hope that you will always remember the many
friends you have left in New York, not least the
Russian ones.

We are grateful to Mr. Eide for his assessments
and for his customary substantive and frank analysis of
the situation in Afghanistan. We commend his personal
contribution to the international effort, under the
auspices of the United Nations, in helping to bring
about a settlement in Afghanistan and the post-conflict
rebuilding of that country.

Unfortunately, despite a number of positive
developments in Afghanistan that were noted in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/323) and were
mentioned by Mr. Eide today, so far the situation in
that country continues to see very clear destabilizing
tendencies. Specifically, as before, we are particularly
concerned by the fact that the efforts by the Afghan
authorities and the international military presence have
yet to bring about any truly serious improvements in
the security sphere. Unfortunately, so far, there has
been no stability in the positive improvements that do
exist, nor have those positive steps been made
irreversible. In that area, clearly much remains to be
done, including in terms of the international military
presence and their mandates. Unfortunately, there
continues to be an increase in the terrorist activities of
the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremists, which
undermine the basis of the Afghan nationhood and
significantly hinder stabilization and construction.

With regard to the armed fight against the
Taliban, we are seriously concerned by the current
ongoing cases of loss of civilian life owing to the
international military operations. We listened to the
assessments made today by Mr. Eide, and we agree
with them. We advocate meticulous investigation of all
related incidents and stepping up efforts to prevent
them in the future.

We acknowledge the work being done by the
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan
and by the Coalition Forces to prevent the loss of
civilian life during military operations. We recognize
that work, but we note that, unfortunately, those efforts
have so far not been sufficiently effective.

We expect the agreement between NATO and the
Ministry of Defence of Afghanistan to have a practical
effect on the coordination of joint actions. We support
the proposal of the Secretary-General with regard to
the need to Afghanize the special anti-terrorist
operations. We are convinced that, without the active
involvement of the Afghans themselves, it will not be
possible to eradicate extremism in Afghanistan.

We fully share the view of the Secretary-General
to the effect that, if we cannot maintain those positive
trends so far seen that have been mentioned today,
including shifting the focus to the civilian
reconstruction of Afghanistan, strengthening local
governments and enhancing the effectiveness of
international assistance, the positive momentum will be
lost, and the Afghans themselves and the work of the
entire international community in Afghanistan could be
set back for years. The goal is to prevent that through
collective efforts, and the coordinating role of the
United Nations in that regard is extremely important.

We support the goal of national reconciliation in
Afghanistan. At the same time, that process should not
take place to the detriment of achieving long-term
stability in the country, nor should it run counter to the
relevant Security Council decisions, specifically in
terms of carrying out the sanctions regime with respect
to the Taliban and Al-Qaida. That must not happen.
Those Security Council decisions must be fully
implemented by all.

If the Afghan leadership believes it appropriate to
seek contacts with the moderate wing of the Taliban,
such a dialogue should be carried out only with those
who truly lay down their arms, recognize the
Government and the constitution of Afghanistan and
renounce their ties with Al-Qaida. We are categorically
against any arrangements with ringleaders of the
Taliban or other terrorist and extremist organizations.
Any attempt to establish dialogue with them would
undermine the sanctions regime imposed by the
Security Council. Again, we intend to continue to
demand full compliance with that regime.

While not downplaying the importance of the
holding of presidential and provincial elections in
conformity with the generally accepted requirements of
democracy, we consider that there is a need to pay
particular attention to the post-election period. The
principal aim today is to try to involve the largest
possible number of Afghans in the electoral process
and, in general, in the political settlement and the
reconstruction of Afghanistan. We welcome the work
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in that regard and expect the
Mission to continue, as in previous years, to provide
solid and effective assistance in conducting the
electoral process in line with international standards.

We continue to believe that the international
presences' counter-narcotics efforts are still falling
short. That task is ever more pressing, as drug
trafficking continues to provide the primary financial
underpinning of the terrorists in Afghanistan - and, I
would add, beyond. At several levels, Russia actively
supports the fight against the scourge of illicit drug
production. In combating terrorism, drug trafficking
and organized crime, we are certain that we must make
more active use of the capacities of regional
organizations that have proven their effectiveness in
these spheres. These include in particular the
Collective Security Treaty Organization and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization.

An important political stimulus for setting up
counter-narcotics and counter-terrorism belts around
Afghanistan was provided by the event held on
27 March in Moscow: the Special Conference on
Afghanistan, convened under the auspices of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. We are grateful to
the Secretary-General for his effective participation in
that Conference. The Conference's outcome was aimed
at stepping up practical international cooperation in the
counter-narcotics and counter-terrorism effort. The
measures that were adopted included a comprehensive
analysis of the situation and a variety of joint efforts,
including manoeuvres and the training of specialists to
meet the needs of law-enforcement agencies in
Afghanistan.

Russia is interested in the development of
Afghanistan into a prosperous, democratic and stable
State, and our practical efforts are aimed at helping

achieve that goal through carrying out joint projects in
the areas of industry, transportation, communications
and infrastructure. We are pleased, for example, that
the volume of trade between Russia and Afghanistan
grew by 12 per cent last year, to a total of some
$400 million. That is a positive trend, and Moscow
intends to continue engaging in serious endeavours
with our Afghan partners in this sphere. Clearly, we
shall continue to provide the friendly Afghan people
with necessary humanitarian assistance.

