Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): New Zealand,
too, welcomes High Representative Mogherini to the
Council and thanks her for her briefing.

New Zealand is a strong believer in cooperation
between the United Nations and regional bodies within
the framework of Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter. While we will always assert the primacy of
the Council and the unique authority vested in it by
the international community, it is clear that local
knowledge and perspectives are essential to our shared
goal of maintaining international peace and security.

There is no one-size-fits-all approach to cooperating
with regional organizations. Each has potential to assist
in the Council's work, regardless of size or resources.
The European Union (EU) provides a good example of
how regional bodies can interact effectively with the
United Nations, but other regional organizations have
their own approach. As we know from our experience
in the Pacific, the United Nations can support long-
term stability only through genuine and respectful
engagement with local actors.

The EU's role in ensuring peace, stability and
prosperity in its own region is well known. With
conflict prevention at the very core of its foundation
and existence, and its proximity to and links with
conflict-beset regions, it is well placed to play a role
across the breadth of the Council's agenda.

It is not possible to canvass all the possibilities
here today, but there are some of particular and recent
importance.

New Zealand strongly supports the achievement
of a comprehensive nuclear agreement with Iran, and
we acknowledge the E3+3's constructive role in those
complex negotiations. And, as New Zealand told the
Council during the January open debate (see S/PV.73 60),
the Middle East conflict between Israel and Palestine
is an ongoing and serious threat to international peace
and security.

We believe that the Council has a role to play in
bringing the parties to the table, hopefully to negotiate
a two-State solution. We acknowledge the EU's
considerable efforts towards that same goal.

We also applaud the EU's part in the international
efforts to manage the humanitarian impact of the Syria
crisis, both within Syria and in the wider region. In
Africa, the EU has demonstrated the value it can add to
the Council's work through its long-term commitment
in Mali and Somalia, to name but two countries.

In the Central African Republic, which the Council
will visit this week, an EU force has strongly supported
the efforts made by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and France to stabilize the security situation.
That force is about to be replaced by an EU military
advisory mission, hopefully foreshadowing the
Council's continued engagement with the EU and other
stakeholders, so that the people of the Central African
Republic can finally see real peace dividends.

Looking forward, New Zealand urges the EU to
maintain its focus on conflict prevention, working with
regional organizations, not least in Africa. Given its
history, geography, size and experience, the EU has
particular advantages and perspectives that it can bring
to bear. It is in all of our interests that it should apply all
that to building partnerships that prevent the emergence

or re-emergence of conflict. In doing so, it will always
have the support of New Zealand.
That is because a firm belief in more active
prevention of conflict under Chapter VI of the United
Nations Charter is one of the fundamental reasons why
New Zealand sought membership in the Council, and
we look forward to working with the European Union
in pursuit of that goal.

