Mr. Lee See-young (Republic of Korea): Allow me
to begin by expressing my delegation's appreciation to you,
Sir, and through you to Security Council members for
having decided to organize today's open debate in a formal
session on this deepening tragic crisis unfolding in East
Timor. My delegation sincerely hopes that today's meeting
will indeed contribute to restoring and further enhancing the
credibility and authority of the United Nations as a whole
and the Security Council in particular vis-a-vis world public
opinion, in effectively and responsibly responding to such
an emergency crisis situation as East Timor.

We noted with appreciation and also with grave
concern the Secretary-General's statements on East Timor
yesterday and this morning. My Government deeply
deplores the rapidly deteriorating situation in East Timor as
described in the Secretary-General's statements, even after
the introduction of martial law. We also remain seriously
concerned about the fate of tens of thousands of internally
displaced persons in Dili and elsewhere.

We would be remiss if we did not recognize the bold
initiative taken by the Indonesian Government in agreeing
to organize the popular consultation in East Timor under
the auspices of the United Nations. Now that the free will
of the East Timorese people is clearly confirmed in a most
peaceful, orderly and democratic manner, thanks mainly to
Indonesian cooperation, we firmly believe that the results
of the popular consultation should be the sole foundation on
which the tragedy in East Timor should be brought to an
end. We therefore strongly urge all parties directly
concerned to reaffirm their commitments to respect the
results of the popular consultation and to continue to take
all necessary measures to uphold them and to put them into
practice.

The Republic of Korea, as a longstanding and close
friend of Indonesia, has intensely followed with
appreciation the events in East Timor and the measures the
Indonesian Government has taken so far to restore law and
order and to help assist humanitarian activities.

However, given the deterioration of the situation in
East Timor, as reported by the Secretary-General, even
after the imposition of martial law, we cannot but renew
our call upon the Indonesian Government to continue to
take necessary measures in a more decisive and vigorous
manner to fulfil its responsibility to restore law and order,
to protect all human lives and to help facilitate the
activities of the United Nations Mission in East Timor
(UNAMET) in carrying out its mandate.

In the process of taking these urgent measures, we
very much hope that Indonesia will be able to consider
favourably the help of the international community as
necessary, as suggested by the Secretary-General, and
accept the friendly offers readily available, individually or
collectively, to help Indonesia fulfil its responsibility of
restoring order and security for the people of East Timor
and of helping humanitarian assistance to reach those
desperately in need without further delay.
We are encouraged to hear this morning of the
emergence of signs of flexibility on the part of the
Indonesian authorities in this regard. We sincerely hope
that these signs will turn out to be true and be turned into
reality sooner rather than later.

I do not want to conclude without paying my
delegation's special tribute to the entire staff - men and
women - of UNAMET and all other humanitarian
personnel, particularly those who still remain voluntarily
and courageously in Dili, for their tireless efforts,
devotion and sometimes sacrifices that they have so
valiantly demonstrated in the face of an extremely
difficult environment throughout the process, since the
popular consultation up to now. Our appreciation also
goes to the members of the Security Council mission to
East Timor for all their efforts in Jakarta, yesterday in
Dili and now back in Jakarta. We look forward to their
report and recommendations, which will hopefully lead to
appropriate action by the Council.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to reaffirm the
willingness and readiness of the Government of the
Republic of Korea to contribute to the efforts of the
parties directly concerned and of the international
community. We will work closely with them in bringing
expeditiously the volatile and tragic situation in East
Timor to a peaceful solution acceptable to all of us.

