Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Madam President, for having organized
this debate. I also thank the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the President of
the Cote d'Ivoire chapter of the West Africa Action
Network on Small Arms for their excellent briefings.

I fully endorse the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.

As we hold this debate, the Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons is convened in this same United
Nations Headquarters. Curiously, however, as the
Secretary-General stated a few years ago, the true
weapons of mass destruction are small arms and light
weapons, because they are the weapons that have caused
the highest number of deaths in recent times. One of
the main principles of peaceful coexistence among
States and the maintenance of international peace and
security is the State's established monopoly on the use
of force. Nevertheless, the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction could challenge the State's monopoly.
I wish to examine that thought from three points of
View.

The first is terrorism. I am convinced that one
of the causes of the increase in terrorism today is
precisely due to the increase in the trade of small
arms and light weapons. I believe that it would not be
possible for terrorist groups to control broad swaths of
territory in increasingly large areas of the Middle East
and elsewhere if they did not possess a large number
of small arms and light weapons. The proliferation of
small arms and light weapons is thus one of the causes
of the increase of terrorism today.

The second perspective is the protection of
civilians. Unfortunately, the victims of the illicit trade
of small arms are civilians, particularly in areas where
the State is the weakest. Where borders are distant from
the State nucleus of control are precisely those areas
where civilians are most affected.

Thirdly, as the High Commissioner vigorously and
emotionally stated, women and children are particularly
affected. Women are often victims of sexual violence,
both during and following conflicts. Sadly, as Council
members are aware, children are recruited as child
soldiers and sometimes used as human shields and
instruments of war.

What is the solution to all those problems? States
have the solution. States must do more to establish better
controls over the end use of weapons. That is clearly
stated in the Secretary-General's report (S/2015/289)
and in the reports of the Group of Experts. To better
combat the illicit trafficking of weapons of small arms,
it is essential to have good international cooperation, as
the Ambassador of China expressed so well.

In conclusion, I would like to welcome the new
Ambassador of New Zealand and fully subscribe to
his statement regarding the need for a new Security
Council resolution. I think it would be necessary
and appropriate to have a new resolution to provide
continuity to resolution 2117 (2013). Such a resolution is
necessary because it would establish better international
control, more effectively prevent access by terrorists
to small arms, and ultimately lead to a more secure
world. Finally, I fully support the efforts of Lithuania to
ensure that the draft resolution can be adopted as soon
as possible. I trust that the Council members can reach
an agreement on it soon.

