Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me begin by conveying
my delegation's gratitude to the Chinese presidency for
convening today's debate, and to the Secretary-General
and the African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and
Security for their insightful and informative briefings.

Let me at the outset also pay tribute to the eight
peacekeepers from the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the 12 members of the Forces Armees
de la Republique Democratique du Congo, who were
killed last week in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; and another peacekeeper from the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, who lost his
life in the Central African Republic over the weekend.
Our thoughts and prayers are with the families of the
fallen heroes from Tanzania and Malawi. As a country
that has faced similar tragedies time and again, we
fully appreciate and relate to their pain. Such incidents
also remind us all of the importance of investing in the
safety and security of the Blue Helmets.

Today's debate is important on many counts. It
takes place at the initiative of a permanent member
of the Security Council that is also one of the world's
top 10 troop-contributing countries, as well as a major
financial contributor to United Nations peacekeeping,
and it focuses on a region in which peace and security
continue to dominate the Council's agenda.

Pakistan was the first country to accede to the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, adopted during the high-
level week of the General Assembly in September.
More than 150 Member States have now joined,
committing themselves, inter alia, to strengthening
peacekeeping partnerships with the Africa Union and
supporting the African Union in capacity-building.
The Declaration also reaffirms the need to provide
predictable, sustainable and flexible funding for AU-
led peace operations, especially those authorized by the
Security Council.

The situation in Africa needs a comprehensive
approach to effectively address the many challenges it
faces - one that relies on strengthening cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations.
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
emphasizes the importance of a cooperative,
interdependent and mutually reinforcing relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
More often than not, countries of a region are better
equipped to understand the challenges faced by their
region and also to respond to them. We acknowledge
and appreciate the AU's commitment to stabilizing
conflict situations and resolving disputes in Africa.

The growing dialogue between the Security
Council and the African Union for a better and effective
response to peace and security issues in Africa is
also a welcome development. In addition, there is
engagement in Africa by other United Nations bodies,
including the General Assembly. The recent annual
session of the Peacebuilding Commission, focusing
solely on the Sahel region, is another example of that
cooperative approach.

The brave peacekeepers of Pakistan, one of the
world's top troop contributors to the United Nations,
have and continue to be deployed in Africa. They have
contributed to many of Africa's success stories, from
Liberia to Cote d'Ivoire to Sierra Leone. Our well-
trained and professional peacekeepers have protected
civilians, provided much-needed medical care and
rebuilt communities. They have worked in difficult
and, at times, dangerous situations, but have never
shied away from fulfilling or failed to fulfil their
mandates. Pakistan remains committed to exploring and
supporting initiatives that help improve peacekeeping
to make it fit for purpose and adapt better to changing
environments and needs.

But successful peacekeeping is a two-way street.
Its success depends as much on the dedication and
professionalism of peacekeepers as on the adequacy
of resources and realistic and achievable mandates.
We therefore urge the Council to invest in flexible,
sustainable and predictable resources, and better utilize
triangular cooperation avenues to listento and include the
views of troop-contributing countries - the Council's
eyes and ears on the ground - at the time of evolving
and updating mandates. That will help the Council,
the Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries. All of us will benefit from that.

Successful peacekeeping is our success. The
credibility of the United Nations depends on it, and so
does international peace and security.

