Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the various briefers for their introductory
statements, which were very enlightening. I would
also like to thank Egyptian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this important debate.

The Security Council has just returned from
Somalia. The operation deployed there - the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) - is the most
tangible example of cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, but it is far from being
the only one. I will make three comments in that regard.
First, regional organizations have become key
partners for the implementation of peace operations.
That is one ofthe main conclusions from the reports on
peace operations and peacebuilding. It is an irrefutable
fact. African organizations working in the context of
the African Union Peace and Security Architecture
are increasingly shouldering their responsibility in
the framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. Their political role in acting as
mediator and providing support has increased, as
illustrated, for example, by the role played by the East
African Community in Burundi and by the Economic
Community of Central African States in the Central
African Republic under the mediation of the President
of the Republic of the Congo. The latter made possible
the successful conclusion of the political transition in
the Central African Republic.

Those organizations also play a welcome military
role in complementing United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as shown during the transition from
the African-led International Support Mission
to Mali to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali; and from
the African Union-led International Support Mission
to the Central African Republic to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic; as well as in the specific
role played by African forces in AMISOM. and in the
joint multinational task force on combating terrorism.
On behalf of France, I would like to pay tribute to
the African forces who every day serve peace on the
continent under conditions that are often very difficult
and at a heavy price.

I would like to add that, for the Security Council,
dialogue with regional organizations should become
a reflexive instinct. Such dialogue is in the interests
of all, and above all in the interest of peace. It should
enable us to forge a consensus that puts forward the
initiatives of the African Union or of a subregional
organization, when one exists.

Secondly, France would therefore like to encourage
a greater role and a growing recognition of the African
Union and other regional organizations in conflict
prevention, peacekeeping, and peacebuilding. France
welcomes the strengthening of the links between the
African Union and the United Nations through the
establishment of liaison offices in New York and Addis
Ababa. Another example is through institutionalizing
the annual exchanges between Security Council and
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union,
such as the one we held yesterday here in New York. All
those initiatives are essential.

At the bilateral level, France is one of the main
partners of the African Union in strengthening African
peace capacities.France contributes every year to the
training of tens of thousands of soldiers, with more than
29,000 African soldiers trained in 2015. Among those
trained by France and engaged in operations, nearly
30 per cent were deployed in AMISOM. France is also
deploying, in support of the African forces and United
Nations peacekeeping operations, national operations
in the Sahel and the Central African Republic, which
are financed by its national budget.

Our debate on cooperation with regional
organizations would not be complete if we did not
recognize the decisive role played by the European
Union, of which there are many examples. Since
2007, the European Union has financed AMISOM. in
the amount of €1.1 billion. The European Union also
financially supports the African Peace and Security
Architecture. Many missions, such as the European
Union Capacity Building Mission, the European
Union military operation and the European Union
Training Mission, are deployed on the continent and
on its shores in support of African States. In terms
of regional organizations, there is a genuine strategic
tripartite partnership among the United Nations, the
African Union and the European Union, which is being
established with France's full support.

Thirdly and lastly, in this context, we must continue
to engage with determination in strengthening this
strategic partnership. It is essential for the UnitedNations
to fully engage early on in defining a comprehensive
and coordinated crisis management framework,
both from the political and security viewpoints. The
example ofthe situation in Mali demonstrates this well.
The United Nations is intervening in a context in which
the regional dimension is crucial, following an African
Union operation and in support of the implementation
of a peace agreement that was negotiated in the region.
All of these dimensions are inextricably linked.

In this regard, the issues of transitions between
successive missions and coordination among
simultaneous missions are areas that require special
attention. In this connection, bringing those involved
up to United Nations standards, the training of regional
contingents and greater awareness on human rights
issues seem to us of utmost importance in the context
of United Nations peacekeeping.

Finally, the financial sustainability of military
operations remains a major concern. Today, the
African Union is heavily dependent on external
contributions to finance its operations. The goal is
for African organizations to be able to gradually take
over an increasing share of the funding of their action.
Presidential statement S/PRST/2016/8, which we have
just adopted, reflects the issues we are discussing
today. France is determined to continue its efforts
and cooperation with the United Nations and the
African Union, as well as all regional organizations, in
this direction.

