Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized an open meeting of the Security
Council on the situation in the Central African
Republic.

Mali, as you know, has worked hard to bring
about a settlement of the situation in Central African
Republic, in particular through the tireless and ever-
successful efforts of General Amadou Toumani Toure.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
excellent report and General Lamine Cisse, the
Representative of the Secretary-General in the Central
African Republic for his briefing that complements that
report.

Lastly, I want to welcome the presence here at the
Council table of representatives of international
financial institutions. This bears witness to the
importance attached by those institutions to the
recovery of the Central African Republic.

The diagnosis of the situation in the Central
African Republic is familiar enough; it was well
described in the report of the Secretary-General and
was eloquently recalled by General Cisse just a
moment ago in his briefing. I shall, therefore, not refer
to that. What I do wish to do - and in response to your
wish, Mr. President - is focus on the operational
conclusions that they both drew.

I would like to refer, first of all, to the need to
design a coherent programme to contribute to the
recovery of the Central African Republic. It is indeed
essential to correct the many areas of dysfunction and
the structural problems of the country. The crucial
questions of payment of foreign debt, the payment of
salary arrears in the civil service and the further
restructuring of the armed forces are of the highest
priority. It goes without saying that an important effort
from the international community to this end will be
necessary. This should be done in exercise of the duty
of solidarity, in particular at the meeting that is
scheduled to take place in Paris starting on 24
September 2001.

Secondly, I would like to address the
strengthening of the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in the Central African Republic
(BONUCA). My delegation shares the views expressed
in this respect by the Secretary-General in paragraphs
22 on in his report. I want to say that we completely
support the recommendations that result from his
assessment. This is first of all because the
strengthening of BONUCA, as was very well recalled
by General Cisse, should contribute to achieving
political dialogue and national reconciliation.

By providing, in particular, needed support for
the implementation of the provisions of the National
Reconciliation Pact of 1998 and the genuine
functioning of the Monitoring and Arbitration
Committee, BONUCA will make it possible for Central
Africans to preserve their unity, thus contributing to
political stabilization of the Central African Republic,
which in turn is essential for subregional stability.

The strengthening of the BONUCA mandate
should make it possible to ensure better monitoring of
the security situation. Its role will now be crucial,
particularly in the restructuring of the defence and
security forces and in the implementation of the
national programme for support of development and
redeployment and the programme for the collection of
small arms.

Strengthening the human rights component of
BONUCA should - and the General has emphasized
this - make it possible for it to deal with the
monitoring, information-gathering, training and
judicial assistance tasks that are required because of
the situation resulting from the attempted coup of 28
May 2001.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm my delegation's
full support for BONUCA, which, in my delegation's
view, should have the capacity necessary to act to meet
the many complex challenges of the situation in the
Central African Republic. The strengthening of its
mandate will be an important stage in the continuation
of the peace and national reconciliation process in the
Central African Republic. This is why we completely
support the Secretary-General's recommendation that
the BONUCA mandate be extended for another year.

