Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I want to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his
briefing to the Security Council on resolution 2334
(2016) and for his daily commitment, as well as that of
his team.

In Gaza, the West Bank and Jerusalem, every
passing day increases, bit by bit, the despair by
reflecting a three-pronged reality. First, the false status
quo actually covers up the daily deterioration on the
ground. Secondly, the situation could, at any moment,
degenerate into an full-blown crisis, as has been the
case in Gaza for many long months. Finally, when peace
prospects diminish on the ground, they also diminish in
hearts, minds and words. It is that vicious cycle that is at
play today. Generation after generation of Palestinians
and Israelis are losing hope in a peaceful settlement to
the conflict.

A quarter century, nearly to the date, has elapsed
since the Oslo Accords were signed in Washington,
DC. Twenty-five years after Oslo, nearly three quarters
of Palestinians, according to opinion polls, believe that
their situation has deteriorated. Barely half ofthem still
believe in a two-State solution.

Nevertheless, the observation that we consistently
make in the Council remains valid. No viable alternative
to the two-State solution has emerged since Oslo. The
unique territorial structure that seems to take form
before our eyes under the effects of the settlement
policies will ultimately lead to the coexistence of
two unequal classes of citizens on one territory. For
Palestinians it would mark the abandonment of their
aspirations to statehood, and for the Israelis the end of
their democratic project. While it is essential to fill the
current political vacuum, a peace plan not based on the
internationally agreed parameters of two States would
be doomed to failure. It is therefore essential that all
negotiations take place within that framework, which
in turn is based on international law and the relevant
resolutions of the Council, including resolution 478
(1980), on Jerusalem, as well as resolution 2334 (2018),
which brings us here today.

With regard to the latter resolution, 10 members
of the Council, including France, requested that, in
accordance with the established practice, written
reports be submitted to the Council. We thank the
Secretariat for the circulation of a written report last
June (S/2018/614), and we encourage the continuation
of that practice.

Today I would like to emphasize two points: the
Israeli settlement policy in Area C and Jerusalem, which
now threatens to irreversibly undermine the two-State
solution - and I would refer to the risk of the imminent
demolition of the village of Khan Al-Ahmar - and the
situation in Gaza, which may at any time lead to an
escalation in violence.

According to the judgement of the Supreme Court
of Israel on 5 September, the decision to demolish the
village of Khan Al-Ahmar is now entirely up to the
Israeli Government. That decision, which has been
in force since 12 September, can be implemented at
any time. France, in conjunction with several of its
European partners, has expressed its deep concern over
that and calls on the Israeli authorities not to proceed
with the demolition. The demolition of that Bedouin
village, which would include the forced displacement
of its inhabitants, would contravene international
humanitarian law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention, as well as the resolutions of the Council.
Several structures that have received European funding,
including one school, are being directly targeted. Two
hundred and thirty inhabitants, including nearly 160
children, are being threatened with deportation.

In addition to its humanitarian consequences,
the demolition would be disastrous, and probably
irreversible, to the political landscape. It would pave the
way for the settlement of the so-called E-l area, which
is of strategic importance for the two-State solution.
It would separate the north and south of the West
Bank and isolate East Jerusalem from the rest of the
Palestinian territories. By destroying the continuity of
the Palestinian territories, it would make it impossible
for the two States to reach a solution, with a strategy
of de facto annexation of the West Bank by Israel in its
place. That would represent a significant responsibility,
historically and for both peoples.

Secondly, the erosion of the two-State solution as
a consequence of settlement activity in East Jerusalem
and the West Bank must not make us forget the
imminent risks facing Gaza. For the past six months,
there has been a succession ofviolence in Gaza, against
the backdrop of a humanitarian crisis of unprecedented
severity. In the face of the terrible record of successive
demonstrations along the separation barrier, France
condemned the disproportionate and indiscriminate
use of force and called on Israel to respect the right of
Palestinians to demonstrate peacefully. We have also
denounced the instrumentalization of demonstrations by
Hamas and other armed groups. Finally, we condemned
the firing of rockets and the use of incendiary devices
directed at Israeli territory, as well as the construction
of offensive tunnels by Hamas.

On several occasions in recent months, the Gaza
Strip has found itself on the brink of a new armed
conflict, as it experienced three times in the past
decade. Each time, the worst was avoided, thanks in
particular to the efforts of Egypt, which we especially
welcome, and to the mediation work of Nickolay
Maldenov, for which I am also grateful. But we know
that, if the current situation persists, a large-scale
escalation cannot be avoided indefinitely. It is then
the people of Gaza who will once again pay the price.
We must do everything we can to avoid it. It is up to
the Council to speak with a strong voice to prevent
an escalation. The silence it has observed since the
beginning of the crisis is, every day, more deafening
and, to be honest, incomprehensible.

Beyond an immediate de-escalation and respect for
the 2014 ceasefire, there will be no lasting solution in
Gaza without inter-Palestinian reconciliation within the
framework of the Palestinian Liberation Organization
principles and without restoring the prerogatives of
the Palestinian Authority in Gaza. In that regard, we
welcome the relaunching of the process begun in Cairo
almost a year ago, which must be followed by a genuine
commitment by the Palestinian Authority to improve
the living conditions of the people in Gaza. Above all,
only lifting the blockade, with the necessary security
guarantees for Israel, will make it possible to meet the
needs of the population.

In parallel with those efforts, we must give our
full support to the Special Coordinator's proposals for
the accelerated implementation of priority projects.
We will have an opportunity to discuss that in more
detail next week at the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians meeting in New York. Those projects
must be accompanied by quick-impact humanitarian
measures, necessary to meet the immediate needs of
the population and prevent further escalation.

In the same spirit, unprecedented international
mobilization is needed to enable the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East to continue its essential activities and keep
its schools open, without interruption, in Gaza and
throughout the region. We will have an opportunity to
call for such collective mobilization during the week
of high-level meetings during the General Assembly.
The stakes are high for the populations concerned,
of course, but no less so for regional stability. In that
context, we call on the United States to maintain its
historic commitment to refugees and the Palestinian
territories, with the necessary engagement of the
international community.

France is a friend to both the Israelis and the
Palestinians. It has no other interest than peace in the
region and the possibility for the populations concerned
to live in safety and dignity. As we all know, the
destinies of Israelis and Palestinians are intertwined:
neither of the two peoples will achieve their national
aspirations in a sustainable way at the expense of the
other. Twenty five years after the Oslo Accords, and
in a context of increasing regional crises, the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict has not lost any of its gravity,
centrality and symbolic significance. The international
community cannot turn away from it.

It is in that spirit that the President of the French
Republic, Mr. Emmanuel Macron, will meet tomorrow
in Paris with the President of the Palestinian Authority,
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas. In that same spirit, there
will be an exchange with the Israeli Prime Minister,
Mr. Benjamin Netanyahu, next week on the sidelines
of the General Assembly. France's conviction is that
our shared compass, more than ever, needs to be
implementation, through negotiation, of a two-State
solution - the only way to achieve just and lasting
peace between Israel and Palestine. France will spare
no effort in that regard.

