Mr. Zerihoun: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on recent
developments in Ukraine.

Due in large part to the initiative taken by
President Petro Poroshenko since his inauguration
on 7 June to find a peaceful, lasting resolution to the
crisis in Ukraine and to the unrelenting efforts of the
international community, there are encouraging signs
towards a de-escalation of the conflict in Ukraine, and
political and diplomatic steps are beginning to be taken
towards the resolution of the crisis.

On 20 June, Ambassador Yuriy Sergeyev of Ukraine
provided the Secretary-General with an official copy
of President Poroshenko's peace plan, which included
de-escalatory measures such as amnesty for those who
did not participate in serious crimes, disarmament,
the decentralization of power and early local and
parliamentary elections, and a programme for creating
jobs in the region.

Simultaneously, upon the advice of his military
commanders informing him that the border with the
Russian Federation had been secured, on 20 June
President Poroshenko announced the start of a one-week
unilateral ceasefire aimed at giving armed militia a
window of opportunity to disarm. Government forces
were ordered to withdraw from their engagements,
allowing rebels a chance to lay down their weapons.
According to the plan, all rebels who surrender
peacefully and who have not committed grave crimes
would be granted amnesty. Also, with a view to engaging
with Ukraine's eastern regions, the President travelled
on 19 June to the Donbass region, where he met with
civil society, business and community leaders. The
following day, he travelled to conflict areas in Donetsk
and Lugansk.

On 21 June, the Secretary-General spoke to
President Poroshenko over the phone, expressing his
encouragement over the peace plan and in particular
the start of a unilateral ceasefire. At the same time,
the Secretary-General voiced concern that it might be
difficult to halt the violence without the engagement
of the armed groups. The Secretary-General has since
been pleased to see that peace talks have reportedly
started with representatives of the armed groups in
eastern Ukraine, led by former Ukrainian President
Leonid Kuchma and with the participation of the
Russian ambassador to Ukraine and European officials.
The Secretary-General has stressed that such talks are
indispensable to efforts to help defuse tensions.

The Secretary-General has also taken note of
the fact that the armed militia groups have agreed to
reciprocate the ceasefire, despite previously rejecting
the President's offer and continuing their offensive.
Overall, the ceasefire is holding. The Secretary-General
expects all sides to live up to the ceasefire and to leave
the door open for effective negotiation and mediation
towards a peaceful resolution of the crisis.

Today, according to reports, in a welcome
development that will not only help reduce tensions but
also improve the chances for a negotiated settlement,
President Putin asked the Russian Parliament to revoke
the authorization given to him to send troops to Ukraine.
President Poroshenko's office welcomed the move as
the first practical step after President Putin expressed
support for the peace plan. While those are important
steps with the potential to de-escalate the situation,
the Secretary-General remains deeply concerned that
the realities on the ground are still grave and deeply
worrying.

Until those recent political developments, fierce
fighting, particularly in eastern Ukraine, had raged
on, claiming hundreds of lives and injuring many
more, including civilians. Arms, weapons and fighters
had crossed Ukraine's border, making the situation
more complex and more violent. Various rebel groups
had sprung up, uncoordinated, and are reportedly not
fighting for any apparent political cause.

Even after President Poroshenko's announced
ceasefire, the armed groups had publicly rejected the
offer and continued their assault on Ukrainian forces
on the night of 20-21 June, reportedly injuring six
servicemen. During that same period, other reports
indicate that Ukrainian forces also continued their
security operations, although it was unclear if they
were merely defending themselves against attacks. The
Russian Federation has reported that shells from those
exchanges had crossed its border, causing material
damage.

On 14 June, a Ukrainian Ilyushin-76 military
transport aeroplane was shot down while approaching
an airport in Luhansk. The aeroplane was targeted by
armed militia on its approach to the Luhansk airport
and crashed at 12.50 am. local time. All 49 people on
board, including 40 paratroopers, were killed.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe monitors abducted almost a month ago on 26 and
29 May are still being held captive. The Secretary-
General has reiterated his call for their immediate and
unconditional release.

The fighting has resulted in loss oflives and caused
much suffering to innocent people. It is for the sake
of those innocent people that efforts must be made to
urgently capitalize on the progress that has been made
in the political and diplomatic areas.

The Secretary-General has been stressing all along
that the international community cannot afford to fail
Ukraine and its people. He has reiterated the pressing
need for the international community to work together
to stop the hostilities and help achieve lasting peace.
President Poroshenko's peace plan has received support
from key parties in the country, the region and beyond.
However, there is still more hard work to be done. The
international community needs to support Ukraine in
surmounting the current crisis and finding a peaceful
and lasting solution to the challenges facing the country.
The United Nations stands ready to support all efforts
to that end.

