Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif for
presenting the report (S/2015/303) of the Secretary-
General on the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and for
his assessment ofprogress in the province. We welcome
the participation of Mr. Ivica Dacic', First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and we share his opinion. We have
listened to Mr. Hashim Thaci's statement. We note that
it contained a number of grandiose theories that have
no bearing on assistance for Serbians and Kosovars in
the province.

The Kosovo problem is still very pertinent and
continues to have a destabilizing impact on the whole
region, as demonstrated by recent events in Macedonia,
in particular the attack by uniformed bandits of the
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) on Macedonian border
guards on 21 April, and by the incident in Kumanovo
on 9 May, set off by the arrival in that town of a large
group of radical fighters from Kosovo who planned to
carry out a series terrorist attacks in the territory of
Macedonia.

The Kosovo Force (KFOR) is called to take action
to restore security and order in the territory under its
mandate. Under resolution 1244 (1999), the KFOR
mandate includes demilitarizing the KLA and other
military groups of Kosovar Albanians, ensuring public
security and order, and carrying out commitments
regarding border control. We expect that, in addition
to its mandate, the EU mission will also make an active
contribution to solving these obvious problems in terms
of the rule of law. We were astonished to learn that
Skopje's information about the plans of the terrorists
was apparently conveyed early this year to international
partners who play a security in key role in ensuring
Kosovo. That warning was ignored.

The Macedonian incident shows inter-ethnic
conflicts persist in the Balkans and highlights the high
conflict potential of the region. The situation is also
impacted by the absence of the rule of law in Kosovo
as a result of the lack of the settlement to the Kosovo
problem as a whole. This once again demonstrates the
pernicious nature of staying silent and covering up the
real situation in the province. Furthermore, the slogans
regarding greater Albania are of concern, as are the
insinuations regarding the unification of Albania and
Kosovo.

The situation with regard to the Serbian minority in
Kosovo is still of serious concern, including the ongoing
inter-ethnic incidents and the cases of desecration of
Serbian Orthodox sites. We consider the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, with the mediation
of Brussels, to be a useful instrument in assisting the
stabilization of the situation. The protection of the
interests ofthe Kosovo Serbs should be enhanced by the
establishment of a community of Serb municipalities
of Kosovo. An agreement was reached on this some
two years ago. The lack of progress in implementing
that agreement is a poor sign. We are convinced that
decreasing tensions between the ethnic communities
would help give the community real powers, enabling it
to insist on the rights of the Serbian inhabitants of the
province.

There have been delays in establishing the specialist
court to investigate crimes carried out by the KLA,
including the trade in human organs. It is odd that the
establishment of such a body should be dependent on
the adoption of legislative decisions in Pristina when
Kosovo is clearly not ready to evaluate such a delicate
matter objectively. This a negative legacy of the recent
past.

There have been reports of Western diplomats in
Pristina trying to persuade Kosovans to adopt a text,
written on their behalf, that would apparently produce
better results than if this matter were brought to the
Security Council. We do not understand how such
friendly recommendations can be married with the
mantra of the rule of law. We insist on the need to achieve
real progress in this area as soon as possible. We note
the statement made in that regard today by Mr. Thaci.
We confirm our position that the perpetrators of these
crimes must be brought to justice, irrespective of their
status.

We should continue to decisively curtial the
participation of Kosovans in conflicts in the Middle
East, including in the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham and other radical organizations. We believe that
this issue should remain a priority of UNMIK.

The United Nations Mission is the main international
presence in Kosovo. The European Union mediation
in the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina and
the transfer of the UNMIK rule of law functions to
EULEX do not mean that the United Nations role in the
province is diminished. We welcome the cooperation
established between Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zarif and Pristina. Given the broad
spectrum of problems, we would urge UNMIK to
fully implement its mandate by taking the necessary
initiatives. To do so, it should be provided with all the
necessary resources and staff. We are categorically
against attempts to devalue the role of UNMIK and
would urge the Kosovo-Albanian side to fully cooperate
with the United Nations presence.

In conclusion, we would like to confirm that Russia's
stance on the Kosovo matter remains unchanged.
Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in force as a
international legal instrument that is binding for all. It
is still the responsibility of the Security Council.

