Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): On
behalf of my delegation, I would like to begin by
sincerely thanking you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting on the situation in Burundi. I
would also like to warmly congratulate your country,
Italy, on its assumption of the rotating presidency of
the Security Council for the month of November. You,
Mr. President, can always count on the full support
of my delegation throughout your mandate, which
you have conducting with professionalism and great
attentiveness since the beginning of the month,

I welcome the presence among us of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, the former interim
President of Burkina Faso, Mr. Michel Kafando.
Through you, Mr. President, I would like to thank him
for the presentation of his report on his recent field visit
to Bujumbura. I would also like to thank my colleague
Ambassador Jiirg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi
configuration ofthe Peacebuilding Commission, for his
report and, in particular, for his personal involvement in
the peacebuilding process in Burundi for several years.

The purpose of my intervention is to share with
members of the Council the new positive developments
in Burundi since the previous meeting of the Council in
the Chamber in July (see S/PV.8013).

On the political front, the inter-Burundian dialogue
continues smoothly. A new round of talks is planned
in the next few days in Arusha. Contacts at the highest
level through the Special Envoys have intensified in
recent days. President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda,
who, as the Council knows, is in charge of mediating
the dialogue process, has dispatched our colleague
Ambassador Adonia Ayebare, his Special Envoy, from
Uganda to Burundi to meet the national authorities.
He was first received by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation in Bujumbura,
the capital, and then by the Head of State himself, in
the interior of the country. The exchanges between the
two parties were fruitful. For his part, the facilitator
of the Inter-Burundian dialogue, Mr. Mkapa, held

productive consultations on 7 November in Kampala
with Mr. Yoweri Museveni, President of Uganda
and mediator of the inter-Burundian dialogue. We
would like to recall that Mr. Mkapa received a visit
from the Ombudsman in September in the context of
consultations aimed at the resumption of the dialogue.

In the same vein, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, who is with us this morning, recently made his
second visit to Burundi and the region, during which
he held open and productive discussions with national
officials. During his stay in Burundi, the Special Envoy
received a warm welcome, with a tropical flavour, and
full cooperation from national authorities at all levels.

In the same vein, at the initiative of the Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, who is here today, Ambassadors of the
greater subregion of Southern Africa met at an informal
work lunch meeting. At the end of the meeting,
participants agreed on the following points.

First, they agreed that the people of Burundi and
the region itself must maintain leadership in managing
the situation in Burundi. The contribution of other
actors outside the region should be limited solely to
supporting national and regional efforts.

Secondly, they agreed on the importance for
the international community continuing to support
Burundi's socioeconomic sectors.

Thirdly, they called for the mobilization of the
necessary resources for the organization of free,
democratic and peaceful elections in 2020.

Fourthly, they called for support for national and
regional efforts in the search for a lasting political
solution to the current situation through peaceful means.

Fifthly, they called for the lifting of the economic
sanctions of the European Union against Burundi,
which have a negative impact not only on the lives of
vulnerable groups, such as women and children, but also
on the implementation of the Agenda for Sustainable
Development and, above all, on the creation of an
environment conducive to holding the next elections
in 2020.

My delegation hopes that, with the current positive
momentum, our partners that have adopted sanctions
and punitive measures against Burundi can move in
the direction of general peace in Burundi and lift such
counterproductive sanctions.

As you can see, Mr. President, regional dynamics
remain vibrant. In order to safeguard such regional
momentum, it would be desirable to avoid any attempt
to create parallel mechanisms that are likely to alter
the current trajectory of the dialogue. It must remain
first and foremost under the leadership of Burundians
and the subregion. The contribution of outside actors,
although commendable, should be limited only to
support. As much as possible, actors beyond the region
must - and this is very important - be careful about
taking unilateral decisions and positions of a political
nature that undermine the efforts of the East African
Community in the management of the Burundian
question. That wish was expressed by the Heads of
State of Uganda and Tanzania during their bilateral
meeting on 11 November in Kampala.

When it comes to strengthening democratic culture,
we remain convinced that in a country like ours, which
is still making efforts to consolidate peace, justice
and security, free, peaceful and transparent elections
are an essential part of consolidating the voice of the
people in outlining their future. Any alternative of
access to power through unconstitutional shortcuts is
unacceptable. The coups that we have seen in the past
remain for most Burundians a nightmare from which
they are trying to wake up today.

Since 2005, there has been a gradual consolidation
of the democratic culture in Burundi. In order to cement
that culture throughout the country, the President of the
Republic has urged all of the country's forces - all 32
Burundian political parties, people from all religious
denominations, civil society, the media and the
youth - to act as messengers of peace by strengthening
security for all and encouraging peaceful coexistence,
social cohesion, reconciliation and national unity.

With regard to constitutional affairs, my delegation
wishes to recall that the amendment of the Constitution
is an exercise that is exclusively a matter of national
sovereignty, not only for Burundi but also for the
countries represented here in the Security Council.
The issue is the responsibility of Burundians and
should not be the subject of debate by external actors
in a non-Burundian context. I would like to remind
the Council that the current exercise is aimed, first at
foremost, at Burundi's long-term stability through an
end of the transitional period of our basic law of 2005.

The Constitution of 18 March 2005 has not
yet undergone any changes, even though it sets out
outdated provisions that are unsuited to the post-
transition context and the East African Community
Treaty, which Burundi has ratified. Therefore, the
committee responsible for proposing amendments has
examined the constitutional provisions that are the
source of imperfections in maintaining, as they are,
provisions that have the merits and democratic values
that guarantee stability and peace in Burundi, the
protection of the political opposition, the protection of
the rights and interests of minorities, the protection of
the independence of certain institutions and, above all,
the legitimacy of the constitutional order. Almost all
the achievements of the Arusha agreement, which are
already in the current Constitution, such as ethnic and
gender quotas, will be safeguarded.

With regard to the security situation, the situation
on the ground since the Council's most recent meeting
on Burundi in July is very positive (see S/PV.8013).
The security situation is generally good throughout
the national territory, and citizens go about their daily
activities peaceably. From the most distant hill to the
capital of Bujumbura, calm reigns. Burundians, in
their rich diversity, enjoy their political and civil rights
without any hindrance.

The return to normalcy was recognized and
emphasized by the seventh Ordinary Summit of the
Heads of State of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, which took place on 19 October
in Brazzaville. I would mention that that meeting,
which included 19 countries, mostly business people,
decided to hold its next summit in Bujumbura. That is
an illustration of the emerging regional confidence in
our subregion.

In the area of human rights, my country, Burundi,
remains convinced that any progress in the area of
human rights must be through dialogue, cooperation,
the mechanism accepted by all as the Universal
Periodic Review and the strengthening of the national
capacities of all the relevant stakeholders in the field.
Unfortunately, the growing tendency towards the
politicization of human rights to satisfy the political
interests of some States is hampering the efforts of
many countries, including Burundi. Human rights are
a universal concept that is amply outlined in several
international instruments. It constitutes one of the
three pillars of the United Nations. But human rights
are increasingly being abused by some States, which, if
they are not careful , are deviating from the objectives
of the Human Rights Council. Those objectives were
mandated to it by the General Assembly when it was
created on 15 March 2006 and fortified during the
establishment of the mechanism of the Universal
Periodic Review on 18 June 2007.
Regrettably, some members have become
accustomed to achieving the adoption of resolutions
by the Human Rights Council, and other mechanisms
established by it, to advance hidden agendas in
carefully targeted countries, while turning a blind
eye to massive human rights Violations in countries
under their protection. It cannot be said enough that
politicization, selectivity and double standards, which
are starting tobecome blatant in the specific case of
Burundi, constitute real hindrances in the process of
promoting human rights. The international community
therefore should break from that counterproductive
stance and address the suffering of the peoples of the
world with the same level of attention, and with no
other geopolitical considerations.

With respect to national reconciliation, the
Government of Burundi, under the leadership of
President Pierre Nkurunziza, established the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission as part of the last phase
of the establishment of the institutions provided for
in the Arusha agreement in 2000. The members of the
Commission have been called upon to move quickly
to inform Burundians about the successes and failures
of the past, with a View to saying goodbye to the
political-ethnic antagonisms that have marked the dark
history of our country, and thereby build a bright future
for present and future generations. The Commission has
already done an excellent job to date, and it deserves
the support of the international community to bring its
task to a successful conclusion.

On 8 November, the Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
who is here with us, emphasized the importance of
lending support to the national reconciliation process.
Furthermore, the National Assembly adopted a bill
few months ago on the functional role of the national
council for unity and reconciliation. The new council
will work towards unity, equity and reconciliation of
the Burundian people and will also be at the forefront
in promoting positive values in our country.

With regard to the return of refugees who fled
the country for various reasons - which is of great
importance - the Government of Burundi continues
to call on refugees to return to help build a peaceful,
stable and prosperous Burundi. The seventh Summit
of Heads of State and Government of the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region, which brings
together 12 countries and took place on 19 October in
Brazzaville, made an enrgetic appeal to the countries
of the region that welcomed Burundian refugees to
facilitate their voluntary return to their native country.
And for those who do not wish to return to their country
immediately, for one reason or another, the Summit
itself urged host countries to resettle them far from
common borders, as stipulated in the 1951 Convention
relating to the status of refugees.

It is similarly very important for the host countries
that have generously welcomed Burundian refugees
to respect the civilian nature of the refugee camps,
in accordance with the requirements of the same
Convention and the various appeals of the Council.
Those present are aware that the repatriation of refugees
is a guarantee of subregional stability, now that among
those who have fled, some, including minors, have
been recruited, trained, supervised and subsequently
enrolled in rebel movements against Burundi. All of
that is in flagrant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and other relevant conventions; the related
report of Council is available to the public.

The voluntary repatriation movement continues at
a satisfactory pace with the arrival of several thousand
citizens who had fled to Tanzania. More than 100,025
Burundians repatriated themselves in 2016, with more
than 68,000 up to 15 August, and 7,549 officially
after the tripartite meeting held from 29 to 31 August.
According to the planning of that meeting, at least
13,000 refugees will have been officially repatriated
from the neighbouring countries of Burundi between
7 September to 31 December. To recap, we estimate
that from 2016 to today, more than 175,000 refugees
have already returned to their country voluntarily. To
encourage the voluntary return movement, the Minister
of the Interior paid a working visit to the refugee camps
in Tanzania from 15 to 17 November. At the end of
his visit, the observation was that more than 40,000
refugees in Tanzania, including 26,000 in the Nduta
camp, hd registered to voluntarily return to Burundi
before the end of the year.

With regard to cooperation between Burundi and
the United Nations, that is a subject of paramount
importance for partners here. Burundi, just as
the members of the Council, maintains the same
commitment to strengthen and enhance its relations with
the United Nations, in strict respect of its sovereignty
and the free will of Burundians, within the framework
of its political future. In order to ensure the United
Nations presence in the human rights sphere, the draft
cooperation agreement with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights is being
discussed between the two parties and is in its final
phase. In the case of the Office of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, both parties have agreed
to designate ad hoc teams to negotiate and finalize a
cooperation agreement. The Special Envoy mentioned
that before my statement.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
once again that Burundi has, for more than two
years, been subjected to disproportionate political
and diplomatic pressure, which intentionally obscures
the progress already made and has led to the unjust
double-standard treatment over other Member States of
the United Nations. That long-standing attitude must
cease and give way to fair and equitable treatment.
We know that all is not perfect here as elsewhere, but
we remain convinced that it is not possible to resolve
political misunderstandings by intensifying pressures
through political reports and declarations. Burundi is
not asking for preferential treatment - far from it.
It simply asks that it be treated on its merits and in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter and of international law.

Moreover, I must say that, thanks to the renewed
peace and undeniable control of the situation on the
ground, Burundi is not a threat to international peace
and security. Based on that observation, the Security
Council should consider in the near future to remove
Burundi from the list of countries that are on its agenda,
so as to address other areas ofrecent emerging tensions.

