Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for having convened this
debate, which is of great interests to the entire
membership of our Organization. I would also like to
take this opportunity to recognize the preparatory work
by the Permanent Representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Ambassador Ivan Barbalie, as Chairman
of the Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Matters, a subsidiary body of the Council
whose work is important to all Members. The Working
Group has identified certain areas and issues that
demand the Council's attention in order to achieve
greater transparency, participation, efficiency and
accountability in the Council's fulfilment of its
responsibilities in the areas of international
peacekeeping and security.

The Group's work is summarized in presidential
note S/2010/507, whose adoption represented a
significant step forward. Although we feel that it would
be premature to undertake an evaluation of the process
of implementing the guidelines for the practices
contained in that important document, we believe that
Council members should keep this issue under
permanent review.

We stress the importance of the goal set forth in
the note with respect to interaction and dialogue with
non-member of the Council. The rigidity imposed by
the traditional formats of Council meetings has been
gradually overcome through the establishment of such
practices as holding informal interactive dialogues in
which members of this organ have benefited from the
opportunity to make their views heard on a range of
themes in direct exchange with intergovernmental

organizations and with representatives of Governments
of non-member countries. Aside from the question of
the capacity in which Council members act in such
meetings, the central point is that direct contact with
such organizations and countries offers benefits that
otherwise would be difficult to obtain. We wish to
emphasize the role that new technologies should play
in that process.

To those who maintain that the efforts required
for the Council to consider matters of a general nature
would unnecessarily dilute the Council's attention,
when discussion of such matters more natural belongs
in the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council or other United Nations organs, we believe
that that is simply a way to rationalize the working
methods of other organs.

An important development that contributes to
improving transparency is the noticeable increase in
the number of open debates held each month. The
participation of non-members in such debates should
contribute towards the same goal of airing different
points of view and enriching the arguments available to
Council members in adopting their decisions.

It may seem contradictory for open debates to be
held in which presidential statements or resolutions
that had been previously negotiated among Council
members are adopted. A reasonable break should be
allowed between an open debate and the negotiation
and adoption of such documents to allow Council
members to incorporate points of View that emerged in
the debate. By the same token, it would be useful to
reflect on possible formulas that would guarantee
broad participation in those debates, as well as to
ensure that statements are confined within rational
limits and serve to convey a substantive conceptual
contribution.

The same logic can be applied to meetings with
troop-contributing countries, whose raison d'etre
should be to enrich the basic outcomes so that the
Council adopts them and acts in the areas of
peacekeeping operations in greatest need. If that
exercise is to have greater significance, it is imperative
for meetings to be scheduled sufficiently in advance
and for the Secretariat produce an executive summary
of the main points, from which Council members can
extract elements to be included in or to enrich their
decisions on renewing the mandates of ongoing
peacekeeping operations.

The established practice of meeting with
interested countries at the start or end of every month
to enable the presidency to inform them about the
provisional programme of work and discuss it is of
great use and an important contribution to the
transparency of the Council's work. My delegation
believes it important to stress that the reports of the
Secretary-General are key to matters under
consideration by the Council. That should not prevent
the Council from consulting other sources of
information, so long as such sources are accurate,
objective and verifiable.

Another positive development is the greater
transparency that has been established with respect to
the management of the procedures and selection
criteria that have been established to decide on the
inclusion of persons, groups, organizations or entities
on the lists related to terrorism as well as their
exclusion. We welcome the decision to establish the
Ombudsman Office as an independent and impartial
body charged with reviewing such lists in order to
ensure that the Council's actions take matters of due
process into account.

In conclusion, I should like to say that my
delegation shares the views of those speakers who
stated that any debate on the methods of work of the
Council should focus on matters such as transparency,
interaction with non-members and the efficiency of the
Council's work. We stand ready to listen closely to the
points of View of all delegations that have requested to
speak during today's debate.

