Judge Robinson: It is an honour for me to appear
before the Security Council today in my capacity as
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, and particularly to do so under the
presidency of the United States. I would also like to
express my sincere appreciation for the support shown
for the work of the Tribunal by the outgoing members
of the Security Council: Austria, Japan, Mexico,
Turkey and Uganda. In particular, the Tribunal is
grateful to Austria, as Chair of the Security Council
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
for the substantial progress that has been in the
development of a residual mechanism.

My remarks today will be brief, as the details of
the measures that the Tribunal has undertaken to
complete its mandate are set out in the written biannual
report, which has been duly submitted to the Security
Council (S/2010/588).

At the close of the reporting period, 13 persons
were in appeal proceedings and 18 persons were on
trial. Two accused, Ratko Mladie and Goran Hadzie,
remain at-large. To date, we have concluded
proceedings against 125 of the 161 persons indicted by
the Tribunal. During the reporting period, the Tribunal
conducted proceedings in 10 trials concurrently by
doubling-up judges and staff so that they were working
on more than one case at a time. The second of the
Tribunal's three multi-accused trials, Prosecutor v.
Popovie et al., was brought to a close. Bordevic',
Gotovina et al., Perisic' and the Haradinaj partial
retrial will conclude in 2011. Five trials - Prlic' et al.,
Seselj, Stanisie and Simatovic', Stanisic' and Zupljanin,
and Tolimir - are anticipated to conclude in 2012. The
final case - that of Karadeie - should be completed
at the end of 2013.

Two appeal judgements were rendered, and
appeals from three trial judgements are currently
pending before the Appeals Chamber. All appeals are
still scheduled to be completed by the end of 2014,
although the recent, unavoidable delays in the Karadeic'
case suggest that this date will have to be reassessed at
an appropriate time. The judges of the Appeals Chamber
also continued to work at maximum capacity on appeals
from the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

The Tribunal continues to take all measures
possible to expedite its trials, without sacrificing due
process. In this regard, I must tell the Council that the
judges have reported feeling extreme pressure to
expedite the work of the Tribunal. I must also say that
this troubles me because judges are entitled to work in
an environment free from all external pressures so that
their independence is not compromised or does not
appear to be compromised.

Despite Herculean efforts to expedite our
proceedings, some estimates from the last reporting
period have had to be amended. Although the trial
schedule is estimated by reference to factors that are
within the Tribunal's control, there are important
influences upon the schedule that are not within our
control, such as witness intimidation, the failure of
witnesses to appear, the illness of accused, the death of
defence counsel, the complexities associated with self-
represented accused, the discovery of new evidence,
and perennial staff attrition.

On the issue of our debilitating staff attrition, I
would like to sincerely thank the Security Council for
responding to the pleas of the Tribunal for assistance
by adopting resolution 1931 (2010) in June, which
noted the importance of the Tribunal being adequately
staffed to complete its work expeditiously and called
upon the Secretariat and other relevant United Nations

bodies to continue to work with the Registrar to find
practicable solutions to address this issue as the
Tribunal draws to a close. But that resolution must be
translated into action, and unfortunately it has not. The
confusion that started with General Assembly
Resolution 63/256 not being implemented due to
budgetary constraints continues.

Most recently, in June 2010, the Staff-
Management Coordination Committee - a body
comprised of the Office of Human Resource
Management (OHRM), staff unions and United Nations
administrators - made two recommendations
regarding the Tribunals, which were approved by the
Deputy Secretary-General on behalf of the Secretary-
General. One of those recommendations was that our
staff be given two-year fixed-term appointments,
subject to another extension of two years. Following
consultation at New York Headquarters in October,
OHRM. clarified that it was fully within the authority
of the Registrar to issue contracts to staff for a period
of two years, regardless of approved budgetary
funds - a position contrary to its view that General
Assembly resolution 63/256 only authorizes contracts
in conformity with approved budgetary funds.

OHRM. also told us that the purpose of the Staff-
Management Coordination Committee's recommendation
was to provide an incentive to staff by way of an
indemnity payment if and when contracts were
terminated prior to expiration. But it was OHRM's
position that such indemnity had to be covered by the
Tribunal's existing resources and that no request for
additional funding to cover indemnity payments could
be made. And herein lies the problem. The Tribunal
does not have the resources, nor can it find them, to
implement resolution 63/256. Again, the Tribunal is
offered a measure that on its face seems to provide a
way of stemming the rapid tide of staff attrition, but in
reality is entirely meaningless.

Moreover, the second recommendation of the
Staff-Management Coordination Committee has also
been rendered meaningless. This recommendation was
that Tribunal staff be given priority in consideration of
eligibility for conversion to permanent contracts.
However, OHRM. has advised that no such priority will
be given. Indeed, it has referred all recommendations
for permanent contracts by the Tribunal to a central
review board on the basis that it did not agree with any
of them. OHRM. has made no secret of the fact that the
recommendations are likely to languish with the review
board for some time. I have to say that, somewhat
surprisingly, the Secretary-General's bulletin on the
consideration of permanent contracts provides for no
such review procedure.

Turning to other matters, I would like to bring to
the Council's attention again the need to compensate
the Victims of the armed conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia. In order to build a lasting peace, justice
must not only be retributive; it must also be restorative.
The International Criminal Court and the 114 States
that have ratified the Rome Statute accept the
importance of compensation to victims of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide, and the United
Nations must do the same. I therefore call upon the
Council to support the establishment of a victims' trust
fund in order to complement the Tribunal's criminal
trials by providing victims with the necessary resources
to rebuild their lives.

In making this proposal, the Tribunal is extremely
sensitive to the financial difficulties being experienced
by Member States, and it has not escaped our notice
that, lately, the importance of the concept of justice has
come under fire. But it is precisely in difficult times
that we must be the most vigilant in safeguarding the
role ofjustice in our society. We must not lose sight of
the reason why the Security Council created the
Tribunal in the first place. It was the German
philosopher Immanuel Kant who posed the issue in the
starkest of terms, stating that the greatest problem for
the human species is that of attaining a civil society
that can administer universal justice.

Although Kant said those words over 200 years
ago, we are engaged in the same struggle today. Courts
are vulnerable institutions because they are dependent
upon other governmental entities for their very
existence. What ultimately safeguards the ability of
courts to function is the consensus of the community
that justice is a quality worth protecting in its purest
form. In carrying out that function, every staff member
of the Tribunal is committed to playing his or her part
to the very best of his or her ability. It is simply
wonderful to witness the United Nations working as a
family to put into practice the ideal of justice upon
which the United Nations was founded.

I travel to New York twice a year to give the
Council an assessment of the progress of our work, but
it really is a shame that the members of the Security
Council do not have the opportunity to see the Tribunal

that I see when I arrive at work in the morning. When I
enter the Tribunal in the early hours of the morning, I
pass a security officer from the United States
reverently raising the United Nations flag. I say hello
to a financial analyst from China who is working on
our next budget submission to the General Assembly. I
walk past a prosecutor from the United Kingdom
nervously practicing her oral argument outside the
courtroom. Inside the courtroom, a defence counsel
from France is consulting with her client before the
hearing begins. As I near the corridor of the judges, I
peek in on a legal officer from Russia working hard to
complete a judgement that is to be rendered soon.

I see faces of the young and the old, men and
women, people from the East and from the West.
Despite their differences, they are all interconnected by
a common thread - they are all ministers of justice.
Theirs are the varied faces of the Tribunal that few ever
get to see. They all came to the Tribunal because they
wanted to be a part of the bold new era ushered in by
the Security Council in May 1993. They came to the
Tribunal to work in a place where they could use their
skills to build a more just world where the guilty are
punished, the innocent go free and the victims have
their day in court. In short, they wanted to help fashion
a world where each person gets what he or she
deserves. That is the very character of justice.

If those staff members are the ministers of
justice, then the members of the Security Council are
the architects of that justice, for it is the Council
members who created the Tribunal in order to stamp
out impunity and bring justice to the former
Yugoslavia. This brings me to the question of why
justice matters. Justice matters because, in a world
without justice, right would be determined by might
and the weak would be at the mercy of the strong.
None of us would want to live in a world where people
did not get what they deserve but what they were able
to take. All of our lives would be much darker without
the light of justice to guide us on our way.

We at the Tribunal are fully aware of its ad hoc
and temporary status. I know I speak for all of us at the
Tribunal when I say that, no matter what we do in our
future professional lives, we will always look back
with nostalgia tinged with gratitude and pride at our
tenure with the Tribunal as a time when we were able
to make a modest difference in the world; as a time
when we were privileged to be a positive force in the
universe. But our work is not finished yet. Those of us
at the Tribunal who go to work each day and who have
faithfully remained at our posts desperately need our
parent, the Security Council, to stand by us until we
complete the work that the Council started back in
1993. We need the Council to stand by us as we
implement its vision of a world that is ruled not by
might, but by right.

I promise that future generations will not look
back at the work of the Security Council and the
Tribunal and wonder why the completion of a
particular trial was delayed. Rather, our children and
grandchildren will admire the members of the Security
Council, the Tribunal and indeed the United Nations as
a whole for our willingness to be bold, to change the
world, to transform it into a safer and more just place
to live, and to achieve our greatest potential as human
beings. What will be remembered is the justice that
was achieved and the courage of those who were
willing to do what was necessary to make justice a
living and breathing reality.
