Ms. Intelmann (Estonia): I am speaking in my
capacity as President of the Assembly of States Parties
to the Rome Statute and as Estonia's Ambassador-at-
large.

I would like to join others in thanking Guatemala
for having organized this timely and indeed long-
awaited debate to look into the relationship between the
Security Council and the International Criminal Court
(ICC). In making this statement, Estonia aligns itself
with the statement that will be delivered on behalf of
the European Union.

In recent years, issues of the rule of law and justice
have gained prominence in the Council, becoming part
of the mainstream of Council discussions. The fact that
the Council has increasingly been able to refer to the
Court's work in its resolutions and its presidential and
press statements is indeed very welcome. It is evident
that the Council has recognized the contribution of the
Court to the fight against impunity and to international
peace and security.

The Rome Statute system is first and foremost a
consent-based arrangement. However, Article 13 (b)
of the Statute enables the Council to refer situations to
the Court, thereby extending the reach of the Court and
making justice and accountability possible in States
that are not parties to the Rome Statute.

That represents a great opportunity to bring to
justice perpetrators of crimes that would otherwise
go unpunished. Resolutions 1593 (2005) and 1970
(2011) took crucial steps in the fight against impunity
by referring the situations in Darfur and Libya to the
ICC. While recognizing those achievements, we must
also be conscious of the challenges faced by the Court
with respect to the two referrals, which are a subject of
continuous discussion among States parties.

Allow me to share a few thoughts, bearing in mind
the possibility of future referrals by the Council. The
Security Council receives periodic reports from the
Prosecutor concerning both of the situations it has
referred to the ICC. Given their complicated nature,
the Court, and indeed the Council itself, would greatly
benefit from a more efficient and vigorous follow-up of
the situations, including using the Council's sanctions
mechanisms.

In particular, the Council could consider imposing
sanctions against individuals who are sought by the
Court, especially when there are already appropriate
sanctions committees in place. There should also
be coordination between the sanctions committees
and the ICC to ensure that frozen assets belonging to
individuals can be claimed by the Court to finance the
defence of individuals before the Court and, ultimately,
reparations to victims.

The Court would greatly benefit from a follow-
up by the Council with regard to instances of
non-cooperation. On that subject, I would like to
mention that the Assembly of States Parties has in
place its own mechanisms to follow up on instances of
non-cooperation by States parties.

The referral of situations to the Court by the Security
Council creates a financial burden that has been borne
entirely by States parties to the Rome Statute. That
situation was not foreseen by the Rome Statute, which
assumes, in its article 115, that the United Nations will
reimburse the Court for the costs incurred as the result
of referrals. The ICC is a relatively small court with
a relatively limited budget. Budget discussions among
States parties at the end of last year, shortly after the
adoption of resolution 1970 (2011), showed that the
present practice may not be sustainable.

Effective cooperation and assistance by all States
and international and regional organizations is essential
for the ICC, and it was also essential for the tribunals
previously set up by the Security Council. In future
referrals, the Security Council might consider imposing
an obligation to cooperate with the Court on all States
Members of the United Nations.

After 10 years of existence, the Court and the
States parties are engaged in a lessons-learned exercise
to make the ICC and the whole of the Rome Statute
system more efficient. That includes a consistent focus
on cooperation with the ICC, including the execution
of the more than 10 outstanding arrest warrants. After
two referrals, it would be useful for the Security
Council to establish a working group or a Rome Statute
caucus to examine the practice of past referrals and the
effectiveness of investigations stemming from them,
and to look into the modalities for future referrals.
Given the common goal of the Council and the Rome
Statute, namely, the fight against criminal atrocities,
I am sure that both the Council and the ICC would
benefit from such an exercise.

The States parties stand for the integrity of the
Statute. They also advocate for universal ratification
of the Rome Statute, since that is the ultimate way to
ensure accountability for international crimes. I call on
all States that have not yet done so to ratify or accede
to the Statute.

Before concluding, allow me to offer some thoughts
about victims. Victims are indeed at the very centre of
the Rome Statute system. Successful investigations
and prosecutions assist in restoring dignity to victims
by acknowledging their suffering and help to create
a historical record that protects against those who
will seek to deny that atrocities occurred. Let us not
fail those who have suffered as the result of criminal
atrocities and look to us for help.

