Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the Plurinational State of Bolivia's stewardship of the
Security Council for the month of June, as well as to
take this opportunity to express my appreciation for
Uruguay's admirable work in the previous month. Iwould
also like to reiterate the deep gratitude of the people
and the Government of Mali to the Security Council,
the Secretary-General, the countries and organizations
on the Agreement Monitoring Committee, led by
Algeria, the countries contributing troops to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and France's Operation
Barkhane for the invaluable and continuing efforts and
sacrifices they have made to bring peace and stability
to my country.

I would also like to reiterate here the tribute
that the people and the Government of Mali have
paid to the memory of all the victims of the crisis
in our country - civilian and military, foreign and
Malian - who have fallen on the field of honour,
and with a special thought for MINUSMA's Guinean
contingent, members of which were the most recent
victims of these atrocities only a few days ago. We offer
the wounded our best wishes for a speedy recovery.

The delegation of Mali takes note of the current
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/478) and would
like to thank our brother Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Mali and Head of MINUSMA, for his briefing and for
the excellent work he is doing on our behalf.

It has been almost two years since the Algeria
process saw the signing of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, and as that period comes
to an end, I welcome Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres's recognition of the leadership and personal
commitment of His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita, President and Head of State of the Republic of
Mali, to the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. Mali has come a long way,
and under the President's leadership the Government
has worked extremely hard to achieve the significant
progress that has been made, with the cooperation of
all the signatories and the support of our bilateral and
multilateral partners, needless to say.

I will omit the long list of measures and concrete
actions taken by the Government of Mali in the context
of implementing the Peace Agreement, of which I think
the Council is well aware, partly thanks to the Secretary-
General's coverage of those developments in the report.
In the past few months, as shown in the report's annex
on the benchmarks for monitoring the implementation
of the Agreement, approved by the Government and
MINUSMA on 28 May, major progress has been made
on the peace process. As of today, interim authorities
and temporary colleges are functioning in five regions
in the North with the exception of Kidal, where technical
difficulties continue. With regard to the mixed patrols,
the Government of Mali, despite its limited resources,
is working to fully operationalize the Operational
Coordination Mechanism. It is also providing various
types of logistical support to the planned battalions,
including health services and even death grants for
victims' families. The Government therefore took the
opportunity to hold the 18th meeting of the Agreement
Monitoring Committee in Bamako on 5 June in order to
brief its partners on the technical and logistical aspects
of operationalizing the Mechanism in Kidal as soon
as possible.

With regard to the follow-up to the recommendations
of the Conference for National Harmony, as you
emphasized just now, Mr. President, which took place
from 27 March to 2 April, I am pleased to inform the
Council that the preliminary drafts of the Charter for
Peace, Unity and National Reconciliation and the map
of Mali's territory have been finalized by the Special
Commission established for the purpose.

With regard to the process of reviewing the
Constitution, I am pleased to inform the Council that
the National Assembly of Mali, following several days
of intensive, constructive debate, on 2 June adopted the
bill on that issue submitted by the Government. The text
that was adopted includes several major innovations
that bolster Malian democracy and take into account
the relevant provisions of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, in particular with regard to the
creation of a second parliamentary chamber, the senate.
The bill will be put to a referendum on 9 July. The
Government will make every effort to ensure that the
referendum is held under the best possible conditions.

The Government is also working to provide basic
social services to the people and to relaunch the local
economy where security conditions so allow.

Concerning the prospects for the implementation
of the Agreement, I can assure the Council that beyond
20 June, the second anniversary of the signing of the
Agreement, the interim authorities will continue to
work on the organization of the referendum and of local
and regional elections, in accordance with the timetable
established by the Government. The Government will
also continue its efforts in the framework ofthe process
of cantonment and disarmament; demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) efforts; reform of the security
sector; the effective operationalization ofjoint patrols;
and the provision of peace dividends to the populations
affected by the crisis.

We can therefore affirm that the peace process
in Mali is on a positive path as a result of the gradual
return of confidence among all Malian stakeholders.
However, these still-fragile achievements must not lose
make us sight of the multiple and very real challenges
facing the peace process in Mali. These challenges
include the insecurity resulting from the activities of
terrorist groups and issues related to the mobilization of
financial resources for the effective and comprehensive
implementation of the Agreement.

In this regard, I reiterate the Malian Government's
call on all partners to meet the commitments they
have made in support of the peace and development
process in Mali. In terms of the challenges facing the
country, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General mentioned the persistent tensions between
the signatory movements, the Coordination des
mouvements de l'Azawad and the Platform coalition of
armed groups, which are creating conditions that are
not conducive to the harmonious implementation of the
Agreement. The Government is not being passive in
this respect; the high representative of the President of
the Republic is deploying his good offices in an attempt
find common ground and ease tensions on the ground,
with the support of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

One year after the adoption of resolution 2295
(2016), of 29 June 2016, which calls on MINUSMA
to adopt a more proactive stance and gives it a robust
mandate, we cannot but note that the major innovations
contained in the resolution have not yet been translated
into facts on the ground. Despite the improvements
that have been noted on the ground, as a whole the
MINUSMA posture has remained fairly static and
defensive, which has facilitated freedom of movement
for terrorist and extremist groups. They have made the
most of this in order to better organize themselves and
multiply attacks against the civilian population, the
Malian defence and security forces and foreign forces.

It is important, in considering the renewal of
MINUSMA's mandate, for the capacity of the Mission
to mobilize to be strengthened and for patrols to be
intensified. It is also important for the Mission, as we
stated repeatedly and as everyone agrees, to be provided
with the material, financial and human resources
necessary to strengthen its operational capacity so as to
enable it fully and effectively to discharge its mandate.

The conclusions of the MINUSMA force-generation
conference held here on 22 and 23 May, and here we
wish to commend the Secretary-General, allow us to
have hope. I should like also to welcome the pledges of
contributions made by several countries, and I hope that
these pledges will materialize as quickly as possible.

It is equally important to strengthen the
indispensable cooperation between MINUSMA and
the Malian defence and security forces. This is a key to
success and the prospects of emerging from the crisis.
In particular, on behalf of the Government of Mali,
I would like to emphasize the necessity and urgency
of supporting the Malian defence and security forces
in their daily fight against terrorism on the ground,
without waiting for the conclusion of the process of
their reconstitution and with the necessary logistics, as
has been done elsewhere.

The Government of Mali would also like to see
the issue of the return of the Administration and of
the defence and security forces to Kidal at the core
of the new mandate of MINUSMA, as well as the
effectiveness of the processes of cantonment, DDR and
security-sector reform.

The security situation in Mali and in the Sahel
continues to deteriorate in a worrisome manner. The
situation is marked by the persistence and proliferation
of terrorist attacks, which constitute the main obstacle
to the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali.

Faced with this situation, the Heads of State of the
States members of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) decided on 6 February last to create ajoint force
to fight terrorism, transnational organized crime and
trafficking in human beings. The creation of this force
is the fruit of the common will of the leaders of our
subregion to work jointly and pool their means in order
to respond to cross-border challenges, inter alia.

On behalf of the States members of the G-5 Sahel, I
should like to express the deep concerns of President of
Mali, Acting Chairman ofthe G-5 Sahel, concerning the
difficulties that the Security Council is encountering
in adopting a draft resolution on the immediate
deployment of the joint force, news of which had given
rise to a great deal of hope among the peoples of the
Sahel region. The adoption of such a draft would send
a strong and unequivocal signal from the international
community to terrorist groups and traffickers of all
kinds and make clear its unanimous support for the
efforts of the region, which is facing a situation that,
as we all are aware, threatens international peace and
security and therefore falls wthin the purview of the
Security Council.

It should be recalled that the creation of the concept
of operations of the force took place in the framework
of a participatory process involving all our regional and
international partners in the area of security. We have
also planned operational coordination mechanisms for
the interventions of all forces present in the region. I
can assure the Council that the operations of the joint
force will respect gender, as was recalled earlier, and
human rights and will promote humanitarian access to
populations in need.

As of now, General Didier Dacko has been
appointed Commander of the G-5 Sahel joint force
and is working to establish its headquarters. We are
awaiting only authorization in the form of a Security
Council resolution for its operationalization.

Here with me today is Mr. Mohamed Najim,
Permanent Secretary of the G-5 Sahel, who travelled
here to New York with us in order to help bring this
important regional initiative, in which the Security
Council is to participate, to fruition.

With regard to the human rights situation
mentioned in the report under consideration, the
Government of Mali notes that the Mali defence and
security forces have, unfortunately, been accused of
alleged human rights violations, in a context of counter-
terrorism efforts and asymmetric attacks involving the
civilian population.

In this regard, I would point out that the majority of
the violations documented and attributed to the Malian
defence and security forces were committed in areas
where judicial and investigative services are absent
owing to insecurity. We also have a different approach
to identifying human rights abuses, as determined
by the Human Rights Division of MINUSMA. Quite
often, victims or civil parties do not file a complaint,
and there is a lack of corroborating testimony and
investigative units in the areas where such violations
have been committed. Therefore, despite the goodwill
of the Government, prevailing conditions make legal
prosecution of those cases difficult.

Nevertheless, the Chief of the General Staff
of the armed forces of Mali has an international
humanitarian law and human rights division that is
willing to collaborate with the Human Rights Division
of MINUSMA. In any event, Council members may
rest assured that all reported or documented cases of
violations are systematically investigated and, where
appropriate, punished, in accordance with existing
law. Mali, which has ratified virtually all international
human rights legal instruments, remains fully
committed to defending and promoting human rights.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
commitment of the Government of Mali and the
President of the Republic to continuing and expediting
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, negotiated in Algiers. I call,
on the one hand, for strengthening the capacity and
capabilities of MINUSMA to enable it to carry out
its mission effectively and, on the other, for enhanced
cooperation between MINUSMA and the Malian
defence and security forces in order to help Mali restore
authority throughout its territory, which is critical to
the sustainable security and stability of our country.

I call on the Security Council to adopt, without
delay, the resolution authorizing the deployment of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) joint force in
order to help protect our populations and our common
space from the dangers of terrorism and thus, protect
the rest of the world from a real threat to regional and
international peace and security. I would also like to
note that peace in Mali and stability in the Sahel must be
considered in a comprehensive manner by the Security
Council, in the context of an overall package that rests
upon four mutually reinforcing key pillars that will
ensure the effectiveness and success of ourjoint efforts.

The first pillar continues to be the resolve of the
Government of Mali to accelerate the implementation
of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
in the framework of the political process agreed to and
supported by the international community. The second
pillar is the stabilization ofMINUSMA in the context of
a strengthened mandate. The third pillar is the support
of the French Operation Barkhane in the fight against
terrorism. The fourth pillar is the operationalization
of the G-5 Sahel joint force to manage the regional
dimension of the crisis.

It is essential that the Security Council
simultaneously take action on those four mutually
reinforcing pillars. We must consider those four aspects
together in the framework of a sustainable response if
we are to have a lasting impact.

