Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me, too, thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Shearer for his briefing.

As my colleague from Equatorial Guinea just said,
we very, very much welcome the meeting that took
place between President Kiir and Mr. Machar. This
was a necessary step for the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution ofthe Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan and for the formation
of a transitional Government of national unity by the
already extended deadline of 12 November. I commend
both men and their teams for taking that crucial step
forward, which gives us hope here in the Council. The
November deadline is fast approaching, so I would
urge, today, that both parties ensure that theirs was the
first of many, forthcoming meetings going forward.

We have been discussing the conflict in South
Sudan for some time now; it has taken a huge toll
on civilians in that country. During the worst of the
conflict, we saw atrocities carried out against civilians;
we saw attacks on humanitarian workers and health
clinics; we saw food and humanitarian assistance used
as weapons of war. It was a grim conflict for the people
of South Sudan. And yet, since the peace agreement,
one of the most inspiring things that I have seen in the
Council has been the response of the people of South
Sudan to the peace. People came out in their hundreds
and thousands to celebrate and welcome the decision
made by their leaders. I really believe that the people
of South Sudan have set a genuine example in their
country, in their region and for their own leaders of the
importance of peace.

We are very grateful to Mr. Shearer and his team
for their work in facilitating reconciliation efforts,
including, of course, civilian-military dialogue and the
peace conference between states but also, crucially,
the subnational rapprochement between Government
and opposition. I note from the Secretary-General's
report on future planning for the protection of civilians
sites (S/2019/741) that there have been at least 128 such
subnational rapprochement initiatives between the
Government and the opposition since the signing of the
peace agreement in September 2018. Again, this is very
much to be welcomed. It is not all about the big men
meeting in choreographed ways in smoke-filled rooms.
Community action and grassroots reconciliation are
vital and should be encouraged by all of us in the
Council, all in the region and all in South Sudan.

The United Kingdom does not yet believe that
conditions in South Sudan are conducive to the safe,
voluntary and dignified return of internally displaced
persons and refugees. We need all parties to play
their parts in establishing a secure environment for
the people of South Sudan. Accountability will be
a vital element of that. We urge the parties to the
revitalized agreement to fulfil their commitments to
establishing transitional justice institutions and to sign
the memorandum of understanding with the African
Union on the establishment of the hybrid court. Again,
we have talked about that court in the Council for some
time now; surely it is time to see it established.

Those institutions are desperately needed. We have
heard from the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict that reports of
sexual violence increased in 2018, in an environment,
I am afraid to say, of near total impunity. The people
of South Sudan need to see safety and security
developing. They need to see credible action taken to
end acts of sexual violence and ensure the protection
of civilians. They need to see the demilitarization of
towns and public buildings being taken forward. As
such, all parties to the revitalized agreement need to
allow United Nations Mission in South Sudan and
humanitarian actors to carry out their work unimpeded.

Although the ceasefire has held, which is very
much to be welcomed, a serious humanitarian crisis
remains. Six and a half million people suffer food
insecurity; 1.7 million are on the edge of famine. The
United Kingdom remains one of the largest donors in
South Sudan; we have spent $135 million dollars in this
financial year. That is our national contribution; we give
more through the European Union and development
assistance. We remain committed to the people and the
country. But all humanitarian actors must be able to
play their part in helping the people of South Sudan
rebuild their country.

There will be many more opportunities for dialogue
between now and November. We urge the parties to
continue to meet and the region to retain its focus on
South Sudan, and very much hope that the Ministers
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
will be able to meet before November. As my colleague
from the United States has said, the Council will have
an important opportunity to engage with the parties in
a visit to Juba in late October, co-led, I believe, by our
South African presidency. I hope that we will have an
opportunity at that time to meet with all the parties to
the revitalized agreement. I hope we will be able to meet
with representatives of women, youth and civil society.
I hope we will be able to see grass-roots reconciliation
happening. I know that the Church and other actors
have been involved in reconciliation. I think this could
be a great opportunity, as a Council, to give a timely
boost to the efforts of the South Sudanese parties and
people. And that is how it should be of course.

