Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let
me thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
very comprehensive and insightful briefing on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). I would also
like to thank Ambassador Nikki Haley for sharing her
plan for the peace process with us.

Exactly two years ago this month, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2334 (2016), reaffirming
its previous resolutions regarding the applicable
international law and the parameters of a peaceful
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. This year
also marks 25 years since the first Oslo Accord. Despite
its many shortcomings, the agreement represented
a historic compromise. Unfortunately, since then the
conflict has not seen significant progress towards
achieving peace. On the contrary, we have seen that
the recent security situation in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory has become more tense. Many
times over the past months, we have expressed our
great concern about the tragic loss of civilian lives on
both sides.

Recent developments on the ground clearly point to
a constant need to continue the de-escalation process.
Despite the ceasefire between Israel and Hamas on
14 November, the security situation in Gaza remains
fragile, and miscalculations could result in the outbreak
of violence. In that context, let me underline that all
sides must fully comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law.

Recent reports on the violence in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, are a source ofgreat concern.
We deeply deplore the loss of lives on both sides. We
call upon all parties to exercise restraint and spare no
effort to avoid further escalation.

Our priority is to restore a political horizon for the
resumption of a meaningful peace process. We believe
that a negotiated two-State solution and the resolution
of all final status issues, including Jerusalem,
settlements, the future of Palestinian refugees, borders
and security arrangements remain a realistic way to
fulfil the legitimate aspirations of both parties and
achieve long-term peace. We appeal to both sides to
refrain from taking unilateral steps that prejudge the
outcome of final status negotiations, and expect them
to demonstrate, through their actions and policies, their
commitment to peace.

In more general terms, let me underline that Poland
supports a two-State solution, under which the national
aspirations ofboth parties to the conflict would be met,
including the Palestinian right to self-determination
and independence, the Israeli right to ensure its security
and the normalization of relations with Arab States.
Unfortunately, we have so far not seen significant
progress towards achieving that goal.

The situation in the Gaza Strip is extremely
worrying. There is a lack of progress on the political,
security and humanitarian fronts. The prevailing lack
of decisive steps towards a return of the legitimate
Palestinian Government to Gaza, despite Egypt's
best efforts to revive the process, is detrimental to
Palestinian aspirations to statehood, contributes to
the worsening of the humanitarian crisis and risks
escalation. Undoubtedly, progress in the Palestinian
reconciliation process would contribute to improving
the situation on the ground. The humanitarian situation
on the ground has continued to deteriorate. In the Gaza
Strip, humanitarian conditions are especially dire.
Basic needs continue to be unmet and many people lack
access to basic services, including health care.

The critical financial shortfalls of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) have also
raised the alarm, particularly as 80 per cent of Gaza's
population is dependent on the Agency's humanitarian
services. In that regard, I commend the mobilization of
the donors that helped secure additional funding for its
budget, as well as the imposition of austerity measures
by the Agency, under the leadership of Commissioner-
General Pierre Kreihenbiihl. It is vital to continue those
efforts in the coming year so as to ensure sustained
support to UNRWA, as well as the transparency and
accountability of its programmes.

Unfortunately, provocation, incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric continue on both sides. In our
opinion, such acts constitute a significant obstacle to
the reactivation of the peace process. It must also be
stated that we have observed an increasing number of
dangerous incidents as a result of that incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric. Some of those incidents involve
children, who need special protection.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the long-
standing position of the European Union that all
settlement activity is illegal under international law.
Settlements continue to undermine the practical
prospects and hopes for peace. In that context, I also
wish to reiterate our call for the plans to demolish
Khan Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu to be cancelled. Not
only is the community at imminent risk of demolition
and displacement, but it would also set a significant
precedent for other Bedouin communities in Area C.

