Mr. Mantovani (Italy): I wish to thank Under-
Secretary-General Holmes for his comprehensive
briefing on the humanitarian dimension of crisis
situations in the Great Lakes region and the Horn of
Africa, a dimension that, for Italy, is as crucial as the
political and peacekeeping dimensions.
I should also like to commend Mr. Holmes for
having visited Mogadishu. He is the first high-ranking
United Nations official in many years who has been
able to witness its dramatic reality. Finally, we
appreciate his speaking out on violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law, as well as
his comprehensive approach to humanitarian work -
which includes relief, but also protection of those most
in need.

On Somalia, Italy cannot but share the deep
concern at the deterioration in the humanitarian
situation, and in particular at the suffering and
displacement of hundreds of thousands of people as a
result of recent fighting. We urge Somali authorities in
particular to do their utmost to remove obstacles to the
free movement of aid and humanitarian relief workers
into and throughout the country, and we call on
countries in the region to facilitate the cross-border
provision of aid, as was stressed by Italy's Vice-
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Patrizia Sentinelli,
during her recent visit to the region.

Italy firmly believes that the only possible
solution to the Somali conflict is through genuine
political dialogue and reconciliation, as set out in the
Transitional Federal Charter. We therefore fully agree
with Under-Secretary-General Holmes's remarks on
the need for an inclusive political process. The early
convening of a national reconciliation congress
involving all components of Somali society is
paramount in that regard, and we appeal to the
Transitional Federal Institutions to make this event as
meaningful and inclusive as possible.

Italy joins others in strongly condemning the
recent attacks against troops of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and expresses its
condolences to the families of the Ugandan soldiers
who died in them, as well as to the family of the Red
Cross official fell victim to those attacks. We call on all
parties to show continued restraint, and we support the
present talks between the Transitional Federal
Government, Ethiopian troops and clan elders from
Mogadishu aiming at consolidating the cessation of
hostilities. In that context, we believe that the role of
AMISOM. is crucial, and we have decided to support
the African Union with a supplementary bilateral effort
of $13 million for that purpose.
We feel encouraged by the findings of Under-
Secretary-General Holmes's Visit, which hint at an

improvement of the humanitarian situation in northern
Uganda as a result of the ceasefire agreement and the
ongoing peace talks in Juba, which Italy fully supports.
This positive evolution proves that a sound political
process, led and managed by the region with the full
support of the whole international community, can
have an immediate impact on the affected population.

We support the approach under which it is time to
start thinking about resettlement and reconstruction for
northern Uganda. To that end, we appreciate the call on
the donor community to remain engaged and invest in
the sustainable development of a region which has
suffered from marginalization. It would be interesting
to know more about the cooperation of the Ugandan
Government in that regard.

