Mr. Bolton (United States of America):
Mr. President, I wish to thank you for having convened
this important meeting. This month's meeting takes on
far greater salience in the light of the rapidly unfolding
events in the Middle East.

The United States remains unequivocal in its
commitment to working with others to build a
foundation for lasting peace in the region. But it would
be a disservice, and only bring increased hardship to
the peoples of Israel and of Lebanon, if the Security
Council adopted stopgap measures which did nothing
to address the violence.

Let us be clear: if we are to identify lasting
solutions to bring about a permanent peace in the
Middle East, we must have a shared understanding of
the root causes of the problem. Let there be no
misunderstanding. All of us in this Chamber face a
common and shared enemy, an enemy that is solely and
directly responsible for the situation we find ourselves
in today. That enemy is terrorism - not only
organizations like Hizbollah and Hamas, which kidnap
Israeli citizens or fire rockets into Israeli territory, but
their sponsors in Tehran and Damascus.

As we speak, Hizbollah continues to operate in
southern Lebanon with impunity, defying the will of
the Security Council as established in resolution 1559
(2004). We take special note of the important statement
of the Arab League, which had the courage and
conviction to condemn Hizbollah for its role in
instigating this latest round of violence. The United
States reiterates its call for the full implementation of
resolution 1559 (2004) and the full extension of the
authority of the Government of Lebanon over all of
Lebanese territory. If that were done, then Israel would
not be subject to terrorist attacks, nor would the people
of Lebanon be subject to the reign of terror that
Hizbollah inflicts.
The United States is studying several of the ideas
proposed on how best to secure the implementation of
resolution 1559 (2004), which Secretary Rice will

discuss shortly, including the insertion of an
international stabilization force. In considering these
proposals, we must always keep at the forefront that
the key goal should be to disarm and "defang"
Hizbollah, to quote Secretary Rice. We take note of the
fact that some Member States have called for an
immediate and unconditional ceasefire between Israel
and Hizbollah, but we must ask our colleagues: How
do you negotiate and maintain a ceasefire with a
terrorist organization, one which does not even
recognize the right of Israel to exist?

The United States has no confidence that an
unconditional ceasefire by itself would be honoured by
Hizbollah. It would only allow it time to regroup and
plan its next wave of kidnappings and attacks against
Israel. The United States seeks an end to the violence
that afflicts innocent civilians, and it is for that very
reason that we are working for the long-term, sustained
conditions that will make a real ceasefire possible and
permanent. Our aim is to address the underlying causes
of the violence in southern Lebanon. That is the
purpose of Secretary Rice's upcoming trip to the
region.

In considering a stabilization force, we should
consider three broad questions. The first deals with
whether or not it would be empowered to deal with the
real problem, namely Hizbollah. How would such a
force deal with Hizbollah armed components, and
would it be empowered to deal with arms shipments
from countries such as Syria and Iran that support
Hezbollah? What exactly would be the extent of the
mandate to deal with the military threat posed by
Hizbollah?

The second set of questions concerns how any
new force would relate to the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), which has been there
already for 28 years. While that is hardly an interim
force, it is reasonable and responsible to ask how a new
force would differ from and be more effective than
UNIFIL, and whether that force could be multilateral,
but not necessarily a United Nations force.

Thirdly, we need to keep in mind the fact that a
key prerequisite for the complete implementation of
resolution 1559 (2004) requires the extension of full
sovereignty by the Lebanese Government over its own
territory. Would the addition of a new multilateral force
help strengthen Lebanese institutions or just create new
multilateral institutions? Would such a force contribute
to the institutional strength of the Lebanese armed
forces? Would it help to fully implement resolution
1559 (2004)?

As I noted earlier, we cannot defang Hizbollah
and Hamas while ignoring those who back them with
weapons, financing and political support. The nexus of
terror between Hizbollah and Hamas and their
principal backers, Iran and Syria, can no longer be
ignored. The United States calls upon Tehran and
Damascus to stop acting through their terrorist proxies
in the region and to work towards a lasting peace with
Israel. Again, for the fourth time in 22 days, we call
upon Syria to arrest Khaled Mashal, the leader of
Hamas, who has received safe harbour in Damascus.

There is no moral equivalence between acts of
terrorism and Israel's exercise of its legitimate right to
self-defence. Of course, it is a matter of great concern
to us, as President Bush has stressed, that civilian
deaths are occurring. It is a tragedy, and I would not
attempt to describe it any other way. We have urged the
Government of Israel to exercise the greatest possible
care in its use of force. But it is a mistake to ascribe a
moral equivalence to the killing of civilians who die as
the direct result of malicious terrorist acts, the very
purpose of which are to kill civilians, and the tragic
and unfortunate consequence of civilian deaths as a
result of military action taken in self-defence.

The United States remains firmly committed to
working through the Security Council - indeed,
through all diplomatic channels - to find a lasting end
to the violence which has plagued the region for too
long. We hope that from this current crisis we can seize
the opportunity to once and forever dismantle
Hizbollah, restore democratic control by Lebanon over
all of its territory, and lay the foundations that would
allow Israel to live in peace with its neighbours.

