Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): It is a pleasure
for me to give members of the Security Council an
update on developments in Kosovo since the previous
briefing in mid-December. Before I begin my briefing,
I should like to remind the Council that Mr. Kouchner
has now left Pristina, and his successor, the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Hans Haekkerup, has taken up his post. I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to Mr. Kouchner,
who, with the great ability, dedication and energy for
which he is known, mobilized people in very difficult
circumstances to establish the interim administration in
Kosovo in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).

I should first like to speak about the joint interim
administrative institutions. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has
continued its work to create inclusive local
administrative structures. To ensure that there is a
political foundation for this work, the outgoing Special
Representative reminded Kosovo's residents that they
are responsible for building a tolerant society. He
called on Kosovo's political leaders to use their
influence to reject intolerance and put an end to
extremism, and he stressed that Kosovo Albanians risk
squandering much of the goodwill of the international
community unless they stop ethnically motivated
killings and political violence in general.

The Kosovo Transitional Council (KTC) has been
enlarged, and further enlargement is planned to make it
as representative as possible of all of the political,
religious and ethnic communities of Kosovo. Three
new members participated in the KTC meeting on 10
January, one from the Party of the Liberal Centre, one
from the Bosniac Party of Democratic Action of
Kosovo and one from the Democratic Party of
Albanian Ashkalij a in Kosovo. These parties draw their
political support from different minority communities,
including the Kosovo Bosniacs, the Ashkalija and the
Gorani, respectively. The Interim Administrative
Council - the IAC - structure has yet to be reformed.
Other changes will take into account the results of the
28 October municipal elections, which enabled the
United Nations Mission to gauge more precisely the
popularity of the various political parties on a Kosovo-
wide basis.

The Special Representative chaired the two
meetings of the Council of Joint Interim Administrative
Structure Co-Heads. The main objective of the Council
is to increase cooperation between the various
administrative departments.

On 10 January, the first meeting of the UNMIK
working group on the legal and institutional framework
for Kosovo-wide elections was held. It was attended by
Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb experts designated
by the IAC. It focused mainly on proposals for the
functions and composition of a provisional assembly
and on an appropriate electoral formula for the
Kosovo-wide elections. The date for those elections
will be set once the legal framework has been
developed by the Special Representative.

The Assemblies in the 27 municipalities where
the election results were certified are now fully
established. The three committees- dealing with
policy, finance, and communities and mediation-
have been established in 12 Assemblies. In eight
others, the process of setting up these committees is
under way. However, the process of setting up the
municipal administrations has been complicated in
some municipalities by the deliberate politicization of
the process for selecting high-level municipality
officials by the two major Kosovo Albanian political
parties. This has partially undermined UNMIK's effort
to develop effective democratic municipal assemblies.

In the three Kosovo municipalities where Serbs
constitute the majority, Serb representatives have been
appointed to the Assemblies by the Special
Representative. However, the inclusion of Kosovo
Serbs in Assemblies in areas where Serbs are not in the
majority remains a problem. The Special
Representative has met with representatives of the
Kosovo Serb community. Negotiations have been
complicated, however, by demands from some Kosovo
Serb leaders that their communities be allowed to set
up their own distinct municipal structures, separate and
distinct from the elected Assemblies. This was rejected
by UNMIK as being contrary to resolution 1244
(1999).

I should like to say a few words about the
Gracanica Assembly. On 30 December, the Serb
National Council-Gracanica held its year-end meeting.
The Gracanica Assembly reaffirmed its willingness to
participate in all of UNMIK's Kosovo-wide
institutions, while at the same time strongly criticizing
Belgrade-based Serb leaders and their representatives
in Kosovo who continued their policy of non-
cooperation with UNMIK. The Gracanica Assembly
expressed concern over respect for the law and the
effective setting up of law-enforcement procedures, as
well as recent Kosovo sales of property belonging to
Serbs, which, according to the Assembly, were made
under duress. UNMIK is considering a range of
possible administrative recourses.

On 14 December, UNMIK and representatives of
the Government of Yugoslavia met to discuss the
matter of detainees and missing persons. The meeting
focused on practical arrangements for family visits in
prisons under Belgrade's authority and in those under
UNMIK's authority. Yugoslavian representatives also
asked that their medical personnel be authorized to
conduct medical examinations of Serb prisoners held in
Kosovo detention facilities before family visits.
Yugoslavian authorities declined an UNMIK request to
allow international doctors to visit and evaluate sick
Albanian prisoners in detention centres in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, but they did pledge to have
their own doctors conduct thorough examinations. On
17 December, UNMIK, in cooperation with the
International Organization for Migration, conducted a
second family visit to the Nis prison involving relatives
of 20 prisoners.

On security matters, since the Council was last
briefed by the Secretariat, there has been one serious
security incident in northern Kosovo. On 18 December,
the UNMIK municipal building in Zubin Potok was the
scene of a shooting and grenade attack. Threats and
attacks against members of the Democratic League of
Kosovo (LDK) have continued. The principal
coordination mechanism to ensure an effective and
coordinated international community response to these
incidents is the UNMIK Political Violence Task Force.
A number of senior LDK politicians remain under
UNMIK Police protection.

With respect to minority communities in Kosovo,
Kosovo Serbs and their property have continued to be
the targets of violent incidents, including arson and
grenade attacks. In Ashkalija communities, the
atmosphere has remained tense following the
November killing of four Ashkalija returnees in Srbica,
in the Mitrovica region. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
reports that, in several locations, Ashkalija parents
have kept their children home from school out of fear
for their safety. Interethnic tensions thus continue to
create problems for minority community access to
social services. For example, access to health care,
particularly in the smaller minority communities, is in
danger of deteriorating further. These services have
largely been provided by non-governmental
organizations and KFOR. However, a number of non-
governmental organizations either have or are planning
to pull out of Kosovo. The Department of Health
established by UNMIK is endeavouring to fill the gaps
that will be caused by these departures.

The recent unrest in Kosovo's northern
municipalities has resulted in increased pressure on
Kosovo Albanians and other minorities in these areas.
In this respect, a sharp increase was noted in the
number of incidents targeting Kosovo Albanians and
other minorities who remain in the northern side of the
town of Mitrovica. UNHCR estimates that as few as 19
Kosovar Albanian families remain within the general
population in that part of town. UNHCR notes that
minorities are still leaving the province, though recent
departures tend to be small in scale.

On 13 January, the Joint Committee on the Return
of Kosovo Serbs endorsed a framework document on
returns in 2001. The framework document notes that
return operations should be low-profile, incremental
and orderly. It contains a detailed analysis of living
conditions in Kosovo Serb communities throughout the
province and specific recommendations as to measures
required and resources needed at the local and central
levels in order to create the conditions favourable for
returns. Both the Serb National Councils of Gracanica
and Mitrovica have strongly endorsed the framework
document.

(spoke in English)

I would now like to turn to civil administration
and the rule of law. Since the Council was last briefed,
there have been key developments in civil
administration. Employment offices are now
operational in a growing number of communities. An
initiative to place a youth worker in every municipality
has been launched in order to involve the young in
community activities, such as refuse clean-up and safe
driving campaigns. By the end of 2000, more than 100
schools had been constructed or repaired. All tent
schools have been replaced by containers. Facilities
and staff have been provided to care for abandoned
children and adoption procedures are now in place to
find permanent homes for them. As of the end of
December, 46,000 families were receiving social
assistance. UNMIK's second winterization programme
is under way, assisted by unseasonably mild weather.
Firewood and coal have been distributed to needy
families and emergency shelters have been constructed
in key cities.

The Mission has made significant progress in
strengthening the rule of law in Kosovo. The Kosovo
Judicial Institute and the World Bank began work on a
$3-million technical assistance project to establish
various aspects of commercial law, including training
for judges and lawyers. The Judicial Performance
Working Group has launched its review of the
judiciary, with specific attention to possible
misconduct ofjudges, lay judges and prosecutors.

The Kosovo Police Service (KPS) has improved
in both quantity and quality. 312 cadets graduated from
the eleventh class at the Kosovo Police Service School
on 16 December, bringing the total number of trainee
police officers who graduated from the school's basic
training course to 2,851. Despite increased threats and
intimidation against Kosovo Police Service personnel,
KPS officers are largely performing in a professional
manner. This was exemplified by the pursuit and arrest
by an off-duty KPS officer of a homicide suspect who
had escaped multiple times after being arrested for
shooting a Russian KFOR soldier.

With respect to economic reconstruction,
UNMIK's initial focus on emergency reconstruction
has now shifted to economic development and the
promotion of private sector enterprise. Attention has
focused on the development of small to medium-size
enterprises, which should generate the bulk of
sustainable job growth. Substantial progress has been
made towards establishing a legal framework to
support private sector development. Four core
regulations- dealing with business organizations,
pledges, foreign investment and contracts - have been
endorsed by the IAC. In mid-December, the Mission
published a preliminary assessment of the continuing
reconstruction and economic development needs of
Kosovo. In addition to private sector development, the
assessment outlined five other priorities, including
education, health, poverty alleviation, public
administration and housing.

Under the Kosovo consolidated budget for 2001,
domestic sources of revenue will play an increasingly
major role in funding expenditures. The 2001 budget
provides for total recurrent and some capital
expenditures of 743 million deutsche marks in public
enterprises, the municipalities and the general
government. This is financed from domestic
revenues - such as taxes, fees and user charges - of
541 million deutsche marks and donor grants of 202
million deutsche marks, of which 40 million deutsche
marks is exclusively for electricity imports, if required.

With respect to the situation in southern Serbia,
the security environment in the Presevo Valley remains
tense, although the risks of major conflict appear to
have diminished. Most of the 5,000 ethnic Albanians
who fled in November 2000 have since returned to
their homes in southern Serbia. However, the situation
is not yet stable. Elements from the Liberation Army of
Presevo, Medveda and Bujanovac (UCPMB) have
moved into towns and villages, reportedly to protect
the returning populations, and are now in close
proximity to Serbian police and Yugoslav military
forces. In addition, several incidents in southern Serbia
have threatened the ceasefire understanding reached in
early December. They include the abduction on 31
December of six ethnic Serbs near a crossing point into
Kosovo, all of whom were released the next day after
intervention by KFOR.

KFOR has continued to play a major role in
helping to stabilize the situation, including a visit by
the Commander of KFOR to Bujanovac on 20
December. Following this visit, KFOR brokered an
agreement on 30 December designed to improve
freedom of movement between Bujanovac in Serbia
proper and the town of anilane in Kosovo. On 10
January, the UNHCR Special Envoy visited villages in
the ground safety zone and held meetings with the
ethnic Albanian Mayor of Presevo and Mr. Covic, the
Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia, in
order to assess the situation of the returnees. Mr. Covic
emphasized his desire to work with KFOR to arrange
for the peaceful disarmament of ethnic Albanian
fighters in the area, gave security guarantees for all
those who wished to return to their homes in Presevo,
and told UNHCR that there would be compensation for
any damages to property by the security forces.

Mr. Covic also stated that arrangements would be
made to enhance the role of ethnic Albanians in local
government. According to UNHCR, further concrete
measures, such as the inclusion of ethnic Albanians in
the local police forces and the demilitarization of the
area, are needed in order to address the sources of
tension in the area. UNHCR has established a presence
in the area in order to closely monitor the situation.

The issue of depleted uranium has been very
much in the news, and I shall take the opportunity of
this briefing to say a few words on that particular issue.
In November 2000, UNMIK invited a team of
scientists, led by the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) and including the International
Atomic Energy Agency, to study the possible presence
of radioactivity in and around sites where depleted
uranium ammunition was used. The North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), through KFOR, provided
maps identifying 112 such sites, most of them in
southern and western Kosovo. The UNEP-Ied team
visited 11 sites: five in the west and six in the south of
the province. The team collected 340 samples of soil,
water and vegetation, and conducted smear tests on
buildings, destroyed army vehicles and depleted
uranium penetrators. The samples are now being
analysed in Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom,
Austria and Italy.

The team's preliminary field findings show three
sites with no signs of higher radioactivity, nor any
remnants of depleted uranium ammunition. At eight
sites, the team found slightly higher amounts of
radiation immediately at or around the holes left by
depleted uranium ammunition, or pieces and remnants
of ammunition. The team's final report is expected in
March 2001, although a further follow-up mission may
be needed.

The World Health Organization (WHO) and the
UNMIK Department of Health and Social Welfare have
examined the incidence of leukaemia in Kosovo.
Records at Pristina Hospital for the past four years
were reviewed, and doctors from district hospitals have
been interviewed. The initial survey indicates that the
incidence of leukaemia in adults in Kosovo has not
increased.

UNMIK is taking a number of specific steps to
deal with the potential problems posed by depleted
uranium. Warning signs are being posted by UNMIK in
all known areas that were targeted by shells containing
depleted uranium. At UNMIK's request, the World
Health Organization has seconded a staff member to
Pristina to coordinate the establishment of a voluntary
testing programme for Kosovo residents and UNMIK
staff at Pristina Hospital. The WHO is also dispatching
to Kosovo three specialists- a toxicologist, an
authority on radiation and an environment expert - to
assess the consequences of depleted uranium. A
committee of local medical experts is being
established, with a representative from the UNMIK
Department of Health among its members. Members of
the committee will be included in briefing sessions
dealing with the public health aspects of depleted
uranium.

A public information campaign is being
developed to inform Kosovo residents, both local and
international, about depleted uranium and what is
known about illnesses, specifically leukaemia, which
may or may not be related to ingesting depleted
uranium.

To conclude, I should like to stress that over the
last 18 months, UNMIK has made impressive progress
in the implementation of its mandate. The support of
the members of the Council and the inspired leadership
of Mr. Kouchner have played an essential role in this
process. As the leadership of the Mission passes from
one Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
another, preparations are already under way to tackle
the new set of challenges UNMIK will face in the
coming months. The new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has laid out a clear agenda for the
future. Under his leadership, the Mission will
concentrate on developing a legal framework for
provisional self-government in Kosovo, in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999).

Renewed energy will also be put into the
development of effective law-enforcement institutions.
In addition, UNMIK will establish an office in
Belgrade in order to facilitate dialogue with the
Government of Yugoslavia. In order to realize these
ambitious goals, the Mission will continue to rely upon
the type of strong and committed support it has enjoyed
from the Council and Member States since its
inception.

