Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
join others in thanking your country, Madam President,
for convening this important and timely open debate.
My country understands that peace and security must
be viewed in a framework in which both concepts and
their meanings are considered from the point of View of
the rule of law.

All here present have in mind the Declaration of the
High-level Meeting ofthe General Assembly on the Rule
of Law at the National and International Levels, adopted
on 24 September 2012 (General Assembly resolution 67/ 1). We also recall the intensive negotiations during
the year to ensure that all Member States achieved
consensus on the text of the Declaration.

Even in those cases where the international
community is unable to resolve conflicts between or
within countries, a legal framework is needed to enable
such societies to go on to develop and become viable.
We believe that that can be achieved only when laws
are fully enforced, with a separation of powers and
the presence of State authority throughout the national
territory.

In that respect, we consider peace and security and
the rule of law to be fully complementary and mutually
reinforcing values. We believe that, in the twenty-first
century, it is not possible to discuss peace and security
without referring to the rule of law, both nationally and
internationally.

The recognition of the rule of law at the national
and international levels is of paramount importance
to the promotion of political dialogue, the peaceful
resolution of conflicts and international cooperation,
concepts that strengthen the three pillars on which
United Nations efforts are based, namely, peace and
security, human rights and development.

My delegation notes with satisfaction that 18 of
the 28 Security Council missions have a mandate to
strengthen rule-of-law institutions. We believe that,
while each mission relates to a different reality, all
mandates should include rule-of-law principles and aim
at the weakest points indicated in each case.

That is clearly insufficient in and of itself for
achieving peace, but we must strengthen efforts towards
peace. Ifwe agree on the benefits provided by the rule of
law to the international community and today's society,
it would also be desirable for national and international
justice systems to prosecute those responsible for
massacres and killings around the world, which may be
the result of the use of conventional weapons or, even
worse, of the use of weapons banned by international
law.

In that regard, although our country - as is well-
known - opposes the use of the veto, we urge the
permanent members of the Security Council to refrain
from the use of the veto, especially in cases of war
crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and mass
atrocities.

To conclude, my delegation believes that, beyond
the inclusion of the rule of law and its various facets
as the objective of missions mandated by the Security
Council, it is essential to create the necessary conditions
in countries that are, unfortunately, plagued by violence
and disregard for human rights so that, through the
implementation of national and international law,
including humanitarian and human rights law, societies
can finally advance towards improved development in
peaceful and secure conditions.
