Mr. Riecken (Austria): Austria fully aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier on behalf of the
European Union.

Let me thank the Lithuanian presidency for
convening today's open debate. The protection of
journalists is a priority for Austria. We are continuously
witnessing high numbers of targeted and often deadly
attacks on journalists. Over 600 journalists and media
workers have been killed over the past 10 years, and
attacks on journalists are occurring in virtually all
regions of the world. We are particularly appalled by
the unprecedented cruelty of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist groups.

Since only the beginning of 2015, 30 journalists
have been killed, according to the International Press
Institute, either because of their reporting or simply
because they were journalists. It must be emphasized
that the clear majority of attacks against journalists take
place in situations that cannot be qualified as traditional
or typical armed conflict situations. Journalists
reporting, for instance, on organized crime, corruption,
protests and popular uprisings easily become targets of
assault, arbitrary arrest, harassment or intimidation.
Those attacks aim to silent critical voices and greatly
impede the right to the freedom of expression.

In recent years, the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Human Rights Council have shown
increasing international awareness by adopting
resolutions condemning attacks against journalists.
They have called upon all States to act on their legal
obligations to promote a safe and enabling environment
for journalists, so that they can perform their work
independently and without undue interference. Austria
will continue to play an active role to raise political
awareness of the problem. We also particularly welcome
the significant efforts of UNESCO in implementing
the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of
Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

While it is the responsibility of States to ensure that
journalists' right to protection as civilians is respected,
all parties to a conflict, including non-State actors, must
comply with the rules of international humanitarian law
as well as international criminal law, which establish
clear obligations for individuals. The Security Council
has an important role to play in that regard and must
regularly address the issue of the safety of journalists
in a substantial manner, including in its country-
specific deliberations. The Council should strongly
condemn attacks against journalists whenever they
occur as they are a direct threat to free and democratic
societies. Austria encourages the Secretary-General to
include more detailed information on the situation of
and threats against journalists in his future reports on
the protection of civilians. The Security Council should
also make better use of the expertise of United Nations
experts, including the relevant special procedures of the
Human Rights Council and UNESCO representatives,
and invite these experts for briefings.
Furthermore, it would be crucial for United Nations
missions, agencies and offices to be better prepared
to become the first points of contact for journalists
under threat, especially in conflict situations. Taking
into account recent experiences from the situation of
non-international conflicts, Austrian authorities have
responded to increasing expectations to ensure the
protection to our own journalists reporting from conflict
zones by introducing an identity card for journalists in
accordance with article 79 of the Additional Protocol I
of the Geneva Conventions.

Impunity for those responsible for attacks has
been recognized as the biggest obstacle for the
effective protection of journalists. Nine out of 10
crimes committed against journalists go unpunished.
Therefore, States must strengthen accountability
for attacks, in particular by vigorously condemning
such attacks when they occur, by investigating them
promptly and effectively in order to duly sanction those
responsible, and by providing compensation to the
victims where appropriate. We should therefore also
consider how regional justice mechanisms, such as ad
hoc tribunals and the International Criminal Court,
based on its existing competence, can contribute to
ensuring accountability if efforts at the national level
do not bring the expected results.

