Ms. Siider (Sweden): It is an honour to be at the
United Nations today in the Security Council, speaking
on behalf of the Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.

At the outset, we would like to thank China,
Angola and Senegal for organizing this open debate on
a subject of great importance to us all. We would also
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Taye-Brook
Zerihoun for his briefing this morning.

The increase in pirate attacks off the coast of
West Africa and the steadily expanding area of their
operations affect more countries and more people
every year. That poses a threat to peace, security and
stability in an already vulnerable region. Furthermore,
the instability and the threats at sea in the Gulf of
Guinea present a major obstacle to the development and
prosperity of the region. It is therefore of the utmost
importance to increase international cooperation aimed
at curbing that trend and to find a solution to a growing
problem. How then can we join forces to tackle that
concern? We would like to highlight three areas that we
deem to be particularly important.

First, regional cooperation is key. It is therefore
very encouraging that the member States of the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Commission of the Gulf of Guinea agreed, in 2013
at their Summit in Yaounde, on the Code of Conduct
Concerning the Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery
against Ships, and Illicit Maritime Activities in West
and Central Africa. The Code of Conduct and the
establishment of the necessary institutions for maritime
security in the region are important steps in the right
direction. Those institutions are not yet operational,
and they need further support.

Moreover, closer cooperation among the navies
and coast guards of the region needs to be a priority.
Finding ways of patrolling each other's waters could
also be considered and further developed. It is also
important that the right means to prosecute and
incarcerate criminals arrested at sea exist. For our part,
we are considering how we can best further support the
efforts by the countries of the region in that regard.

Secondly, the experiences of the European Union
Naval Force Somalia - Operation Atalanta - which
is pursuing counter-piracy operations off the Horn of
Africa, and to which we have contributed on several
occasions, should be capitalized on. That Security
Council-mandated operation provides a clear example
of how numerous and coordinated local, regional and
international efforts at sea and on land can collectively
reduce piracy and stabilize maritime regions.

Thirdly, we also need to keep in mind that piracy
and armed robbery at sea are complex phenomena
linked to poverty and social unrest. Addressing the root
causes requires a comprehensive and inclusive strategy
for promoting peace, stability and prosperity in the
region as a whole.

In that regard, the region's potential to benefit
from the blue economy and harness the vast potential
of ocean resources so as to unlock growth and wealth
in the marine and maritime sectors should be pursued
further. The important work already under way in
several countries of the region aimed at increasing the
economic contribution of marine resources through
strengthened fisheries governance, reduced illegal
fishing and increased local value added to fish projects
is highly encouraging. My own Government, in
partnership with countries of the region, is currently
looking into how we, in a better and more sustainable
way, can unlock the potential of seas and oceans for
innovation and growth through capacity-building and
through collaboration.

We call for coherent and well-coordinated
intervention from local, subregional, regional and
international actors, including with a focus on bridging
the gaps between security and development. The
international community and the United Nations,
especially through the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel, the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, must continue supporting
regional actors in their specific efforts against piracy,
while other United Nations entities must pursue the
goal of bringing long-term development and stability to
the region, including by investing in local and national
capacities. The role of the Peacebuilding Commission
has never been more important.
I would like to thank you once again, Mr. President,
for initiating this important discussion. We hope that
today's debate will spur further international and
regional coordination and cooperation in the fight
against piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of
Guinea.

