Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We listened with interest to the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Inzko.
Regrettably, his report to the Security Council is again
written in alarmist tones and is critical of the Bosnian
Serb leadership (see S/2012/813). To create a more
balanced impression of the processes under way, we
recommend that he familiarize himself with the eighth
report of the Republika Srpska to the Security Council,
in which the dedication of the Bosnian Serbs to
international law and the letter of the Dayton Accords
is clear.

Russia supports the territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and is eager to see its institutions
function normally and sustainably while complying
with the principle of the equality of the three constituent
peoples set forth in the Dayton Peace Accords.

We agree that the situation in Bosnia over the
past six months has deteriorated somewhat. That has
happened in the light of the deteriorating relationships
between the two leading Bosniak parties, which could
have an impact on stability not just in the Federation,
but throughout the country. But let us not overdramatize
the situation. It is important that the local elections
of 7 October took place for the most part in a calm
environment and without significant violations.

The main task of the international community in
the current phase of the Bosnian settlement process is to
transfer responsibility for the fate of the country to the
Bosnians themselves. In that respect, we are in favour
of abolishing the Office of the High Representative
and, to that end, returning to the implementation
by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council of the five plus two programme. Like any other
issue of vital importance to the future of the country,
outstanding problems within that framework must be
resolved by the Bosnians themselves on the basis of
consensus between the three constituent peoples - the
Bosniaks, the Serbs and the Croats. In that respect,
we are encouraged by the continued internal Bosnian
dialogue.

Unlike the Bosnian Federation, the situation in the
Republika Srpska is stable. We are seeing continued
cooperation between the Bosnian governing party and
opposition on general Bosnian affairs on the basis of a
strict approach to upholding the Dayton Accords and
the legitimate interests of the Bosnian Serbs. We note
the importance of the signing by the President of the
Republika Srpska Milorad Dodik and the head of the
Bosnian Social Democrats Zeljko Komsie on 31 October
of a cooperation agreement that maps out compromise
solutions to a number of socioeconomic issues, as well
as to issues in the areas ofjustice and the functioning
of the administrative apparatus.

The leadership of the Republika Srpska is clearly
raising the question of the necessity of arriving at
an agreement with the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on issues concerning the reform of the
country and cautioning against violating the practice
of consensus, including when making decisions about
matters of foreign policy. We support them in their View
that Bosnia and Herzegovina's existence is untenable if
those principles are not observed.

We welcome the suspension of the Office of the
Brcko Supervisor on 31 August according to the
schedule decided at the May meeting of the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council. That is a
result of our joint efforts. We consider that decision to
be a first step towards winding down the Office of the
High Representative.

We agree with the importance of amending the
Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina in order
to bring it into line with the verdict of the European
Court of Human Rights on the Sejdie-Finci case.
A compromise is possible in that regard through a
continuation of the dialogue. That said, there can be no
possible agreement with the expanded interpretation of
the European Court's decision and the attempts to use
it as a pretext to review the entire Dayton architecture.
In August, the Bosnian sides submitted separate draft
constitutional amendments that reflected the verdict to
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly.
Their subsequent fate depends on the ability of members
of Parliament to agree on a decision.

We consider the creation of a strengthened European
Union (EU) mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina to be
another step towards winding down the Office of the
High Representative. In that context, we welcome the
divisionoftheresponsibilitiesoftheHighRepresentative
and the EU's Special Representative. A prerequisite for
the work of those two international presences in Bosnia
and Herzegovina should be precise compliance with
their mandates. They must not encroach on each other's
responsibilities, and they should certainly not duplicate
each other's functions. While not a participant in the
European Union Force-Operation Althea, Russia
supports certain goals of its mandate relating to
providing security in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
cooperating on training personnel in the Ministry of
Defence and the country's armed forces.

It is essential that we stop ignoring the fact that
for a number of years now the overall situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been fairly stable. We
should therefore look at the prospects and think about
how to reconfigure the international presences in the
country for the future. It is important that we increase
efforts to end the external protectorate, which has run
out of resources, as embodied in the Office of the High
Representative, and abolish the Bonn powers as soon
as possible. For now, the Office should be reorganized
to assist in implementing the five objectives and two
conditions, as well as in removing any legal clashes that
might have been created by the High Representative's
imposition of restrictions on policies and appointments
in the area of extra-judicial administration. We are
opposed to overburdening the European integration
agenda for Bosnia and Herzegovina with the activities
of the Office. The right to define future integration, like
the right to control the general direction of the processes
of reform, belongs to the Bosnians themselves.

In conclusion, the Russian Federation supports
a solid international reconciliation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and in that context, favours an impartial
investigation ofevery crime committed during the 1992-
1995 conflict. We are compelled to conclude, however,
that, for reasons that are unclear, both the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
Bosnian judicial bodies prefer to prosecute Serbs.
The demonstrable bias of Mr. Serge Brammertz, the
Prosecutor ofthe Tribunal in The Hague, against contact
with organizations of relatives of Serbian and Croatian
Victims of the Balkan crisis also raises questions. Such
failings must be eliminated.

