Mr. Aboul Gheit (spoke in Arabic): It gives me
pleasure to extend my sincere congratulations to the
State of Kuwait on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of June and to
express my deep appreciation for the its role as the
Arab member of the Council. I especially commend its
initiative to convene this meeting in order to elevate
the level of partnership between the League of Arab
States and the Security Council within the general
framework governed by Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing, and for his firm commitment to
strengthening the cooperation and institutional
coordination between our two organizations in a manner
that enhances the complementarity of our activities in
maintaining international peace and security in the
Arab region. I also thank him for his commitment to
the two-State solution.

I speak today coming from a region rife with
conflicts and deep crises, some ofwhich are excessively
difficult to resolve. Those conflicts and crises have
had a severely negative impact on generations of our
peoples, who have fallen victim to vicious cycles of
anger and frustration. As the Secretary-General noted,
most of these conflicts and crises are on the Security
Council's agenda, yet regrettably and for a variety of
reasons, the Security Council has not been able, in
some cases, to adopt a clear position towards them or
act on those positions it had already reached.

The complex situation in Syria has entered its ninth
year without the emergence of a genuine horizon for the
political solution which the international community
has called for since the eruption of the crisis in 2011.
In Yemen, the Yemeni people remain the victims of
a humanitarian crisis that results primarily from the
insistence of an outlaw faction on seizing control of
the capital of the country and posing a clear threat to
Yemen's neighbours and to maritime navigation in its
surrounding waters. Libya has fallen anew into military
hostilities that have come to threaten its societal fabric
and its chances of completing its political transition to
preserve its unity. As for Somalia, we continue to work
with other partners, as the Secretary-General noted,
in solidifying the pillars of security and stability and
consolidating peace there and in the entire Horn of
Africa, which is a region of direct geographic proximity
and importance to the Arab world.

Having said all that and more, I cannot neglect
or ignore the centrality of the Palestinian question
in the minds and conscience of the Arab peoples and
leadership. The ongoing Israeli occupation of the
Palestinian territories is and will remain the main
source of destabilization and radicalization in the
Middle East region and beyond. That region will
never enjoy security or genuine stability without an
end to the Israeli occupation of the Arab territories
in Palestine, Syria and Lebanon, the establishment of
the independent Palestinian State and the attainment
of a just and comprehensive settlement to the Arab-
Israeli conflict.

A host of additional factors have contributed to
exacerbating all these conflicts and instigating turmoil
elsewhere in the region, foremost among which are the
unprecedented regional and international interference
in the internal affairs of Arab countries; the spread
of militias and armed groups that are fighting against
national armies and challenging the authority of
States and threatening their sovereignty and territorial
integrity; and the growing threat posed by terrorist
groups that are afforded support, funding and media
platforms that allow them to commit their crimes and
disseminate their message based on murder and hatred.

In addition, I refer to the condemned and alarming
developments with regard to the targeting of oil
tankers in the Arabian Gulf yesterday and on 12 May,
as well as the ballistic missile attacks on the territory
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia two days ago. These
dangerous developments must, in our view, compel
the Security Council to act against those responsible
in order to maintain the security and stability of the
region. Some parties are trying to set the region aflame,
and we all must be aware of that.

While the League of Arab States looks forward
to enhancing the effectiveness of its partnership
mechanisms with the United Nations, and with the
Security Council in particular, to resolve these conflicts
and crises and address all these challenges, it has also
become determined to exercise a more effective role in
contributing to the maintenance of international peace
and security in our Arab region, defending the Arab
national security of its member States and deterring
the dangers that threaten them, all in accordance with
the Charter and international law. The emergency
Arab Summit that was held in Mecca on 31 May
was the most recent and perhaps best testimony to
this. The Arab leaders gathered in an extraordinary
session and condemned the terrorist acts that targeted
oil installations on Saudi territories and commercial
vessels in the territorial waters of the United Arab
Emirates. They further reiterated their full solidarity
with both countries in the face of Iranian interference
and practices, as well as the crimes perpetrated by the
Houthi militias, supported by the regime in Teheran.

I find it important in this regard to clarify that
the maintenance of the security of the Arab region
is a central condition for the preservation of the
international security system, and that threats and
acts which undermine Arab security will have serious
consequences that will not stop at the borders of our Arab
region. International solidarity is therefore essential in
order to send an unequivocal and unambiguous message
to all our neighbours that subversive activities are
no longer acceptable and that concealing themselves
behind regional proxies or through grey-zone operations
that are non-attributable to their original perpetrators is
a tactic that is rejected by all of us.

My principal message to the Security Council today,
as a representative of the oldest regional organization
to be granted observer status in the General Assembly,
in 1950, is based on our desire to establish a broad
and solid platform to elevate the level of consultations
between the League of Arab States and the Security
Council and to consider ways and means to translate
that coordination into further support that will advance
the joint and complementary activities between our two
organizations, similar to those arrangements in place
with other regional organizations and in a manner that
enhances efforts to maintain international peace and
security in the Arab region and their credibility, in
conformity with the provisions of international law, the
objectives of our two organizations, and the principles
and purposes of their charters. To that end, allow me to
present a number of observations and proposals.

First, any fruitful cooperation between the
League of Arab States and the Council should be
underpinned by the establishment of a permanent
and institutional arrangement for the exchange
of information - transparently as well as
frankly - between the two sides in order for the
Council to be apprised of the views and assessments
of the regional organization concerned and able to
articulate the appropriate position and adopt the proper
measures, in conformity with this vision and these
assessments, when addressing any matter related to
the region. This request is not in fact entirely new;
it merely requires the commitment to putting it into
effect, as it already constitutes an established principle
in the relations between the Council and other regional
and subregional organizations.

Secondly, there is a parallel need to advance the
level of coordination and interaction with the Arab
League on the part of the United Nations special
representatives and envoys to Arab conflicts and areas
of crises in a manner that truly results in a unified and
common understanding of the causes of the eruption or
continuation of these conflicts, leading to coordinated
and complementary action by both organizations to
resolve them.

I commend in particular the commitment shown
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Libya, my dear friend Mr. Ghassan Salame, and his
cooperation with the League of Arab States, especially
during the current critical stage in Libya following
the outbreak of hostilities around the capital Tripoli
and the reversals in the political process that he used
to oversee and which the Arab League fully supported
and continues to support. We also highly appreciate
the approach of the Commissioner-General of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in regularly coordinating and
interacting with the League of Arab States, especially
to address the severe financial crisis that has afflicted
the Agency's budget and endangered its operations
in the service of Palestinian refugees. This form of
cooperation provides a positive example that we hope
will be followed to maximize the coordination between
the Arab League, the envoys and senior officials of the
United Nations and others concerning issues related to
the Arab region.

Thirdly, there is a long-standing history of
institutional cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States in various areas of
common interest to both organizations. We established
an organizational framework for this relationship
almost 30 years ago when the two sides signed an
agreement on cooperation in 1989 and proceeded
afterwards to update the text of the agreement by
signing an additional protocol in 2016. The agreement
and the mechanisms emanating from it, along with the
preparations currently under way by the United Nations
to open a permanent liaison office to the Arab League in
Cairo - to which the Secretary-General has referred-
provide a comprehensive framework for advancing the
cooperation between the United Nations system and the
Arab League.

We trust that this framework can be employed to
further develop the cooperation we aspire to with the
Security Council, not only in resolving armed conflicts
but also in addressing all threats to international
peace and security in the Arab region in its broader
perspective, be it with respect to disarmament and
the elimination of all weapons of mass destruction in
the Middle East, combating terrorism, the protection
of civilians in armed conflict or humanitarian crises,
the flow of refugees and internally displaced persons
and irregular migration. I pledge to take care of and
cooperate with the liaison office, providing it with all
the support it needs to carry out its mandate in Cairo.

Fourthly, the cooperation that we aspire to achieve
with the Security Council and United Nations agencies
must expand to encompass all stages of early warning,
mediation, good offices, preventive diplomacy,
conflict resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding
and peace sustainability. There are multiple examples
of joint action that we have undertaken together in
these fields, perhaps the most notable of which was the
appointment of the Joint Special Envoy of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States to Syria in 2012
and the establishment of the Libya quartet, which is
comprised of representatives of the United Nations,
the League of Arab States, the European Union and the
African Union.

I believe that we must draw the lessons learned from
these and other experiences and strive to replicate their
positive results in other situations, whether existing
or emerging, that require joint action to prevent the
eruption or deterioration of conflicts, leading to their
resolution and ensuring them against the possibility
of reoccurrence. We also welcome, in this regard,
the institutional support provided to us by the United
Nations to strengthen the internal capabilities of the
Arab League in maintaining international peace and
security in the Arab region, which we hope to further
develop to the point of establishing and deploying peace
missions in the field to Arab crisis areas in the near
future. This practice is highly useful and we appreciate
the efforts of the Secretary-General and the important
resources he provides to us. Other practices are being
undertaken at the level of the Arab League thanks to
his support.

Fifthly, despite the severity ofthe challenges facing
our region, the League of Arab States, as a regional
organization and collective of its Member States,
remains an active partner in the multilateral system and
a major contributor to efforts to maintain international
peace and security, not only in the Arab region but also
in areas in geographic proximity to the Arab world and
other crisis areas.

Certain Arab States - like Egypt, Jordan
and Morocco - are among the top troop- and
police-contributing countries in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Other Arab countries - such
as Kuwait, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United
Arab Emirates and Qatar - are among the largest
donors of humanitarian assistance to address the
humanitarian crises in Syria, Iraq, Yemen and Somalia,
as well as in supporting the budget and activities of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. We all succeeded in bridging
the gap in the Agency's budget last year, and we hope
that this year will be just as successful.

Arab countries have also exercised a significant
diplomatic role in sponsoring historic reconciliations
in the Horn of Africa and provided further financial
and logistical assistance to the countries of the Sahel
to enhance their capabilities to combat Boko Haram
and other terrorist groups active on their territories.
There are also distinguished Arab institutions, such as
Al-Azhar Al-Sharif, that are partnered with the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations and support dialogue
among religions and peoples in a way which promotes
the culture of peace, moderation and tolerance in our
Arab region and beyond.

I believe that these contributions, among many
others, all feed into the process of strengthening
cooperative relations between the United Nations and
the Arab League and demonstrate the benefits of the
cooperation and complementarity that can and must be
achieved between us.

Sixthly and finally, it is incumbent upon me to
once again warn against the dangers of maintaining the
status quo of the Palestinian situation to the security
and stability of the entire Middle East region. This is
especially pertinent given Israel's continued oppressive
practices against the Palestinian people and its feverish
attempts to expand by annexing Arab lands, even to
the point of doubting the Palestinian right itself and the
just Palestinian question. Rather, it seeks to legitimize
the occupation of the territory and then proceed to
illegally annex it by recognizing occupied Jerusalem as
the capital of Israel, casting doubt over the just cause of
Palestinian refugees, which the Organization has been
sponsoring for 70 years.

While I trust that the Council is fully aware of the
consistent positions espoused by the Arab League on
this issue over the decades, I also trust that it recognizes
the gravity of the issues I refer to. Attempts to resolve
the Palestinian question outside the framework of
international law, while ignoring the established
final-status issues based on the two-State solution, or
to create an alternative economic or development track
perpetuating the occupation constitute a devastating
blow to the international legal architecture, the
credibility of the Security Council and the basic
principles upon which the United Nations was founded.
In this regard, I call on the Council to fully assume its
responsibilities, without selectivity or double standards,
to provide international protection to the Palestinian
people, enforce all its previous resolutions and compel
Israel to fully comply with implementing them.

(spoke in English)

Allow me, in conclusion, to clearly state that we
are fully aware of the internal political dynamics
surrounding the Security Council's approach - or lack
thereof - to many of the complex crises afflicting
the Arab region. I am confident that the Council
also appreciates the complications and tensions that
sometimes permeate our own Arab system and curtail
its ability to collectively respond to the security
challenges it faces.

Yet these considerations should not be an excuse
for inaction or lead to any abdication of the Council's
commitment to upholding the foundational principles
of international law. I remain equally convinced that
advancing the cooperative partnership between the
United Nations and the Arab League is an indispensable
means of enabling both the Security Council and
our regional organization to assume their inherent
responsibilities and better discharge their duties in the
promotion and maintenance of international peace and
security in our region.

This partnership alone is not sufficient to resolve
the multiple emergency situations that atrophy the Arab
region, yet it is an important prerequisite that embodies
our collective political will to address these crises and
act in a complementary manner that truly reflects the
letter and spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. It also affords the Council the added
legitimacy and credibility it often requires to elaborate
the most appropriate course of action and secure the
requisite support for its decisions vis-a-vis our region.
