Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, I would like to congratulate
you on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and for the admirable manner in
which you are undertaking the task.

We have closely followed the briefings presented
by the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies in today's
meeting, and we thank them for their statements.

Syria reaffirms its condemnation of terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations, regardless of its
source or perpetrators, be they groups, individuals or
States. Terrorism consists of criminal, aggressive and
unjust acts that target the lives and property of
innocent people, and its effects touch everyone without
distinction.

Today started as a beautiful sunny day in most of
the capitals of the world, but it was a bloody day in
Damascus. Our capital was shaken by two suicide
terrorist attacks that killed 56 innocent individuals and
grievously injured 372 others; the remains of 15
individuals have yet to be identified. Those statistics
characterized this morning in Damascus, in contrast to
the morning enjoyed by all other capitals in the world.
It is therefore appropriate that, on behalf of my
Government, I today address the members of the
Security Council on the subject of counter-terrorism.

At 7:30 am. local time, two suicide terrorist
bombers exploded two vehicles laden with explosives
in an neighbourhood of Damascus that is densely
populated with civilians. The area has four schools,
including a primary school, a preparatory school and a
secondary school. The two explosions took place at a
time when students were on their way to school. As I
mentioned earlier, the explosions killed dozens of
innocent victims, civilian and military. Joint Special
Envoy Kofi Annan quickly condemned the cowardly
act, as did General Mood, chief of the United Nations
observer mission. We expect the Security Council,
under the wise leadership of its President, to condemn
that cowardly act loudly and clearly, and to take a firm
stance in addressing it in all its Arab, regional and
international dimensions.

The explosion took place at the same time as
another explosion in Aleppo this morning, which also
claimed several civilian victims and did massive
damage to private property.

Council members are well aware that, while Syria
has witnessed a noticeable reduction in the level of
violence, there has recently been an increase in the
scale and frequency of terrorist activities and
operations in the country. Extremist terrorist groups
have emerged, using unusual criminal methods and
carrying out organized terrorist operations based on
extremist Takfiri edicts that label others as apostates
and which are issued by inciters residing in countries
well known to us all. These groups use suicide
bombers, booby-trapped cars, explosive belts and
packages to attack vital facilities and infrastructure and
to sow fear among citizens. That is apparent in the
terrorist explosions that have taken place in various
areas around Damascus and Aleppo, as well as the two
recent explosions in the province of Idlib, which the
Security Council regrettably failed to condemn for
unjustifiable political reasons.

The same applies to the terrorist explosion that
took place yesterday in Daraa, targeting a convoy of
the United Nations observer mission, which led to
injuries among members of the Syrian security forces
who were accompanying the convoy. That incident led
the Secretary-General to condemn the explosion and all
acts of violence, including the use of explosive devices
in Syrian cities to target the forces of law and order,
civilians and public and private property on a
continuous daily basis; armed robbery, banditry, theft,
vandalism, attacks on citizens in their homes and in
their shops, in order to provoke and terrorize them; and
the kidnapping of individuals for ransom, which is then
used to support terrorist activities.
The number of army, police and security
personnel kidnapped between 24 March to 26 April
alone is 220 individuals. Some of those organized
terrorist acts have carried the hallmarks of Al-Qaida
method and ideology, including the mutilation of
corpses, the killing of entire families on the basis of
purely sectarian affiliation, and the carrying out of
simultaneous suicide explosions in separate areas.

Since the beginning of the aforementioned events,
we have conscientiously stressed that armed terrorist
organizations associated with Al-Qaida are carrying out
the atrocities in Syria, but many political parties and
hostile media have cast doubt on our assertions. Today
we are witnessing the public endorsement by groups
and organizations affiliated with Al-Qaida of terrorist
activities and operations carried out in Syria in
response to appeals issued by leaders of Al-Qaida such
as Ayman Al-Zawahiri, who has called for jihad in
Syria.

Statements have also been made by the leaders of
Western intelligence agencies, admitting that the
Al-Qaida branch in a State bordering on Syria was
behind the recent terrorist bombings in Damascus and
Aleppo, following the infiltration by Al-Qaida
elements into the ranks of the armed opposition
fighting the Syrian Government. Arab and non-Arab
media are reporting on a daily basis the deaths in Syria
of foreign fighters of various nationalities in the course
of undertaking terrorist operations. Indeed, some
Al-Qaida-affiliated websites have been lamenting the
loss of members of their groups in carrying out
terrorist activities in Syria.

I have a list of 26 names of terrorists, some of
whom are affiliated with Al-Qaida. We have
transmitted the list to the Secretary-General, the
President of the Security Council and the Chairman of
its counter-terrorism subsidiary bodies. We also have
recordings of those same individuals confessing that
they are terrorists and had entered the country to carry
out terrorist operations. This evidence is available from
our delegation, and we are pleased to provide any
member of the Security Council with copies.

Furthermore, we are in possession of copious
documentary evidence of terrorist activities, all in
English, and the names and citizenship of terrorists and
those who have incited and supported them. Members
of the Security Council, the Secretary-General and the
Chairmen of the Council's subsidiary bodies shall soon
receive this evidence. We also have a list of the names
of 12 foreign terrorists who have been killed in Syria,
including a French, a British and a Belgian citizen.
This list is also available from our delegation, and we
request you, Sir, to distribute it among the members of
the Security Council.

Terrorist operations cannot be carried out without
financing and support in the form of funds, weapons
and operatives. Unfortunately, some Arab States and
States of the region and beyond have provided such
resources to help armed terrorist groups carry out
terrorist activities in Syria. Those countries have
publically and openly pledged to provide support in the
form of weapons, funds, training and safe havens to
help terrorists carry out acts of terrorism and sabotage
against the peace and security of the Syrian State and
people. To that end, they are engaged in illegal cross-
border movements from neighbouring States.

The smuggling of funds and weapons to armed
groups is a reality encountered on a daily and even
hourly basis by the customs authorities and border
guards of Syria. High-level officials of Syria's
neighbours have spoken publically about disrupting the
smuggling of weapons, money and people into Syria.
For example, on 20 March the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Lebanon spoke of the arrest by the Lebanese
authorities of 27 individuals on charges of smuggling
weapons into Syria. The Director of the General
Security Service of Jordan has spoken of the detention
by the Jordanian authorities of a number of individuals
attempting to sneak weapons into Syria through our
border crossings.

We have sent dozens of letters to the President of
the Security Council and the Secretary-General on this
topic. The most recent was that of 24 April concerning
terrorists, most affiliated with Al-Qaida, who had been
arrested in Syria following their infiltration of our
borders for the purpose of undertaking terrorist
operations. I should like to inform the Council that, on
27 April, the Lebanese authorities detained and seized
the vessel Latfallah II, which had sailed from Misurata,
Libya, to Lebanon via Alexandria, Egypt, carrying 180
tons of weapons and advanced communications
equipment, including rocket-propelled grenade
launchers, French anti-tank and anti-aircraft launchers,
and large amounts of TNT. This weaponry was
intended to be smuggled into Syria for use in armed
terrorist operations.
Statements have also been issued by certain
armed terrorist groups, noting earlier successes in
smuggling shipments of weapons, including American
Stinger anti-aircraft rockets, into Syria. At the same
time, a high-level official of the Libyan National
Transitional Council had announced that 5,000 anti-
aircraft had been misplaced or lost from Libyan
arsenals. There have also been reports of Turkish and
Libyan cooperation with other Arab and non-Arab
States in sending lethal weapons to armed groups in
order to sow death and destruction in Syria. I find it
strange that the aforementioned ship entered Lebanese
territorial waters via Egypt, passing without
interdiction the positions occupied by the maritime
units of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.

Agreements to conspire to smuggle weapons and
to facilitate the entry of terrorists into Syria undermine
all efforts to find a political solution to the crisis there
and to facilitate the implementation of the Security
Council's resolutions and Mr. Annan's peace plan.
Indeed, they reflect an attempt to undo Mr. Annan's
mission and a blatant attack on Syrian sovereignty.

The Security Council, at a meeting presided over
by the President of Azerbaijan last week (see S/PV.6765), reaffirmed in presidential statement
S/PRST/2012/ 17 its strong and unequivocal
denunciation and condemnation of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, regardless of its perpetrators,
location or purposes. We call on the Council to
translate those words into deeds, to take the immediate
actions necessary to stop all terrorist activities in Syria,
and to exert maximum pressure on the States that are
facilitating, financing and inciting the groups
undertaking such activities to comply with the
Council's resolutions concerning terrorism and Syria.

Terrorist acts have spilled the precious blood of
our people. The day will come when we shall call to
account all those who have taken part in, incited,
financed or facilitated such activities. Terrorism is an
international crime that requires an international
response. That was the gist of the presidential
statement issued on behalf of all members of the
Council. Accordingly, the fight against terrorism
cannot be selective, relative or subjective. It must
match deeds to words. We also call on the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 1373 (2001) to complete their mandated
tasks and to implement the substance of these
resolutions with respect to events in Syria.
The terrorist activities now taking place in Syria,
which target the stability of the State, the nation and
society, are no less dangerous than the terrorist
activities that targeted New York on 11 September and
the terrorist activities that targeted Madrid and London.
There is no righteous terrorism and malicious terrorism.
There is only one terrorism that must be combated. The
terrorism that targets Syria is the same as the one that
targeted New York, London, Madrid and other cities.
There are also media, cultural, political and economic
terrorism. It is all terrorism. There is no merit for a
Member State of this Organization to finance the
creation of a centre for counter-terrorism while it
stands behind the incitement to terrorism and finances
terrorist groups in my country. Terrorism is one and the
same.

Finally, terrorism throughout the world is caused
primarily by Zionist terrorism, which was initiated by
Israel much earlier in the life of this international
Organization. In 1954, Israel hijacked a Syrian aircraft.
It was the first time ever that a civilian aircraft had
been hijacked. Later, Israel carried out a series of
terrorist activities that you are well aware of and which
led to the displacement of millions of Palestinians from
their homes. The course of Israeli terrorism has
continued to this day. The words that you heard from
the speaker who spoke before me were merely a
distraction to divert attention from Israeli terrorism, the
sole purpose of which is to undermine the possibility of
establishing a Palestinian State in the West Bank and
Gaza and to focus attention on issues other than State
terrorism, a form of terrorism that is well-evidenced in
thousands of documents issued by the United Nations
in New York and Geneva.

