Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 10 member countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).

Permit me, at the outset, to thank the Chairmen of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for their comprehensive and informative
briefings. ASEAN is deeply supportive of their work
and looks forward to continued cooperation and
collaboration with them.

Today's meeting comes at a remarkable time for
members of ASEAN. For many years, we have
recognized the global challenge of terrorism and have
worked with the international community in that
respect. But we have also worked diligently on a
11-33901
regional basis to complement the efforts of the global
community. With this in mind, ASEAN is pleased to
announce the imminent entry into force later this
month of the ASEAN Convention on Counter
Terrorism. This is a very important tool in our arsenal.
ASEAN also re-emphasizes the importance of working
towards acceding to and ratifying the relevant
international instruments on counter-terrorism.

During the eighteenth ASEAN Summit in Jakarta
last week, ASEAN leaders also agreed to continue
promoting the effective implementation of the ASEAN
Comprehensive Plan of Action on Counter-Terrorism
and to develop initiatives aimed at addressing the root
causes of terrorism and conditions that are conducive
to terrorism and to promote cooperation on de-
radicalization and interfaith dialogues. ASEAN is of
the view that these efforts would also contribute to the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

ASEAN is determined to continue to cooperate,
not only in the prevention and suppression of
extremism and terrorism but also to address and
remove the root causes and conditions that give rise to
these threats to humanity. ASEAN approaches that task
through the promotion of development that is both
equitable and inclusive. Such development would also
embody peaceful and mutual respect among the various
communities and take into account their peculiarities of
diversity and historical uniqueness.

ASEAN continues to work to coordinate and
cooperate with the United Nations on key global issues
in general, and with the counter-terrorism Committees
of the Security Council in particular. We would,
however, like to see further cooperation and
coordination among the three counter-terrorism
Committees in order to ensure broader support from
the wider membership of the United Nations.

ASEAN recognizes that, to be effective, a global
counter-terrorism strategy should be broad,
comprehensive and based on profound respect for
human rights, with full adherence and respect for
human rights and the dignity of the person. ASEAN
therefore acknowledges the important work being done
within the United Nations system to spur and sustain
development, to provide education and to encourage
intercultural and interreligious dialogue as part of the
broader efforts to address terrorism and to counter
radicalization.
11-33901
ASEAN underscores the importance of
implementing resolution 1904 (2009), in particular the
provisions regarding coordination and outreach,
whereby the expert groups of the Committees are to
enhance information sharing and coordination on visits
to countries within their respective mandates, on
facilitating and monitoring technical assistance, on
relations with international and regional organizations
and agencies and on other issues of relevance to the
three Committees. The resolution further underlines the
need for the groups to be co-located as soon as

possible.

Allow me to now touch briefly on specific
references to the individual Council counter-terrorism
Committees.

With reference to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), ASEAN member States have carried out their
obligations under the resolution. We call upon the
Security Council to promote the legitimacy and
credibility of the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regime, in particular by addressing concerns about due
process and transparency in its listing and de-listing
procedures.

Turning to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
ASEAN member States have also taken measures at the
national and regional levels to carry out the various
obligations under the resolution. We now have various
mechanisms in place to achieve these objectives.
However, we urge the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate to intensify cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, with a view to enhancing
the capacity of Member States to fully implement
resolution 1373 (2001) and to facilitating the provision
of technical assistance. We would also like to reiterate
the importance of cooperation in capacity-building
programmes, both for ASEAN and on a country-
specific basis, as a two-pronged approach that would
benefit all ASEAN stakeholders and the larger
international community.

On the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), ASEAN member
States have taken measures at the national, subregional,
regional and international levels to strengthen the
global response to the serious challenge and threat to
international peace and security posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
33
means of delivery. Furthermore, ASEAN member
States have taken measures to strengthen export
controls, to prevent proliferation financing and
shipments and to secure sensitive materials that could
be used for weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that ASEAN stands
ready to continue to work together and to contribute to
the successful outcome of our common efforts in the
fight against terrorism.

