Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman
of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Allow me at the same moment to congratulate Bosnia
and Herzegovina for its election as a new member of
the Security Council. We also welcome His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Special Representative of the
European Union, and thank him for his briefing
today- the second in his new role. I wish to assure
him of Croatia's full support in the conduct of his
duties and wish him every success in fulfilling his
mandate. Croatia also aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by Sweden on behalf of the European
Union.

Here I wish to make some additional comments.
Croatia strongly supports the clear and unambiguous
European and Euro-Atlantic perspective on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That was recently stressed during the two
visits at the highest political level from Croatia. We
believe that the futures of all of the countries of South-
East Europe belong in the European Union, as it
provides the most suitable framework for their overall
development. We also support the official application
by Bosnia and Herzegovina to NATO for a
Membership Action Plan. Last year, important progress
enabled Bosnia and Herzegovina to sign the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the
European Union. However, we note with regret that the
report before us (S/2009/588*) states that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has made little progress towards
implementing internal reforms - and has even
regressed somewhat - as well as towards satisfying
the priorities and conditions required for progress on
the Euro-Atlantic agenda.

We are concerned by the ongoing attacks against
State institutions, competencies and laws perpetrated
mainly by the leadership of the Republika Srpska, as
well as the continuing challenges to the authority of the
High Representative and the Peace Implementation
Council. In particular, we are concerned with the
assessment of the High Representative on the current
situation in the country during the reporting period that

"anti-Dayton rhetoric challenging the sovereignty
and constitutional order of Bosnia and Herzegovina
also played a role" (S/2009/588*, p. 3).

We agree with the assessment that not all
outstanding requirements have been met so far for the
transition from the Office of the High Representative
to the European Union Special Representative to take
place. We support the work of the High Representative
and share his assessments.

On the other hand, we believe that Bosnia and
Herzegovina should continue - even accelerate -
reforms and the adoption of visa liberalization-related
laws in order to be admitted to the "White Schengen"
list as soon as possible, so that its citizens do not lag
too far behind their neighbours.

It has been our long-standing position that the
impasse in Bosnia and Herzegovina can be overcome
only through comprehensive and inclusive dialogue
that includes the peoples of all three constituencies
throughout the entire territory of the country. This is
closely linked with the reforms needed to bring Bosnia
and Herzegovina closer to the path of integration with
the European Union and will also facilitate fulfilment
of the country's other international obligations.

It is particularly important that the current
dialogue on constitutional reform intensify, with the
committed engagement of the international community
and with the support assured by the High
Representative.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is facing considerable
problems, some of which are challenging the very
foundations established by the Dayton Peace
Agreement. However, it should be stressed that any
constructive engagement that supports the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and any intention
to improve the current situation and remedy the
fundamental problems should be welcomed and
encouraged. In that respect, let me welcome last week's
decision on the prolongation of the mandate of the
European Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

On this point, we wish to reiterate that the
country's stability depends on respect for the
constitutional principle of the collective equality of all
three constituent peoples: Bosniacs, Bosnian Serbs and
Bosnian Croats. We have stated on several occasions
that there can be no Bosnia and Herzegovina without
Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Their political and
cultural survival is vital to the continued existence of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as these two elements are
closely intertwined.

One needs to keep in mind the particular situation
of Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina as the smallest
and most vulnerable of the country's three nations.
Their voice must be considered on the basis of
equality, both ethnic and civic, as guaranteed in the
Constitution and as arising from the history of the
country. All three peoples must feel that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is their country and that they are safe and
protected over its entire territory. Their fundamental
rights and freedoms, as well as their civic and ethnic
rights, should be protected throughout, as should be the
right to return to their pre-war homes and to be safe
and protected.

Another important factor in the normalization of
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is the fight
against impunity for war crimes. We wish to stress that
all fugitives from the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia who are still at large must be
arrested and transferred to The Hague as soon as
possible.

Finally, let me conclude by saying that Croatia,
together with the rest of the international community,
is offering the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina a
clear and unambiguous European and Euro-Atlantic
perspective. In that regard, we urge all three peoples to
invest their greatest efforts in the Butmir process,
which represents the biggest opportunity to date to
make real progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As a country that joined NATO recently and is
undergoing a very demanding but rewarding process of
negotiations with the European Union, Croatia can
testify that strong central institutions are fundamental
to the process of Euro-Atlantic integration. As a
neighbouring State, we are very interested in seeing
Bosnia and Herzegovina embark on that process as
soon as possible. We regard it as the best guarantee of
sustainable peace, security and prosperity for the
country, the region and all Europe.

