Mr. Pronk: The report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in the Sudan in October presents a
hybrid picture. There is progress on the political front,
but regression on the ground. The progress is slow, and
the regression is alarming. The divergence between the
two trends is also getting wider. Political agreements
reached at the negotiating table may come too late to
stop the rising violence and human suffering in the
towns, villages and settlements in the field. I am afraid
that the situation in Darfur may become unmanageable
unless greater efforts are made both at the negotiating
table and on the ground.

The meetings of the Council planned for mid-
November in Nairobi provide an excellent opportunity
to get such robust measures started. Is that necessary?
Yes, it is. Since the first Security Council resolution on
Darfur - resolution 1556 (2004) - three months ago,
there has undoubtedly been progress on the political
front, but it is not yet paying off because in Darfur
itself the situation has greatly deteriorated.

The report before the Council today identifies a
number of trends in events during October. Both the
Government and the rebel movements violated the
ceasefire, and it seems that the Sudan Liberation
Movement/Army (SLM/A) was responsible for the
greater number of such violations in October. The
SLM/A is seeking to claim a wider area of control in
Darfur and are strengthening its logistical and fighting
capacity. The Government is also trying to extend the
territory under its control by attacking with mixed
forces made up of military, police and militia. The
United Nations is awaiting verification from the
African Union (AU) Ceasefire Commission on reports
that aircraft flown in those attacks discharged their
weapons against ground targets. The Government,
however, has denied that action and stated that it has
given instructions to the military not to do so.

In the beginning of the reporting period, large-
scale attacks on civilians by militia did not take place.
However, towards the end of the month, the threat of
large-scale attacks had increased considerably. Cases
of banditry and abduction are rising, hampering the
delivery of humanitarian aid. Two new rebel groups
have arisen and another new threat - that of
landmines - has emerged to threaten humanitarian
operations and civilians in Darfur. The Council is
aware of the tragic death of two humanitarian aid
workers caused by a landmine - a criminal, cowardly
act against people who had come to help.

In general, agreements reached with the
Government are kept. For instance, they agreed on full
and unhindered access for humanitarian assistance.
However, they are backsliding on their agreement that
displaced persons will not be forced to return or to
relocate. Recently, in south Darfur, families of
displaced persons were forced, in the middle of the
night, to leave the place where they had sought refuge.
That should stop immediately, and the forcibly
uprooted displaced people should be helped to get back
to their freely chosen places of refuge.
So, overall, instability has increased in October
with more insecurity and violence than in September.
The situation has become very tense during the last
couple of days, more tense than at any time since the
adoption of the first Security Council resolution on
Darfur in July 2004. An armed group, said to be
members of SLM/A, looted a large number of camels
from Arab tribes and kidnapped 18 civilians from a
passenger bus in the area around Zalingei, west Darfur.
That gave rise to an ultimatum by the militia, which
threatened to attack not only SLA forces, but also the
civilian population and displaced persons.

As October turned into November the situation
deteriorated and tension rose to a level unprecedented
since early August: fighting is breaking out in more
and more places; parties are provoking one another;
militias are ganging up; and governmental authorities
are not able to exert a moderating influence or they
respond with untimely and even counterproductive
measures. Darfur may easily enter a state of anarchy -
a total collapse of law and order. The conflict is
changing in character. The Government does not fully
control its own forces. It co-opted paramilitary forces
and now it cannot count on their obedience. The genie
is out of the bottle and cannot be pushed back in. The
border lines between the military, the paramilitary and
the police are being blurred. Within the rebel
movements, there is a leadership crisis. There are
splits. Some commanders provoke their adversaries by
stealing, hijacking and killing. Some seem to have
begun acting for their own private gain. They now
control so much territory that they must either take
responsibility for the needs of the people therein -
and become political leaders - or else turn to preying
on the civilians in areas they control by force - in
which case we may soon find Darfur is ruled by
warlords.

If those negative trends are not reversed, it is a
recipe for disaster. If the fighting continues, the crops
will fail and the whole population of Darfur will
become dependent on humanitarian assistance. Many
livelihoods are at stake. It started two years ago, when
some Arab tribes drove other tribes out in order to get
more Lebensraum for themselves and their cattle. It
was pure ethnic cleansing. Now they now are getting
something similar in return: thefts of cattle and the
blocking of the necessary camel tracks to dry areas,
resulting in illness of the animals and thus in a threat to
their own livelihoods. Right of access to scarce
common natural resources is being denied. Those
resources are even scarcer owing to pressure from
increased human and animal populations and also to a
decrease in the quality of those resources as a result of
climate change. The result is a fight between economic
lifestyles drawing on the same natural resources,
leading to survival of the fittest and death for the
weakest.

Can that situation be reversed? It can be reversed
only by a three-pronged approach. First, a third-party
force - the AU - must be deployed to effectively
deter violations. Secondly, there must be a speeding
up of all negotiation processes. Thirdly, political
leaders - the official ones as well as the self-elected
ones - must be held accountable for ongoing
violations of agreements and further human misery.

First, the deployment of the expanded AU force
is already taking place. However, the present upsurge
in violence and the trends that I indicated require an
even speedier deployment of those forces in order to
enable them to be everywhere they are needed - that
is, in any area where the insecure situation may get out
of control and explode. I would advise members of the
Security Council to consider all possibilities for more
financial and logistical support to the AU to ensure that
its forces can be present wherever they are required to
fulfil their tasks.

The second element of the three-pronged
approach is the speeding up of all negotiation
processes. Political talks between the Government and
the various movements are proceeding. There is light at
the end of the tunnel, but it seems as if the tunnel is
getting longer and longer. Political solutions are
important in themselves; they are also urgently needed
in order to get a grip on the security situation on the
ground.

Three months ago, there were not yet any talks
between the Government and the rebel movements in
Darfur. They have now started. They were paralysed in
the last round because parties were focused on the
wrong issues. At the negotiation table in Abuja, there
is still reluctance, distrust, internal division, lack of
capacity to negotiate and no sense of urgency.

The Government and the rebel movements must
comply with Security Council resolutions and with the
N'djamena Ceasefire Agreement, rather than make
their compliance mutually conditional. They should
implement fully and immediately the agreement
reached on humanitarian access, whether that
agreement has been signed or not. They should put
their political objectives at the centre of their
deliberations, rather than focusing on issues, such as
humanitarian access and security, that are essentially
non-negotiable. The Security Council meetings in
Nairobi could bring the parties to realize that the
international community expects them to negotiate in
good faith and adopt, before the end of the year, a
declaration of principles, as well as a time frame and a
detailed agenda for further negotiations on political
issues.

In Nairobi, the Government and the Sudanese
People's Liberation Movement met again in October,
and some new agreements are close at hand. I have, in
previous statements, listed reasons why the outcome of
the north-south peace process - peace, a new
constitution, a federal structure for the State, national
differentiation and a broad-based Government - can
serve as a model and basis for Darfur. It now seems
that this round of talks has a good chance of being
completed. However, a very tough final bone of
contention - the financing of the southern army -
still has to be resolved. Parties seem reluctant to move.
Members of the Security Council could offer their
good offices to help resolve that last issue, so that
Vice-President Taha and Mr. Garang could meet each
other halfway; thus neither of the two would lose.

The international community should ensure that
the momentum is sustained and should give the right
message to the parties with a single, strong voice.
There is now, more than ever, an urgent need for firm
pressure on all parties to finalize the agreements and
move into the implementation phase. As we have seen
in past cases, the final stage can be the most difficult,
with new challenges emerging up until the last
moment. This final stage has to be completed,
ultimately, around the end of this calendar year.
Negotiators owe this not only to the people affected by
the north-south conflict, but also to the population
elsewhere in the Sudan, particularly in Darfur.
Therefore, negotiators at the north-south talks should
commit themselves to working together to resolve the
Darfur conflict immediately after the signature of the
comprehensive agreement, for instance by
strengthening and underpinning the political process
already under way in Abuja.

The Council may therefore wish to make clear
that it will not tolerate any further delay in the
finalization of a comprehensive north-south peace
agreement and a political resolution of the Darfur
crisis. The Council's message to the parties should
essentially be as follows: "Fulfil your commitments
and you will have our support. If you do not, or if you
do not do so in time, you will lose it."
The third prong of this political strategy is to
ensure that political leaders - the official ones as well
as the self-elected ones - are held accountable for
ongoing violations of agreements and further misery.
The Security Council has adopted a number of
resolutions on the Sudan this year, primarily because of
increasing concern regarding the fate of the civilian
population. Political leaders on any side who deny the
facts on the ground, neglect the sorrow of poor and
vulnerable people living in areas under their control
and use delaying tactics in negotiations and in
implementation procedures are acting irresponsibly.
The message to the SLM/A, the Justice and Equality
Movement and all other armed groups is that their
rebel status does not exonerate them from a moral
obligation towards their people. On the contrary, as
political leaders, they are responsible for civilian
protection as much as the Government of Sudan. The
Security Council may wish to consider creative and
prompt action to ensure effective implementation of
the terms it set in earlier resolutions regarding the
protection of civilians and to warn all parties that they
will all, without exception, be held accountable for
such violations. Again, the meetings of the Security
Council foreseen for mid-November in Nairobi provide
a major opportunity in that respect.

In conclusion, action is required. The
humanitarian catastrophe of 2003 and of the first six
months of this year was allowed to happen because the
international community had not yet decided to act.
With the adoption of two Security Council resolutions
on Darfur, that has changed. If the sorrow continues, it
is despite those resolutions. If, for instance, displaced
persons protest and the police and military shoot
innocent civilians despite the United Nations presence,
a drama would develop for which the United Nations
would be blamed. If, for instance, members of militias
or paramilitary groups attack unarmed civilians, a
massacre would result, despite the fact that the
protection of civilians was the essential objective of

the Security Council. That would be a catastrophe. The
protection of people is the obligation of the
Government of Sudan. It is the obligation of
movements that consider themselves as would»be
governments, which are bound by the same principles
of humanitarian law as formally recognized
Governments. It is also the duty of the international
community to consider further action if the action
taken so far proves to be insufficient.

