I would like to thank the German presidency of the Security Council for organizing this open debate. I also thank Ms. Michelle Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and the other briefers for their insightful presentations. When the first peacekeeping mission was established, in 1948, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was being drafted by a committee set up by the United Nations. Since then, human rights have constituted a core function of United Nations peace operations, whether explicitly mentioned in mission mandates or not. The critical role played by United Nations peace operations in the protection and promotion of human rights cannot be overemphasized. Without ensuring people's basic rights to life and dignity, peace has no real value. Peace cannot flourish or be sustained where there are rampant violations and abuses of human rights. In fact, peace materializes through human rights. Countries have the primary responsibility to protect and promote the rights of their civilians. The rights of special groups such as children, women and older people require special attention. The international community, including United Nations peace operations, should support the efforts of national Governments. Human rights violations and abuses should not be used as a means to achieve political ends. Its perpetrators must be held accountable in all circumstances. Peace operations face certain challenges in their efforts on the ground to protect the human rights of civilians. First, peace operations often cannot physically cover the numerous hotspots throughout a country. Secondly, overcrowded internally displaced persons camps are breeding grounds for human rights violations and crimes. Thirdly, national security forces tend to lack the necessary training and infrastructure to instil confidence in the locale population. Their weakness impedes the effectiveness of the joint operations conducted by peace missions and national security forces. Lastly, the question of the impartiality of peace operations also mars their effectiveness since armed groups consider joint operations between the peace operations and the national security forces as an act of partiality that gives an unfair advantage to national forces. That perception prevents armed groups from coordinating and working with peace operations to uphold civilian rights. As the fourth major troop- and police-contributing country, Nepal is aware of its responsibility to uphold the human rights of civilians. Nepal has endorsed the Action for Peacekeeping joint Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations and the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians. Similarly, it has adopted a zero-tolerance policy against sexual exploitation and abuse on the ground. Nepal is also committed to providing well-trained and well-equipped uniformed personnel. Predeployment courses cover human rights law and international humanitarian law, including child protection, the protection of civilians, sexual exploitation and abuse and conflict-related sexual violence. Nepal also conducts weekly in-mission trainings for all its troops on the issue of human rights. My country is also committed to increasing the number of female peacekeepers in order to meet the United Nations goal of gender parity. It has also been deploying female engagement teams in formed units and gender focal points in battalions. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the centrality of human rights in United Nations peace operations. We call upon troop- and police-contributing countries, host countries, the United Nations and other international partners to work in unison to ensure the protection and promotion of the human rights of civilians in peace operations.
