Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank the two
briefers of the United Nations, which continues to have
the United Kingdom's full support for the important
work that it is doing.

Since this is my last meeting in the Chamber, I
wanted to offer a few reflections on the Council's work
on Syria. It weighs heavily on me that, despite the best
efforts of many of us in the Chamber, the international
community and the Council have failed the people
of Syria. However, we should be in no doubt that the
Al-Assad regime bears the primary responsibility for
the suffering of the Syrian people, as well as for Da'esh.
And we cannot forget Russia's 12 vetoes to protect the
Al-Assad regime. The Syrian people have endured
unspeakable suffering and continue to do so. The
regime has bombed them with chemical weapons. It has
systematically tortured and murdered its opponents.
It has targeted civilians through mass indiscriminate
aerial bombardment. That is still happening this week,
as we saw through the horrific images of the violence
in Ma'arat Al-Numan yesterday.

Eight years on from the start of this conflict, we
should not forget why it began. In the spring of 2011,
ordinary Syrians, among them teachers, students and
doctors, took to the streets of Damascus, Dara'a, Horns
and other towns and cities across Syria to protest
peacefully for greater freedom and better governance.
I witnessed some of those protests myself. The regime
responded with overwhelming force, shooting civilians
in the streets and arresting, torturing and murdering
them. That is what started the conflict and what
sustains it today. At no point since then has the regime
seriously engaged in a political process; it has pursued
a ruthless military strategy against its own people to
stay in power at any cost.

While I think it is important to say such things,
these words alone will not help the Syrian people today.
First, the least we can now do is to put a stop to the
violence in Idlib by demanding and implementing an
immediate ceasefire. Since the recent escalation, the
regime and its allies have killed more than 500 civilians
and displaced more than 400,000. Of the 3 million
Syrians in Idlib, less than 1 per cent belonged to the
terrorist group Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham.

In Idlib, there remain more babies than terrorists
and, as my American colleague said, more than halfthe
population, 1.5 million out of 3 million, are children.
The Council must insist on an immediate ceasefire to
protect civilians and prevent further war crimes. We
therefore strongly support the draft resolution proposed
today by Belgium, Kuwait and Germany.

In addition, the least we can do is to ensurejustice and
accountability for the crimes committed by the Al-Assad
regime and by Da'esh. The United Kingdom will be
relentless in its efforts to ensure accountability through
its support for the international impartial, independent
mechanism and the United Nations commission
of inquiry and through national prosecutions. We
welcome the successful prosecutions already under
way in Europe and the Secretary-General's decision to
establish a board of inquiry. One day, Bashar Al-Assad
will face justice for his crimes.

We must also keep laser focus on the actions of the
military units currently engaged on the ground in Idlib,
from the regime, Russia and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham.
They include, but are not limited to the 679th, 680th
and 947th squadrons at the Hama airbase; the 7th, 675t,
677th and 685th squadrons at the Shayrat airbase; the
695th and 698th squadrons at the Al-Nasiriyah airbase;
and the 1st and 819th squadrons, as well as the Russian
5th and 827th squadrons, at the Tiyas airbase. We will
be watching the actions of those military units and their
commanders, and we will hold them accountable.

The least we can do is address the root causes of
this conflict. As resolution 2254 (2015) recognizes in its
call for inclusive and non-sectarian governance, there
will never be stability and peace in Syria as long as the
regime terrorizes its people and tortures and murders
those who oppose it. Such conditions will continue to
act as a breeding ground for extremism and terrorism,
such as perpetrated by Al-Qaida and Da'esh.

Finally, this conflict has undermined and weakened
the United Nations and the wider, rules-based
international system. Al-Assad has used chemical
weapons against his own people. He has thumbed his
nose at the Council and its resolutions, at the General
Assembly and at the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons - aided and protected by Russia
and Iran. If we, as United Nations States Members, are
to uphold the ideals of the Charter of the United Nations,
which sought to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war and reaffirmed our faith in fundamental
human rights and the dignity and worth of the human
person, we must do more to prevent criminal, rogue
regimes from violating international law and imposing
death and suffering on their people. Respect for State
sovereignty can never be a license to allow a leader to
commit war crimes against his own people.

The Council must learn the lessons from the last
eight years of this conflict and from the suffering of the
Syrian people. We must now urgently come together to
stop the violence in Idlib and to protect Syrians from
further suffering.

