Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on China's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and reiterate our delegation's support and cooperation
in ensuring success in your important functions. I also
take this opportunity to thank the delegation of Bolivia
and Ambassador Llorentty Soliz and his team for the
considerable results obtained last month. We welcome
today's meeting and the important briefing made by
Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda. We would also like to
assure her of our full support for the challenging work
her team conducts in Libya.

Peru is deeply concerned about the grave situation,
violence and human rights violations in Libya, despite
the United Nations-sponsored ceasefire. We lament the
precarious situation of tens of thousands of internally
displaced persons and demand that the numerous
allegations of atrocity crimes be investigated. We
believe that it is of paramount importance that
the Council, which is responsible for maintaining
international peace and security, continue to refer to the
International Criminal Court situations in which access
to justice and accountability must be guaranteed. It is
clear that the Court's work is complex and requires the
full cooperation of all States, including local authorities.
Therefore, in addition to recognizing the efforts of the
Libyan Prosecutor-General's Office, we must remind
Libyan authorities of their legal obligation to execute
arrest warrants issued by the Court.

We also believe that, while the work of the
International Criminal Court is crucial to preventing
the most serious crimes from going unpunished, its
jurisdiction complements each State's responsibility
to protect its population. That includes the obligation
to investigate, prosecute and punish those responsible
for atrocities. In that sense, in addition to it being an
obligation, authorities cooperating with the Court must
be understood as an opportunity to strengthen justice
and the rule of law in domestic and international spheres.
That means promoting greater trust in jurisdictional
institutions and effective deterrence.

That is particularly relevant for a country such as
Libya affected by conflict and terrorism perpetrated
by entities such as Da'esh and its affiliates, including
Boko Haram, which control areas of Libyan territory
and might be involved in the trafficking of migrants.
We therefore encourage the Office of the Prosecutor
to assess such situations and their possible links with
ongoing proceedings. In that connection, we also
believe that it is necessary to make further progress in
the implementation of the action plan for the resumption
of an inclusive Libyan-owned political process under
the facilitation and leadership of the United Nations.

We would therefore like to highlight the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and that of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL). Right now, that means ending the
violence, which has recently escalated in Tripoli and
must be denounced and countered, and working on
concrete measures to effectively protect the population,
in particular civilians, and address terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. We believe that that should
be the focus of dialogue among the main leaders and
political factions, as has been the case with the good
offices of UNSMIL throughout the process. Good
faith and the spirit of understanding and respect for
international law and international humanitarian law
must prevail among the parties.

