Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (Spoke in Arabic): I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. David Shearer,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
the Deputy Permanent Representative of Senegal for
their briefings.

The Security Council has been meeting intensively
since July 2016 to discuss the situation in South Sudan
following the armed clashes in the capital of Juba
between Government and opposition forces, which
triggered a cycle of violence in the country. Despite
the difference of opinion between the members of the
Security Council on how to address the crisis, there
has always been and remains a general consensus
and true unanimity within the Council with regard to
the importance of reviving a political settlement of
the crisis as a pillar for achieving peace and stability
and for ending the suffering, human rights violations,
displacement and looming famine faced by civilians in
South Sudan.

Despite the efforts of the regional parties and the
international entities mandated with following up on
and reviving the political solution, nothing has yet
crystallized into a practical and inclusive initiative
ensuring that the parties will completely cease hostilities
and revive their commitment to the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. In that context, we emphasize the importance
of coordinating the international and regional efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the African Union (AU) Peace and Security
Council, the Security Council, the Secretary-General
and the Chair of the AU Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, so as to develop a comprehensive political
initiative for a solution. That may require us to focus our
efforts on persuading the Government and opposition
leaders to end hostilities for a preliminary three-month
period so as to allow for national dialogue and provide
it with momentum.

We are convinced that further delay to opening the
political horizon and ceasing the hostilities will further
complicate and aggravate the crisis. We therefore fear
that the Security Council's meetings on South Sudan
might become routine gatherings at which principled
positions concerning the conflict are repeated without
any real ability to influence the situation on the ground.
We also fear that such debates may become removed
from the conflict and the reality on the ground. In that
context, let us be mindful of the information contained
in the final report of the Panel of Experts on South
Sudan established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
(S/20l7/326) pertaining to the collapse of the Peace
Agreement. We note that such a superficial reading of
the political situation could unfortunately give a green
light to the parties on both sides to continue fighting
without any legal or political framework.

We have continued to call in the Council for a
focus on a political solution, and we also believe that
there is an urgent need and moral and legal obligation
for the parties to the conflict to end all forms of
violence, commit to and respect the principles of
international law, uphold their responsibilities with
regard to civilians, and ensure the security and safety
of humanitarian workers. We therefore believe that
continued obstruction of humanitarian efforts will lead
only to further suffering and increase the human cost of
the conflict. It will also undermine the regional efforts
under way to achieve a political settlement and to end
the suffering of civilians.

In this context, we also emphasize the importance of
continuing to work with the Government of South Sudan
to facilitate access to the affected areas quickly, safely
and in a manner free of obstacles. This is necessary
for UNMISS to carry out its mandate as adopted by
the Council. In this respect, we wish to express our
surprise at the continued delay in deploying the
regional protection force. It is important that we arrive
at a common understanding between the Secretariat and
the Government on the details of the force's mandate,
its terms of reference and its location. We stress also
the importance of ensuring the necessary capacity and
training for the force before its deployment so that it
can effectively discharge its mandate. We must also
create conditions conducive to ensuring its security.

It is the Council's responsibility to not only prevent
the collapse of the State in South Sudan but also to
support it in future. The Council is well aware, on
the basis of its experience with other conflicts, that
the vacuum that results from the collapse of a State
can be filled only by chaos, the price of which is paid
primarily by civilians - women, men and children. It
is the Council's responsibility to work to elevate the
substantive discussion on the crisis in South Sudan so
that it can identify priorities in terms of actions to be
taken, and to use the best tools available to it to support
such actions and ensure their success. For this reason,
we must work on improving the content of the reports
received by the Council from the Secretariat, as well as
periodically engage in dialogue with the various South
Sudanese and regional parties.

