Mr. Wouters (Belgium) (interpretation from French):
Belgium would like to concur with the statement by the
Permanent Representative of Ireland, who spoke on behalf
of the European Union.

Belgium remains deeply concerned by the situation in
Burundi. The recent coup d 'e'tat was rejected by the
international community. Aware of the possible regional
repercussions of the Burundian crisis, Belgium, like its
European partners, welcomes the diplomatic action taken by
the Heads of State of the region to help Burundi overcome
peacefully the serious crisis it is now going through, and
encourages them to continue their efforts to facilitate the
quest for a negotiated political solution.

Belgium would like to avail itself of the occasion of
this Security Council debate to express its support for the
regional leaders, for the Organization of African Unity and
for the former President of Tanzania, Mr. Julius Nyerere,
for the efforts they have been making to help Burundi in its
quest for peace. We would appeal to all the parties in

 

Burundi to cooperate fully and constructively in these
efforts.

Belgium calls for the immediate cessation of all acts
of violence in Burundi, regardless of who its perpetrator
might be. It calls for an immediate and unconditional
cease-fire between the warring parties in Burundi.

A cease-fire is the first step in the process of
national reconciliation and the reconstruction of the
country. It is only by respecting the security of all
Burundians that peace can be restored to that country.
The peace process will then require dialogue and the
initiation of talks that would include all political forces
without exception. If this dialogue is to be fruitful and if
a lasting civil peace in Burundi is to be restored, Belgium
believes it essential that the National Assembly and the
parties should play a role in the reconciliation process.

To that end, the political leaders should shoulder
their responsibilities as quickly as possible and show a
sense of statesmanship and democratic resolve.

Belgium, together with its European partners,
considers itself to be committed to this political process
that is to lead Burundi to peace. The Government has
contributed both financially and materially to the various
initiatives launched by the Organization of African Unity
and by President Nyerere. Belgium remains prepared to
make substantial contributions to any economic
reconstruction effort once peace has been restored to
Burundi.

