Mr. Aziz (Pakistan): I would like to begin by
thanking Australia for convening this meeting, and the
Secretary-General for presenting his comprehensive
report on small arms (S/2013/503).

As my colleagues have pointed out, the illicit trade
in arms and light weapons is causing havoc around the
world. Terrorists and rebels are targeting peacekeepers,
police and security forces. Civilians bear the brunt of
armed conflict, which is fuelled by the proliferation,
accumulation and use of such arms. The illicit trade in
these weapons abets crimes and contributes to narcotic
drug trafficking. In our region, we have first-hand
experience of the lethal nature of such arms. Every day,
innocent people fall victim to the murderous designs of
terrorists, criminals and zealots using such weapons,
which are cheap, easy to transport and easy to conceal.
We agree with the United Nations that such arms are
dominant tools of criminal violence and warfare.

Small arms also have huge social and economic
costs. Instability created by the use of illicit light
weapons drives away investment, slows human
development and impedes economic growth. Terrorists
and criminals do not manufacture those arms. They
buy them in illicit arms markets or receive them from
forces and entities that want to destabilize particular
regions. It is therefore the responsibility of all States,
the Council and the United Nations to take measures to
prevent the illicit trade in such arms and their transfer,
diversion and misuse. We must show strong resolve in
opposing the criminals who use small arms and the
networks that supply them with these killing machines.

The Security Council has done a commendable
job in reducing the adverse consequences of the
illicit trade in these weapons, even as new flows and
hotspots keep emerging. We support the Secretary-
General's recommendations for using new technologies
for stockpile management, making national systems
for marking and tracing weapons more efficient, and
monitoring the activities of traders and brokers more
closely.

To stem the illicit trade in and proliferation of small
arms and light weapons, we need a comprehensive and
integrated approach. The existing mechanisms have
mainly focused on regulating the supply side of this
complex issue. In our view, greater attention must be
paid to addressing the issues related to the demand side.
Unresolved disputes, the growth in terrorist activities
and the rise in illicit narcotics and organized crime are
the driving forces behind the demand for the illegal
small arms trade. The Security Council can address
that aspect by playing a more active role in the peaceful
settlement of disputes and conflicts.

The Government of Pakistan has taken several steps
to regulate the sale, supply, import and transfer of small
arms. We have regularly filed national implementation
reports under the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
outlining the national measures taken over the years.
Pakistan has developed the necessary legislative,
regulatory, enforcement and institutional mechanisms
to address the range ofissues relating to small arms and
light weapons. An inter-ministerial group addresses
those issues in an integrated manner. We have adopted
policy guidelines on the export of conventional arms
and established a national evaluation mechanism to
regulate their trade. We now plan to take additional
measures to strengthen the enforcement regime, which
covers imports and licences.

The success last year of the second Review
Conference of the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
and the adoption this year of the Arms Trade Treaty
are important milestones in advancing our shared
objective of preventing the proliferation of those arms.
National ownership, I believe, is a key tool for spurring
international efforts to deal effectively with small arms.

For developing countries, particularly in Africa,
as pointed out by other colleagues, the role of
international assistance and cooperation is critical.
It is the main enabler of global, regional and national
efforts to regulate and prevent the use of those arms.
We therefore call for stronger commitment from the
international community to mobilize resources in that
regard in order to help smaller countries deal with the
devastation caused by the illegal trade in arms.

One of the main objectives of the resolution
adopted today (resolution 2117 (2013)) is to protect
innocent human lives. In that context, we agree with
the Secretary-General's observation that drone strikes
result in child casualties and have had a serious impact
on their psychosocial health. In Pakistan, we frequently
experience casualties of civilians, including women and
children, inflicted by armed drones. We call for an end
to the use of drone strikes, as they violate international
law, including international humanitarian law, and are
also detrimental to our efforts to fight terrorism.

