Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I am most grateful
for the analysis shared by the briefers this morning. I
join others in paying tribute to you, Mr. Minister, for
your leadership in bringing this important issue to
our attention.

The terrorist threat has evolved over the past
decade. We face increasingly complex threats as
terrorists acquire new knowledge and new technology.
Not content with simply killing innocents, terrorists
seek to destabilize, demoralize and disrupt our way of
life. Critical infrastructure, be it a transport system,
a communications hub or a power grid, represents
an attractive target for these sinister actors. The fact
that those responsible for the attack on the Brussels
metro and airport last March had also invested time
and surveillance on a Belgian nuclear scientist should
concern us all. We must redouble or vigilance to ensure
that we are ready to defend the systems that allow our
societies to function.

We therefore wholeheartedly welcome the action
taken by the Security Council today to adopt resolution
2341 (2017). The resolution raises the profile of this
important issue, calls on States to improve preparedness
and strengthens our cooperation in protecting the
security of our people and our critical infrastructure. If
we are to truly tackle this threat, I believe we need to
focus on three things, namely, preparation, protection
and partnerships.

First, on preparation, it is vital that plans for
protecting our critical infrastructure be comprehensively
developed, maintained and tested. We echo the call of
the resolution for States to develop their own strategies
to prepare and respond to any attack. Threats to our
infrastructure can come from many sources: terrorism,
criminality or natural hazards. In reducing the risk to
our infrastructure, the United Kingdom takes an all-
risks approach. That means developing plans that can be
used to respond to many types of disruption or threats
to life. Measures taken by States to prevent unlawful or
criminal interference in our infrastructure can also serve
to help prevent terrorist attacks. It is in part because of
the strong measures we have taken that terrorist threats
to our infrastructure are being mitigated.

Secondly, on protection, the threat to some elements
of our national infrastructure may be aspirational,
but there is one area where the threat is very real and
very high, that is, transport. As recent reports by the
Secretary-General show, there continues to be a serious
and enduring threat from international terrorism to
our transport networks, specifically to civil aviation.
Three billion passengers reach their destinations
by air every year. The past year offered us too many
reminders of the risks they face: attacks on airports in
Brussels and Istanbul, the destruction of the Russian
Metrojet aircraft over Sinai and the explosion on board
a Daallo Airlines flight from Mogadishu. It was to
combat such threats that the United Kingdom authored
resolution 2309 (2016), and why today we echo our call
on States to work with the International Civil Aviation
Organization. Working together we can ensure not only
that international security standards keep pace with the
terrorist threat, but also - crucially - that they are
implemented effectively on the ground.

Finally, on partnerships, the critical infrastructure
that we need to protect is largely owned by the private
sector, and can also form part of complex international
networks and supply chains. Preparation and protection
of infrastructure are simply good intentions if we fail
to work across sectors to achieve them. Each side has
its part to play. Private companies are responsible for
ensuring that their infrastructure is protected and that
essential services are maintained, just as Governments
have an obligation to ensure that industry is managing
these risks fully and responsibly. As today's resolution
identifies, stronger international partnerships are
vital at a time when the functioning of infrastructure
relies on cross-border networks and supply chains. The
sharing of information, early-warning networks and
expertise will strengthen our common approach.

The Security Council needs to stay abreast of
the evolution of the terrorist threat and respond to it.
Just as we act to prevent conflict, we should also act
pre-emptively to prevent terrorism. Today we have
put another building block in place to strengthen our
common effort. Because of our efforts, terrorists intent
on stirring chaos have another hurdle to cross. Because
of our efforts, our societies are little safer than they
were yesterday.

