Mr. Almansoor (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic):
Israel is continuing its expansionist policy and its
creation of a fait accompli by building a separation
wall. Israel has continued construction of the first stage
of that wall, which runs along 150 kilometres within
the occupied Palestinian territories.

That wall consists of obstacles with barbed wire,
trenches and electric locks, designed to isolate
Palestinian towns and villages from each other. A great
deal of agricultural land has been destroyed, as have
the livelihoods of the thousands of Palestinians who
live off the harvest from those lands.

The separation wall encircles several Palestinian
cities, including the city of Qalqilya. The population
there is totally cut off from their jobs, families and
schools. The continued construction of the wall will
lead to a de facto separation of a great swaths of
Palestinian territory from other territories and to the
confiscation of even more land, which will intensify
the sufferings of the Palestinian people.

Several days ago, the Israeli Cabinet gave its
agreement to beginning the construction of the second
stage of the separation wall. That means the
confiscation of even more Palestinian territory. Israel is
totally flouting international appeals and resolutions
requesting that it immediately cease construction of the
separation wall as well as ignoring relevant resolutions
and anything that would make possible the
establishment of an independent and viable Palestinian
State.

Israel's insistence on building the wall risks
undermining the peace process as a whole. Proof of
Israel's arrogance is its recent aggression against the
city of Rafah and against a refugee camp near the
Egyptian border. That raid lasted 50 hours, caused the
deaths of eight Palestinians and injured more than 80.
It destroyed 120 houses completely and partially
damaged 170 others. Roads and infrastructure were
heavily damaged, as were electrical and energy
networks.

Eyewitnesses likened that act of aggression to an
earthquake. The creation of the separation wall would
not provide Israel with the security it hopes for, nor
will it prevent suicide attacks. It will only increase
rancour and hatred of it.

If Israel genuinely wants to have security, it will
have to put an end to its occupation of Palestinian
territories and go back to the 1967 borders. The peace
process requires the building of confidence between the
two parties - not the building of a racist wall that
serves only to aggravate the situation.

The fact that Israel is pursuing its expansionist
and illegal policy in occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, and the statement by the
Israeli Government that it intends to build more than
600 housing units for settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories make clear the expansionist
intentions of the Israeli Government.

The measures taken by the Israeli Government
and its insistence on continuing its occupation of these
lands is a flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law and of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Fourth Geneva Convention and all
international law and legislation. It totally contravenes
the road map, which paves the way for the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State,
coexisting peacefully side by side with Israel.

The Kingdom of Bahrain calls on the Security
Council, the Quartet and those countries that are
sponsoring the peace process to exert pressure on the
Israeli Government immediately to halt construction of
the separation wall, to tear it down and to cease
building settlements.

We call urgently upon the Security Council to
take immediate necessary measures, in conformity with
the Charter of the United Nations and relevant
resolutions, to deal with this very serious issue by
putting an end to these illegal acts by the Israeli
Government and to demand that Israel implement the
road map in order to achieve a just and comprehensive
solution to the situation in the Middle East.

