Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the adoption by unanimity
of resolution 1734 (2006). It widely recognizes the
huge steps that Sierra Leone has taken over the past
few years, and in particular over the past 12 months
since the last United Nations peacekeeper left and the
United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIOSIL) was established under resolution 1620
(2005).

Only a few years ago, Sierra Leone was the site
of Africa's most gruesome civil war. Over the past 12
months, in comparison, Sierra Leone has continued to
move forward. A strategy for reforming the civil
service has been finalized; judicial and security sector
reform continue; the armed forces and police have
increased their capacity and professionalism; refugees
have returned home; and steps to improve human rights
have been taken, notably through the establishment of
the National Human Rights Commission.

Crucial to reconciliation and the establishment of
the rule of law has been the work of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone, and in particular the detention and
forthcoming trial in The Hague of former Liberian
President Charles Taylor. That sends a clear message
that there is no impunity. It also underlines the
importance of a regional approach.

Over the next 12 months, the efforts of the
Government of Sierra Leone, with our support, must be
consolidated and continued. There is still a mountain to
climb. Adult literacy stands at just 35 per cent. The
probability of living until the age of 40 is only 47 per
cent. There are three physicians per 100,000 people,
and 50 per cent of the population suffer from
undernourishment and live on less than $1 a day.
06-67916

So, in the next year we see three priority areas:

first, the fight against corruption; secondly, civil

service reform; and thirdly, the development of clear

policies and strategies, in particular to tackle youth

unemployment, to tackle poverty and to generate
economic development.

The year 2007 will be a milestone year for Sierra
Leone. July's presidential and parliamentary elections
will be crucial towards building a successful,
sustainable democracy. All parties in Sierra Leone must
demonstrate their full and unconditional commitment
to a full democratic process. International support will
be vital. To that end, the resolution temporarily
increases the number of military and police advisers, to
enable the Office to support the election process
without having to cut back on its work elsewhere. It
also calls on the Secretary-General to conduct an
assessment of UNIOSIL's role closer to that election
date, so that, as Sierra Leone makes a transition
towards sustainable and peaceful economic
development, that can be properly handled.

That process will be reinforced by the longer-
term international attention and support to be provided
by the inclusion of Sierra Leone, at its request, on the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission. The Security
Council should work closely with the Commission to
benefit from its advice as we move forward. So, the
participation today of the representative of the
Netherlands is very welcome, and we congratulate him
on his appointment as Chair of the meetings of the
Peacebuilding Commission on Sierra Leone.

I should like to highlight the particular need for
further work within Sierra Leone on implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). Gender inequality remains a
serious problem, yet women's empowerment is central
to peace consolidation and good governance. There is a
particular need to ensure that women are able to
participate fully in the 2007 election, both as electors
and as candidates, as called for in today's resolution. A
gender perspective should be taken fully into account
in implementing the mandate we have agreed upon
today. I look forward to the next Secretary-General
reporting to the Council on an action plan agreed upon
with the Government of Sierra Leone in order to
implement resolution 1325 (2000).

Sierra Leone is a country close to the heart of the
Secretary-General, as well as to his home in Ghana.
So, it is particularly appropriate that this should be one

of the last resolutions adopted by the Council during
Kofi Annan's tenure as Secretary-General. From Sierra
Leone to the Sudan to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Secretary-General has demonstrated a
tireless commitment over the past 10 years - indeed,
over his professional lifetime - to building peace and
prosperity in Africa and to calling upon nations to
protect those whose national Governments cannot do
so. Africa and Sierra Leone are better places thanks to
his efforts, and so is the United Nations.

