Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
voted against draft resolution S/2019/756, on the
humanitarian situation in Syria, which has been put to
the vote just now.

The Security Council closely follows the
humanitarian situation in Syria and has convened
meetings to that end many times. With regard to the
issue of Idlib, since 31 August the Russian and Syrian
Governments have been implementing the ceasefire in
Idlib, which in general has been upheld. The diplomatic
efforts of the relevant international stakeholders are
ongoing and the situation in Idlib is developing in a
positive direction. In that context, to steamroll a draft
resolution that has major controversies towards a vote is
clearly not constructive. Such a move will not achieve
the desired outcome.

Terrorist organizations continue to expand their
sphere of influence in the north-west region of Syria.
That is the source of the humanitarian issue in Idlib and
poses a grave risk to safety and security in the region.
The Council should be united in tackling jointly this
grave challenge. China has constructively participated
in a negotiation of the text and has proposed reasonable
revisions. However, unfortunately the draft resolution
that was just put to the vote did not touch upon the
essence of the issue or address China's core concerns.
For that reason, China voted against the draft resolution.

The humanitarian situation in Syria is a very
complicated and sensitive issue. All categories of
humanitarian issues in Syria should be considered in
a comprehensive manner and addressed in a balanced
way, instead of only selectively focusing on certain
issues, much less politicizing a humanitarian issue.
The international community must fully respect
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria; fully listen to the views of the Syrian
Government; and seek a comprehensive solution to the
Syrian issue by political means.

At the same time, we should pay close attention to
the post-war reconstruction of Syria and its economic
and social development and help the Syrian people live
peaceful, stable and happy lives.

China also attaches great importance and pays
close attention to the humanitarian situation in Syria.
For that reason, Russia and China are proposing an
alternative draft resolution (S/2019/757) that takes
into consideration humanitarian and counter-terrorism
issues in Syria in a comprehensive manner. The draft
includes a call for the observance of international law
in counter-terrorism efforts and to ensure humanitarian
access, and it reflects the humanitarian needs of the
Syrian people. We hope that all Council members will
support this draft.

I must point out here that China firmly rejects the
groundless accusations made by the representatives
of the United Kingdom and the United States against
China. China has the right to make an independent
decision on how it votes, according to the rights and
wrongs of a situation and proceeding from the interests
of a certain people. No country has the right to make
wilful accusations such as this. I would also like to
point out that the current situation and suffering of the
Syrian people are precisely the result of the wrongful
conduct of some countries, and it is those countries that
should reflect on their behaviour.

