Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the initiative of
the Japanese presidency in convening this open debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
excellent briefing earlier today.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union.

I would like to make one important point today,
which is about our firm belief that only through an
integrated approach and prompt action will we be able
to prevent conflict and sustain peace. The challenges
of the twenty-first century transcend borders. Conflicts
are compounded and the causes of conflict are
plentiful, as the President explained in his concept note
(see S/2017/1016, annex). Such compounded conflicts
demand an integrated approach on the part of the United
Nations, other international and regional organizations,
and Governments.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands has first-hand
experience with integrated approaches, whether in
Afghanistan, Mali, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or elsewhere. We have learned, sometimes the
hard way, about the connection between root causes
and ensuing conflict. We value the importance of
partners working together while appreciating one
another's comparative advantages and recognizing the
importance of working within their given mandates.
We therefore support the Secretary-General's vision
for enhancing the performance of the Secretariat's
pillars in an interconnected way. Only if we succeed
in working across these pillars and avoiding isolated
actions will we be able to address conflicts effectively.
That requires a comprehensive approach encompassing
peace, human rights and development.

Formulating an integrated response to conflicts is
not enough. The Security Council should also devote
more attention to preventing conflicts both from
occurring in the first place and from recurring in post-
conflict situations. That means addressing some of the
underlying causes of conflict, even if it is not the sole
or even primary responsibility of the Security Council
to deal with issues such as poverty reduction, human
rights and climate change. Where it is appropriate and
needed, the Security Council has a role to play in raising
awareness and a responsibility to call for integrated
action. The Council's involvement in the situation in
the Gambia earlier this year was timely and successful,
and helped to preserve the country's sovereignty.

Proper prevention also requires proper early-
warning tools for identifying emerging threats, as well
as the instruments needed to take action. Depending
on the specific situation, the Secretary-General can
rely on various parts of the United Nations system in
New York and Geneva, and in the field, to inform the
Council about what is going on.

For some issues, however, a clear focal point is still
lacking. One example is climate and security. At the
Planetary Security Conference 2017 held last week in
The Hague, Mr. Hassan Janabi, the Iraqi Minister of
Water Resources, said that his country, which is now
beginning a process of stabilization, was going through
additional painful cultural change. That change has the
potential to form the basis for new tensions, despite the
fact that it has little to do with conventional threats from
armed groups or terrorist organizations. Dwindling
water resources, due to climate change-driven drought
and related changes in rainfall patterns, will become
a major challenge. Mr. Janabi said that the more than
100,000 Iraqis who had been fighting the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant are now out of work. They will
go back to their farms, but the water shortage will make
it hard. Given the growing risk that climate change
may increase tensions within and between nations,
it is important to ensure that there is an institutional
home for this topic at the United Nations, a place where
such risks can be assessed and addressed. During
Italy's Arria Formula meeting on 15 December, the
Netherlands, together with Sweden and other countries,
called for the establishment of such an institutional
home, and does so again today.

A final example of the importance of early-warning
tools can be seen when efforts are being made to prevent
humanitarian crises from lapsing into wider instability
and conflict. In such circumstances, reliable, real-time
data is needed to feed into early-warning and early-
action capabilities. In that respect, I am pleased to be
able to inform the Council that in two days' time the
Secretary-General will officially open the new United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) Centre for Humanitarian Data in The
Hague. By collecting, sharing and standardizing data,
OCHA and its partners are working together to improve
the lives of millions of people affected by conflict and
disaster and thereby avoid renewed conflict.

In conclusion, we are well aware of the fact that
not all the elements relevant to this topic fall within the
Council's mandate, but the Kingdom of the Netherlands
wants to underline the importance of prevention and
early warning when addressing complex security
challenges and will continue to do so during its Security
Council membership in 2018.

