Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, let
me thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings. In my statement
today, I will first give an update on the activities of the
Security Council Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, which Austria has the honour
of chairing. Subsequently, I shall make some brief
remarks in my national capacity.

Since my last briefing, on 3 December 2009 (see S/PV.6228), the Working Group has continued to meet
on a regular basis, and it held 15 meetings. The latest
meeting with the Presidents and Prosecutors of both
Tribunals took place yesterday. The members of the
Group continued the informal dialogue with affected
countries and the host countries of the Tribunals. The
members also heard a briefing by the Chief of the
United Nations Archives and Records Management
Section.

The Working Group has made good progress in
its discussions on a draft Security Council resolution
on the establishment of an international residual
mechanism for criminal tribunals after the Tribunals'
closure. Last December, the Working Group concluded
the first reading of the new draft resolution and its
annex, which had been prepared by the Chair with the
help of the Office of Legal Affairs (OLA) based on the
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report on
the administrative and budgetary aspects of the options
for possible locations for the archives and the seat of
the residual mechanism, or mechanisms, for the
Tribunals (S/2009/258).

At the end of last year, the Group agreed to
request OLA to prepare a draft statute of the residual
mechanism based on the statutes of the ICTY and the
ICTR as well as two additional internal reports on the
declassification of documents and review of witness
protection orders by the Tribunals, and on possible
locations for the residual mechanism. I should like to
thank the Office of Legal Affairs for the preparation of
the draft statute and the reports.

On 5 February, the Chair presented the first
revised draft resolution on the residual mechanism,
with an annex including the draft statute prepared by
OLA. In February and March, the Working Group
conducted the second reading of the draft resolution
and the annex. After a period of bilateral consultations
and internal reflection and preparation, the second
revised draft resolution and draft statute were
introduced by the Chair on 26 May. The Group has just
started its third reading of the drafts, which is expected
to last until mid-July. The discussions on a further
revised draft resolution will resume in the fall with a
view to reaching a final agreement.
In addition to the discussions on the residual
mechanism, in December 2009 and March of this year
the Working Group also considered various requests by
the Presidents of the Tribunals for extension of
mandates of judges. Following negotiations and
agreement reached in the Group, the Security Council
adopted resolutions 1900 (2009), 1901 (2009) and
1915 (2010). In resolutions 1900 (2009) and 1901
(2009), the Council underlined its intention to extend,
by 30 June 2010, the terms of office of all trial judges,
based on the Tribunals" projected trial schedules, and
the terms of office of all appeals judges until
31 December 2012, or until the completion of the cases
to which they are assigned if this is sooner. The
Council further requested the Tribunals to submit an
updated trial and appeals schedule, including
information on the judges the extension of whose terms
of office or whose redeployment to the Appeals
Chamber will be sought.

By letters dated 25 and 31 May 2010,
respectively, the Presidents of ICTR and ICTY
submitted the requested schedules and made new
requests for extension of the judges' mandates. The
Working Group is currently preparing two draft
resolutions, which are scheduled for adoption at the
end of this month.

Turning now to what I wished to state in my
national capacity, I should like to reiterate Austria's
strong support for the rule of law and international
criminal justice. We highly commend the work of the
ICTY and the ICTR, which carry out crucial tasks to
fight impunity and bring to justice those responsible
for the most serious crimes. Austria fully supports the
efforts of the Tribunals to complete their work at the
earliest possible date. However, we note with concern
that in the most recent reports we see yet further
slippage of the trial and appeals schedules, which
suggests that the Tribunals' work is not likely to finish
until 2013 or even 2014.

We urge the Tribunals to take all possible
measures to complete their work expeditiously, and we
are prepared to work constructively to assist them in
achieving that goal. In this context, we are also ready
to help develop adequate strategies to retain
experienced staff in order to prevent further delays. I
have listened carefully to what the Presidents of both
Tribunals had to say on this specific issue, and it is my
personal conviction that what they have said requires
further reflection both within the Council and, in
particular, in other bodies of our Organization.

Moreover, by the end of this month, as I have
already mentioned, the Council will have to consider
the extension of the mandates of the judges in order to
enable the Tribunals to properly plan their trials and
appeals for the coming years.

The arrest of the remaining 13 fugitives continues
to be a key priority for the completion of the work of
the Tribunals. We call on all States concerned to fully
cooperate with the Tribunals. With regard to the ICTY,
while the arrests of Ratko Mladic' and Goran Hadzie
are still outstanding, we welcome the Prosecutor's
most recent report (see S/2010/270) about the
successful activities by the Serbian authorities in
seizing 18 wartime notebooks of Ratko Mladie, which
contain highly valuable information.

Austria welcomes the clear political commitment
of the Croatian Government under Prime Minister
Kosor to further intensify the work of its Task Force
and to expand it to the additional avenues of
investigation mentioned in the Prosecutor's report. We
appreciate the growing cooperation and communication
between the Croatian authorities and the Prosecutor
and hope that this dialogue will be pursued on a very
regular basis. We remain confident that the work of the
Task Force will help to rapidly resolve the outstanding
issues.

With regard to the ICTR, we regret that there has
been no further progress in the matter of cooperation
by Kenya in the case of Felicien Kabuga. We urge
Kenya to render all necessary assistance to the ICTR.

In conclusion, I should like to thank the
Presidents and Prosecutors once again for their
briefings and to express our gratitude to all members of
the Working Group for their active and constructive
participation in its discussions.

