Mr. Grauls (Belgium): I have the honour to
address the Council on behalf of the Netherlands and
Belgium. First of all, I would like to thank Portugal, as
President of the Security Council, for having convened
this debate. It reminds me of a debate that I had the
honour to preside over in August 2008, which was
dedicated to the same theme (see S/PV.5968). We
would also like to express our gratitude to Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to Japan for steering this agenda in
2011 and before.

In recent years, real and encouraging
improvements have been made in the working methods
of the Security Council. Your concept note
(S/2011/726, annex), Mr. President, makes that very
clear, and rightly so. The debates on working methods
have already produced results. It is good to remind
ourselves that the Council today operates under new,
better and more transparent working methods than
before. So there has been movement, there is
movement and, hopefully, there will continue to be
movement, be it incremental and sometimes discreet,
but definitely movement. The Netherlands and
Belgium would like to commend both the permanent
members and the successive elected members of the
Council on their efforts in that regard.

The Netherlands and Belgium want to stress that
fact, because we do not want the further development
of better working methods to become hostage to a lack
of progress in the wider debate on Security Council
reform. In other words, we do not want the working
methods debate to come to a halt because there is no
movement or progress on the other chapters of the
Security Council reform agenda currently being
debated in the General Assembly.

In your concept note, Sir, you invite the wider
membership to come up with practical suggestions
aimed at enhancing transparency, efficiency and
Council interaction with United Nations members at
large that could make a difference in the day-to-day
Security Council business. The Netherlands and
Belgium would like to submit some very concrete
ideas, it being understood that none of those ideas, if
implemented, would encroach on the decision-making
power of the Security Council. The Netherlands and
Belgium wish to fully respect the powers of the
Security Council and its members, permanent and
elected, as set out in the Charter.

First, let us encourage the monthly presidencies
of the Council to take whatever action needed, within
their powers, in order to enhance the transparency, the
outreach towards the wider United Nations
membership and the efficiency of the Council. In
recent times, inventive and creative presidencies have
taken welcome steps in that direction, which deserve to
become more common practice. There are now more
public briefings, more public debates, more Arria
Formula meetings and more informal interactive
dialogues. That is much appreciated by the wider
membership. That modern approach to working
methods enhances not only interaction with Member
States, but also the potential to increase the Council's
outreach towards regional organizations, civil society
and interested individuals.

Secondly, the Netherlands and Belgium see room
for further improvements when it comes to country-
specific debates. It is the task of the Security Council
to discuss challenges in specific countries. However,
sometimes, the country concerned is not included in
those discussions, when their [presence really matters.

A way to enhance the transparency and the
inclusiveness of the Security Council's work would be
to invite countries regarding which issues are being
debated but that are not members of the Security
Council to contribute to Council debates of particular
importance and under a formula to be decided on an ad
hoc basis. By doing so, the Security Council would
give a fair and decent chance to countries to put their
point of view forward. After hearing such a country,
the Security Council can still discuss the issues at stake
in a restricted debate among its own members without
the country concerned having to be present. The same
goes for the Chairs of Peacebuilding configurations,
who could similarly contribute in an even more
effective way to the deliberations of the Council with
regard to the country on the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) agenda.

A similar reflection can be made with regard to
the need for increased interaction between the Security
Council, troop- and police-contributing countries and
the Secretariat. That type of interaction would be
particularly welcome prior to the deployment and after
the return of technical assessment missions.

Thirdly, the notion of peace and security today
encompasses a far broader scope than it did 65 years
ago. In recent years, Security Council debates have
focused on climate change, international crime,
terrorism, piracy, diseases, natural resources and other
so-called "new" issues that affect international peace
and security. We would like to encourage the Council
to consult even more broadly than it has done so far.

Fourthly, the Netherlands and Belgium strongly
believe that there is potential for more inclusive and
more transparent working methods in the subsidiary
organs. Those organs prepare Council decisions and
can thus only benefit from external advice at their
level.

Let me give one example. The Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, currently under German
chairmanship, has granted access to the Chairs of PBC
configurations, because issues such as child soldiers
and gender-based violence against children are, all too
often, common practice in countries on the agenda of
the PBC. That practice of granting access to a
subsidiary organ should be generalized and should be
adopted as a general rule by all subsidiary organs, as
appropriate.

The Netherlands and Belgium have taken on an
active role in the debate on wider Security Council
reform. I believe that our statement of last Monday
during the first exchange of views during the eighth
round of intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform clearly underlined our common strong
commitment to Security Council reform in all its
aspects.

Improving the Security Council's working
methods is clearly one aspect of the ongoing
negotiations in the intergovernmental negotiations in
the General Assembly, just as it is an issue under
consideration by this Council.

(spoke in French)

Finally, as others have done before me, I would
like to congratulate the President on the way he has
chaired this Council throughout November. He has
handled this very heavy task with a great deal of
authority and elegance.

