Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
commend you, Mr. President, and your country, South
Africa, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month. We also welcome the new
members of the Council.

Since 1947, the Security Council has adopted
many resolutions on the situation in the Middle East
and the question of Palestine. Without exception, not
one of them has met with compliance from the
Government of Israel. Speakers in today's meeting
have primarily focused on addressing Israel's repeated
non-compliance with those resolutions and its impunity
for crimes committed against the Palestinian people,
which are, today, the main obstacles to the peace so
ardently desired in the Middle East. The Council has a
duty to reject the continued non-compliance of Israel
with the resolutions on peace and security in the
Middle East. The United Nations Charter bestows upon
the Council the powers to do so and to establish
whether or not that State is willing to meet its
obligations set out in the Charter.

So long as the efforts of the Security Council are
delayed or blocked - in an atmosphere that is strained
owing to the existence of double standards - the
United Nations will continue to face a paradox,
namely, continuing to include among its members a
State that disrespects - ad infinitum and flagrantly -
the founding principles of the United Nations and of
international justice, while, at the same time, denying
recognition to the State of Palestine, which has fully
complied with all of the requirements for admission
and which has already been recognized by the vast
majority of States Member States of the Organization.

We must ensure that decisive progress is made
towards achieving a peaceful and just solution for the
question of Palestine. It is a sine qua non condition that
the suffering of the Palestinian people be ended and
that the ethnic cleansing, aimed at attempting to
expunge that people from its ancestral lands, be
averted. That is why we support the Non-Aligned
Movement's call to hold without delay a conference of
the high contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention in order to guarantee respect for the
Convention in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including in East Jerusalem.

We condemn the actions of the Israeli
Government aimed at preventing the establishment of a
Palestinian unity Government and, in particular, the
holding without charges of Mr. Aziz Al-Dweik, the
leader of the Palestinian Legislative Council. We call
upon Israel to free him immediately, as well as the
increasing number of Palestinian political prisoners
being held in Israeli prisons.

Stability in Syria is fundamental for peace in the
Middle East. We welcome the endeavours of the
Government of President Bashar Al-Assad to preserve
the unity, integrity and stability in his country and to
find a peaceful, political and inclusive solution. In that
context, we condemn all terrorist and antidemocratic
acts aimed at hampering the programme of reforms,
which, under the auspices of the Syrian Government
and with the majority support of the people, is moving
forward in that Arab country. The aspirations of this
age-old and honourable people must be channelled
through political dialogue and peaceful means. We
deplore the manipulation of the legitimate demands of
the people, which has created chaos and sown terror in
order to impose a regime designed to satisfy the
interests of imperialism and Zionism.

The double standards of certain Powers disqualify
them entirely from being able in any way to pass
judgment on the situation in Syria. We firmly condemn
those who promote interventionist sanctions and
endeavour to repeat the military and political
aberration that was committed against Libya. The
agenda of dialogue and peace must prevail, and not the
warmongering and interventionist agenda that the
imperial Powers wish to impose at any price. We
therefore welcome the calls made by many countries,
including members of the Security Council, for a
peaceful, constitutional and inclusive solution to the
issue of Syria.

It is heart-rending when any lives are lost
anywhere on Earth. We are talking about avoiding
human sorrow. Political, cultural or religious
differences must be overcome by means of dialogue
and understanding.

Those who promote interventionist unilateral
action against the Government and people in Syria are
violating international law and flouting the
fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter.

The valuable information submitted to the
Security Council by the representative of the Syrian
Government must be taken constructively. The many
measures adopted by the sovereign Syrian Government
and its readiness to take into account the positive
recommendations of the Arab League are a
demonstration of a spirit of dialogue and political will
that guides the authorities of that country. We stress
that respect for the sovereignty of States,
non-interference and the peaceful settlement of
disputes are fundamental principles of international
law and essential conditions for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The Israeli Government is taking advantage of
current conditions in the Middle East to perpetuate its
occupation of the Syrian Golan and continue its
outrages against the Palestinian people. We therefore
reiterate our support for the implementation of
resolution 497 (1981) of 17 December 1981. We recall
that that resolution reaffirms that the acquisition of
territory by force is inadmissible and declares that the
Israeli decision to impose its laws, jurisdiction and
administration in the occupied Syrian Golan Heights is
null and void and without international legal effect.

We renew the call for the State of Israel to respect
the sovereignty of the Lebanon and to avoid further
conflicts, such as that which took place in July 2006.
Only through direct negotiations between the parties,
as set out in resolution 1701 (2006), can constructive
solutions be reached.
