Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan shares the
objective of promoting the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD). We have
expressed our support for the non-proliferation goals
outlined in the statement made by President Bush of
the United States on 11 February this year. We shall
cooperate with all international endeavours that seek to
promote fair and equitable solutions to non-
proliferation challenges, including those arising from
the risk of terrorists and other non-State actors
acquiring or developing weapons of mass destruction.

We share the central objective of the resolution:
to prevent terrorists and non-State actors from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction. However, some
of the provisions of the draft resolution on non-
proliferation - which was circulated in the Council a
few weeks ago, after a long process of restricted
consultations among the five permanent members -
raised concerns that were of a systemic nature and
were also specific to the situation and status of
Pakistan, which is a nuclear-weapon State. We outlined
those concerns in our statement in the Council's open
debate on 22 April.

We appreciate the serious efforts made by the
sponsors of the draft resolution to accommodate our
major concerns and those of other States. The draft
resolution was revised three times. That enabled
Pakistan to support the resolution.

Pakistan shares the general view expressed in the
Council's open debate that the Security Council cannot
legislate for the world. The sponsors have assured the
Council that this resolution is designed to address a
gap in international law to address the risk of terrorists
and non-State actors acquiring or developing weapons
of mass destruction, and that it does not seek to
prescribe specific legislation, which is left to national
action by States. That has been made specific in
paragraph 2 of the resolution.

Second, Pakistan also shares the general view of
the United Nations membership that the Security
Council cannot assume the stewardship of global non-
proliferation and disarmament issues. The Council,
composed of 15 States, is not a representative body. It
cannot enforce the obligations assumed by five of its
members which retain nuclear weapons, since they also
possess the right of veto in the Council. Global
disarmament and non-proliferation can be achieved
only in more universal and non-discriminatory forums,
especially the Conference on Disarmament - the sole
multilateral negotiating body on disarmament. We thus
welcome the affirmation in the draft resolution of the
importance and the role of various treaty bodies
dealing with non-proliferation and disarmament.

Third, the provisions of the revised text affirm
that this resolution is designed specifically to address
the threat of WMD acquisition or development by
terrorists and other non-State actors. The eighth
preambular paragraph of the resolution speaks of the
risk that non-State actors such as those identified in
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001), "may
acquire, develop, traffic in or use nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons and their means of delivery"; the
ninth preambular paragraph speaks about the threat of
illicit trafficking in weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery, and related materials; and the
fourteenth preambular paragraph reaffirms the need to
combat threats to international peace and security
caused by terrorist acts. Those preambular paragraphs
define the purposes and scope of the resolution.

Fourth, the central obligations created in the
resolution are contained in operative paragraphs 1, 2, 3
and 4 of the revised text. Pakistan has already fulfilled
most of these requirements. Pakistan has put in place
appropriate mechanisms and adequate physical security
arrangements for the effective control of our strategic
assets, materials and sites. We are further strengthening
our export control laws. Pakistan's laws already require
express procedures to control chemical weapons,
biological weapons and nuclear materials and missile
technology. Any individual or entity violating our laws
is subject to legal action, including possible criminal
prosecution under those laws.

Fifth, under this resolution, legally binding
obligations under Chapter VII arise only in respect of
paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, which start with the word
"decides" and which, at our request, have been grouped
together for presentational purposes. This offers
reassurance that the provisions of the resolution will
not serve to impose non-proliferation obligations on
States or to transfer the general responsibility for
global non-proliferation and disarmament to the
Security Council.

Sixth, we appreciate the changes introduced by
the sponsors to clarify that there is no intention to
oblige States to join treaties or arrangements to which
they are not parties. Thus, the fifth preambular
paragraph now specifies that the reference to support
for multilateral treaties is important "for all States
parties". Similarly, the eleventh preambular paragraph
also recognizes that the binding legal obligations that
are mentioned are only those arising from "treaties to
which they are parties". Similarly, operative paragraph
8 (a), regarding the universal adoption, full
implementation and possible strengthening of
multilateral treaties, is restricted to States which are
parties to those treaties.

As is well known, Pakistan is not a party to
certain treaties and arrangements, such as the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the
Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) and the Missile
Technology Control Regime (MTCR), which do not
accommodate the reality that Pakistan is a nuclear-
weapon State.

Seventh, we welcome the insertion of the word
"henceforth" in the fifteenth preambular paragraph of
the resolution, which makes it explicit that the
provisions of the resolution are not retroactive, but
would apply only to events from the date of the
adoption of the resolution.

Eighth, the revised text of paragraph 4 has now
clarified the limited and specific nature of the role of
the committee that is being created. The duration of the
life of the committee, as paragraph 4 now states, will
be "no longer than two years". Pakistan will be able to
submit the report sought in this paragraph within the
prescribed six months.

Pakistan continues to believe that the goal of
preventing WMD proliferation by non-State actors, as
also by States, can be best addressed in universal and
non-discriminatory forums. We hope that negotiations
to elaborate international treaties on the issues
addressed in the present resolution will be initiated and
concluded as soon as possible, thus relieving the
Security Council of the exceptional responsibilities it
has assumed under this resolution.

Finally, let me clarify Pakistan's policy on non-
proliferation and disarmament, including in the context
of this resolution.

Pakistan strongly supports the objectives of non-
proliferation and disarmament. We shall scrupulously
fulfil the obligations that we have freely accepted by
sovereign decisions under international treaties and
other arrangements. As a party to the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC) and the Biological
Weapons Convention, we believe that non-proliferation
by State or non-State actors in these fields can be best
achieved through full implementation of the provisions
of those treaties. The outstanding issues relating to
CWC implementation, including the destruction of
chemical weapon stocks, should be resolved through
the Organization for the Proliferation of Chemical
Weapons. Biological weapons are the most likely
weapon of mass destruction that could be acquired by
terrorists and non-State actors as well as by States.
Biological weapons technology is evolving rapidly. A
universal and equitable verification mechanism to
prevent biological weapons proliferation is now more
essential than ever.

The situation in the area of nuclear non-
proliferation, as well as missile proliferation, is
considerably more complicated. Several States,
including Pakistan, are not parties to the NPT, the
Nuclear Suppliers Group or the MTCR. Pakistan was
obliged to develop nuclear weapons and related
delivery systems to maintain credible minimum
deterrence against external aggression, especially once
similar capabilities were developed and demonstrated
by our eastern neighbour. The nuclear non-proliferation
regime needs to accommodate the reality of the
existence of nuclear weapons in South Asia.
Recognition of this reality would enable Pakistan to
cooperate more fully in promoting the objectives of
non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament.

Given that reality, Pakistan will not accept any
demand for access, much less inspections, of our
nuclear and strategic assets, materials and facilities.
We will not share any information - technical,
military or political - that would negatively affect our
national security programmes or our national interests.

Pakistan will continue to develop its nuclear,
missile and related strategic capabilities to maintain the
minimum credible deterrence vis-a-vis our eastern
neighbour, which is embarked on major programmes of
nuclear weapon, missile, anti-missile and conventional
arms acquisition and development. We have proposed
the creation of a strategic restraint regime in South
Asia encompassing nuclear-weapons and confidence-
building measures, a conventional balance of arms and
the resolution of underlying disputes. We hope to
promote such a regime under the composite dialogue
recently agreed upon by the two States. An experts-
level meeting on nuclear confidence-building measures
will be held next month.

The adoption of this resolution and the attention
that is focused on weapons of mass destruction
proliferation by terrorists and non-State actors are
timely and important. At the same time, it should not
be allowed to deflect attention from the dangers that
flow from the existence and vertical proliferation of
nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction.

The Conference on Disarmament, the sole
multilateral negotiating body in the field of
disarmament, remains paralysed mainly because of the
refusal by one or two major States to open multilateral
negotiations on nuclear disarmament and the
prevention of an arms race in outer space. This
paralysis has also frozen the prospects of concluding a
treaty to ban the future production of fissile materials.
We trust that the sponsors of this resolution will
contribute to unblocking those negotiations and will
refrain from taking any steps that could destabilize
strategic stability at the global or regional level and
defeat the goals of disarmament and non-proliferation.

