The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.

Mr. Mminele (South Africa) My delegation would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Arabic
Republic of Egypt for your leadership of the Security
Council during the past month. The debate on the
theme "United Nations peacekeeping operations:
their potential contribution to the overarching goal of
sustaining peace" is important and timely.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

In April 2016, the Security Council and the General
Assembly adopted ground-breaking parallel resolutions
on the review of the peacebuilding architecture.
Those parallel resolutions on sustaining peace are
regarded as a comprehensive statement on the role of
the United Nations in peacebuilding and prevention,
and are directly linked to efforts towards peace and
security, human rights and sustainable development.
Furthermore, the resolutions stress the fact that there
is a conceptual shift from peacebuilding to sustaining
peace, which is both transformative and forward
thinking. In practical terms, peacebuilding is no longer
restricted to post-conflict situations, but applies to all
phases - before the conflict, during the conflict and at
the cessation of a conflict. In essence, the resolutions
are the first to explicitly link peacebuilding and
prevention, and they underscore the essential role that
sustaining peace plays.

More emphasis on conflict prevention means
recognizing the primacy of politics in the pacific
settlement of disputes. The relevance of investing in
structures such as early-warning systems, instead of
reacting to outbreaks of violence, is pertinent. The
full implementation of the resolutions will result in
less emphasis on militarized responses to conflicts in
Africa and elsewhere. Instead, it will promote more
political engagement, which we believe will result in
effective peacebuilding.

Together with the Slovak Republic, South Africa
co-chairs the United Nations Group of Friends on
Security Sector Reform. It is within the milieu of
sustaining peace that we have experienced how relevant
and complimentary such reform has become, taking
into consideration the Secretary-General's emphasis
on preventative approaches to sustaining peace. The
promotion of a culture of prevention to stop conflicts
before they occur complements the objective of the
African Union (AU) to elevate the critical importance
of preventive diplomacy. Given the excessive cost and
limited success of conflict management, a shift is
required to focus more on pre-emptive action that will
allow for sustainable peace and an environment within
which reconciliation and institution-building can
thrive. In essence, the United Nations must move away
from managing conflict towards laying the necessary
groundwork for an inclusive dialogue, peaceful
transition and long-term sustainable peace.

The African Union's Peace and Security
Architecture focuses on conflict prevention, conflict
management and peacebuilding, which are all
fundamental to the AU's aspiration of silencing the
guns by 2020. The African Union and the continent's
subregional organizations have deployed a great deal
of effort to develop and operationalize the African
Standby Force and its rapid deployment capacity, which
will impact directly on the process of peacebuilding
and sustainable peace.

The recent implementation of the joint United
Nations-AU Framework for Enhanced Partnerships in
Peace and Security reflects the AU's commitment to
the framework's four key action areas, namely, first,
prevention and mediating conflict and sustaining
peace; secondly, responding to conflict; thirdly,
addressing root causes; and, fourthly, the continuous
review and enhancement of the partnership. At the
same time, my delegation reiterates its call for the use
of United Nations-assessed contributions to secure
predictable, sustainable and flexible financing for
AU-led peace-support operations authorized by the
Security Council.

Adequate gender representation within the United
Nations peacekeeping structures should continue
to be an important objective in our search for more
effective and efficient peacebuilding processes. The
need for women peacekeepers is more urgent than
ever, as women are often better placed to carry out a
number of crucial peacekeeping tasks, especially with
regard to allegations of sexual abuse and exploitation
and providing safe environments for women to voice
their safety and security concerns. In that regard, South
Africa welcomes the appointment by Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres of the first United Nations Victims'
Rights Advocate, which aims at addressing accusations
of sexual exploitation by international peacekeepers.

In conclusion, the idea of peacebuilding is strongly
based on the understanding that peace cannot exist
without development and that development cannot
thrive without peace and stability. We believe that notion
should underpin the approach of the United Nations
to fulfilling its central mandate of the maintenance
of international peace and security, which is strongly
dependent upon a prosperous and peaceful Africa.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.


