Mr. Jagne (Gambia): My delegation would like to
join previous speakers in expressing its gratitude to you,
Mr. President, and your delegation for arranging this open
debate on such a broad and important topic, "Role of the
Security Council in the prevention of armed conflicts".
We are also grateful to the Secretary-General for setting
the tone of today's debate.

There could not have been a better time, as we
approach a new millennium, to collectively remind this
important United Nations organ - the Security
Council - of its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, in order
words, for our collective security. We have no doubt
whatsoever that the Security Council, with its power and
prestige, has both the capacity and the ability to fulfil this
fundamental obligation. But the weight of power and
prestige is only worthy if it draws inspiration from the
principle of fair play and even-handedness in dealing with
all conflicts, no matter where they occur on this planet
that we all share. Then, and only then, could the Council
continue to lay claim to the moral authority to offer
solutions to problems of common concern to all.

Since we joined the Security Council we have been
insisting on the need to redouble efforts to demonstrate to
those that we represent that, irrespective of their area of
origin, all the Council members - permanent and elected

 

alike - will show the same degree of enthusiasm and
resolve in dealing with any conflict situation. Let us not be
lulled into believing that relative security and stability in
some parts of the world is enough to allow us to proclaim
that our collective security is guaranteed. Unless and until
there is reasonable security and stability everywhere, we
cannot assume that everybody is safe.

It is certainly not by safeguarding our narrow national
interests, to the detriment of the common good, that we can
call this world a safe place. It is by safeguarding our
collective security that our nightmares will end. Otherwise,
we will continue to have sleepless nights.

This is why my delegation commends you,
Mr. President, and your delegation for coming up with a
most comprehensive draft presidential statement, which in
our View constitutes a blueprint for the Security Council,
showing how it can play the preponderant role that the
whole world expects it to play in the prevention of armed
conflicts. The draft contains very useful guidelines to help
the Security Council be more proactive, rather than being
too often characterized as a helpless spectator as dramatic
situations unfold.

In this context, we would like to place greater
emphasis on the usefulness of early-waming mechanisms,
preventive diplomacy and preventive deployment. This
includes, of course, Security Council missions abroad.
Various examples have been cited in which the Security
Council succeeded in defusing potential conflicts.

But the Council must not be selective in its approach.
Furthermore, as the old saying goes - and as my friend,
the Ambassador of Malaysia, has already noted -
prevention is better than cure. It is one thing, though, to be
forewarned, but it is quite another to take urgent and
appropriate action. In this regard, the role of the Secretary-
General, as provided for in Article 99 of the Charter, gains
added importance.

Unfortunately, experience has shown that more often
than not the Security Council does too little, too late,
especially when the situation concerns Africa. This is sad
to say, but nonetheless true. We have witnessed situations
in which encouraging statements were made, only to be
followed by the Council's developing cold feet later on,
when the support and solidarity of the rest of the
international community were most needed.

While recognizing the primary responsibility of the
Security Council in the maintenance of international peace
and security, we are mindful of the important role that
regional organizations and arrangements can also play to
complement the efforts of the Security Council. We are
all too familiar with the provisions of Chapter VIII of the
Charter on such arrangements, but there should always be
close coordination between the Council and regional
organizations.

In this connection, my delegation notes with
satisfaction the growing cooperation between the United
Nations and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and its military observer group, the
ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), notably in
Sierra Leone. We hope to see the consolidation of this
cooperation in the months ahead, with the imminent
deployment of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL).

A successful operation in Sierra Leone augurs well
for other operations in other parts of Africa. We have in
mind the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where we
anxiously look forward to meaningful cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity.

It must also be recognized that for the Security
Council to succeed in resolving problems around the
globe the parties concerned must also cooperate fully and
unconditionally - be they State or non-State actors.
Other situations require concerted international efforts in
the short and medium term in order to have an impact. In
this context, we immediately think of the question of
small arms, light weapons and arms embargoes - to
mention only a few areas. Sustained, concerted
international efforts are, however, not only desirable but
absolutely necessary to tackle the more difficult problems
of post-conflict peace-building and, more generally, the
hardest nut of all to crack: poverty eradication.

As you know, Sir, and as is widely recognized,
poverty is one of the root causes of armed conflicts. My
delegation is pleased that this point is raised in the draft
presidential statement, which goes on to underscore the
need for all United Nations organs and agencies to act
accordingly to assist Member States to eradicate poverty.
It is not necessary to emphasize the more urgent need to
attain the target that was set many, many years ago to
increase official development assistance to 0.7 per cent of
gross domestic product. Perhaps that goal will be attained
in the next millennium. It is so within reach, yet it is so
difficult to summon the necessary political will to make
it happen.

 

Anyway, coming back to the point of departure - the
role of the Security Council in the prevention of armed
conflicts - my delegation is of the view that by
scrupulously following the guidelines outlined in the draft
presidential statement, the Council's credibility will be
enhanced, its authority strengthened and a stable world
guaranteed to all.

