Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to thank Mr. Sevan for his extremely
detailed and in-depth briefing and for the extraordinary
work that he has contributed to concluding the oil-for-
food programme. The conclusion of a programme of
that scale and complexity in the space of six months is
an extremely difficult task that is made even more
difficult by the security problems experienced by the
United Nations in Iraq. In that connection, Mr.
President, I should like to fully associate myself with
the condolences that you expressed on behalf of the
Council to the families of the victims of the recent
attacks against the International Committee of the Red
Cross. Bulgaria agrees with the Secretary-General that
they are true crimes against humanity.

Bulgaria welcomes the important efforts of Mr.
Sevan and his team to conclude the programme.
Thanks to their efforts, 3,554 contracts have been
approved and financed, while 273 are still not financed.
Under resolution 1483 (2003), the process of defining
priorities must continue until 21 November 2003.
However, because of an internal decision, 3 November
and 10 November, respectively, have been set as
deadlines for the prioritizing process in that context.
We believe that, as was said at the last 661 Committee
meeting, it is urgent that there be a plan to accelerate
the process of renegotiating financial amendments to
those contracts.

That would be one of the solutions to that
problem, which, as we saw earlier, concerns other
delegations also. Renegotiating financial amendments
to contracts is a guarantee for suppliers and their
legitimate interests. Obviously, there are other
solutions to the problem that were outlined by
preceding speakers.

In order to meet the needs of the suppliers and the
Authority, the Office of the oil-for-food programme
should accelerate the process of channelling the
authentication of deliveries at the border. Our
expectation is that the Authority will resolve the
problem of implemented contracts under which
deliveries were made when military operations began
but were not authenticated because of Cotecna's
withdrawal.

We welcome the fact that 268 projects in the
northern governorates will be completed by 21
November 2003 and, with several exceptions,
approximately 59 projects will be continued until 22
November 2003. At the same time, we wish to take
note of the fact that only the Authority can function as
intermediary in the process of transferring projects in
the northern governorates.

In conclusion, I should like to express my
delegation's appreciation to Ambassador Pleuger,
Chairman of the 661 Committee, and his team.

