Mr. Eitel (Germany): At the outset, Sir, let me
express my delegation's satisfaction and my personal
pleasure at having seen you preside over this month's
Security Council meetings - and, especially, over today's
meeting, which marks an important step in the efforts to
bring peace to Kosovo. Let me add that my compliments go
also to your predecessor, our colleague from Gabon.
I want now to affirm that Germany fully supports and
subscribes to the statement that the representative of the
United Kingdom made on behalf of the European Union.

In the Kosovo region of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, tension has been building up over several
years. Repression of the Kosovar Albanian community and
serious violations of human rights contributed to this, along
with increasing doubts within that community about the
success of the Kosovar Albanian leadership's course of non-
violent opposition. Guerrilla attacks on police stations and
the excessive use of force by Yugoslav security forces,
resulting in at least 80 fatalities, were the latest steps in that
escalation. My country is deeply concerned about this
political state of affairs, as well as about the resulting
humanitarian situation.

More than many other States, Germany is affected by
this situation. Germany is the refuge of an estimated
300,000 ethnic Albanians, most of them from Kosovo, out
of the total of an estimated 1.3 million persons from the
former Yugoslavia currently living in Germany. When on
25 March, the Foreign Ministers of the Contact Group met
in Bonn to discuss the situation in Kosovo, some 40,000
Kosovar Albanians also met in Bonn - for a peaceful
demonstration.

After the latest outbreak of violence, on 6 March,
Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel sent a message to you,
Mr. President, calling for the Security Council to address
the situation in Kosovo. We thank you, Sir, for your prompt
response to that request. Along with the other Contact
Group members, we had been actively seeking the
preparation of the resolution just adopted by the Council.
The explosive situation in the Kosovo region constitutes
a clear threat to international peace and security. The
genesis of the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which in
the beginning was considered by some to be an internal
matter, is still very much alive in our memories. The
outside world cannot simply stand by and watch a new,
potentially even more devastating conflict develop in the
region.

Alongside the Security Council, the Contact Group
has been actively involved in the ongoing international
peace efforts to avoid further bloodshed and bring about
a political solution. At its ministerial meeting in London
on 9 March, the Contact Group spelled out clearly what
the international community expects from both sides. In
particular, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was called
upon: to withdraw special police units and cease
excessive action by security forces affecting the civilian
population; to allow access by the International
Committee of the Red Cross and other humanitarian
organizations; and to commit itself publicly to begin a
process of dialogue with the leadership of the Kosovar
Albanians.

On 19 March, the Foreign Ministers of France and
of Germany, Hubert Vedrine and Klaus Kinkel, travelled
to Belgrade together and came home with a number of
commitments by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

At their meeting on 25 March in Bonn, the Foreign
Ministers of the Contact Group assessed the developments
and came to the conclusion that there had been progress
in some areas of concern, in particular an understanding
on the implementation of the Education Agreement. The
overall assessment, however, was that the actions taken
by the leadership of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
fell short of the demands laid down at the London
meeting, and that the Contact Group therefore had to
maintain the measures taken against the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia.

In this context, and hand in hand with the United
Nations and the Contact Group, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
European Union also have a crucial role to play. We fully
support the skilful efforts of Foreign Minister Bronislaw
Geremek of Poland as Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE
as well as the role of mediator foreseen for the former
Prime Minister of Spain, Felipe Gonzalez. It is also worth
noting that the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia has

 

affirmed its jurisdiction regarding the violence in Kosovo
and begun gathering information on the latest events.

Today's resolution sends two very clear messages.
First, the international community will do its utmost to
avoid a resurgence of Violence in the Balkans region; and
secondly, a political solution of the Kosovo problem is
more than overdue. We condemn violence and terrorism, no
matter which side is to blame.

Germany wants to see the Kosovo problem solved
peacefully, through negotiations. We therefore support the
call upon the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
leadership of the Kosovar Albanians, contained in the
resolution, to enter without preconditions into a meaningful
dialogue, including on political status issues. Without
prejudging what the result may be, the resolution supports
an enhanced status for Kosovo within the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, with a substantially greater degree of
autonomy and meaningful self-administration. Such a
solution would by no means impair the sovereignty or the
territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
The arms embargo foreseen in the resolution is an
effort to prevent an arms buildup of the opposing sides. It
is, however, also a political measure which illustrates that
resorting to violence and rejecting meaningful dialogue will
bring those responsible, and the countrymen they bear
responsibility for, farther away from the beneficial
normalization of their relations with the outside world. The
fate of their countrymen and of their own international
position is at stake.

Germany therefore supports the resolution adopted by
the Council today.

