Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for having
organized this dialogue. I also welcome the Force
Commanders and thank them for their briefings and
the dedication with which they carry out their tasks
in their respective Missions, under such difficult
circumstances.

We thoroughly support consultations such as
today's meeting, which provide Security Council
members with quality first-hand information on
mission activities on the ground and the challenges they
face. We trust that the holding of such meetings, which
has now been ongoing for four years, will become
established practice and continue in the future.

The maintenance of international peace and
security continues to be among the highest priorities
of the Organization. Peacekeeping operations are
now a complex and continuously evolving system,
developed to fulfil this fundamental aim. Argentina
has therefore contributed troops and police since 1958,
based on its commitment to developing such a system
of peacekeeping and working to strengthen it and to
make it more transparent and democratic in upholding
international law.

As we always note in our statements on this
topic, we believe that peacekeeping is a legitimate
and valid tool to promote and protect human rights
in those countries affected by conflict, in particular
by providing assistance to rebuild institutions and
strengthen democracy and the rule of law through
multidimensional missions with increasingly complex
and comprehensive mandates. Examples of this
include the peacekeeping operations whose Force
Commanders briefed us so informatively today: the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
the United Nations Mission in Liberia and the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI). The
presence of those Missions is crucial to guaranteeing
the protection of civilians in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and C6te d'Ivoire and to promoting the
effective functioning of State institutions in Liberia. I
shall take only a brief moment to make some additional
comments and pose some questions so as to leave more
time for the briefers to respond.

The firstpoint I would like to raise is the clear linkage
between the broadening mandates of peacekeeping
missions, referred to as robust or effective, and the
increasing number of security incidents. In that regard,
during the negotiations on the relevant resolutions, we
expressed our concern at the recent modifications in a
number of mandates ofmissions in Africa, in particular
the establishment in MONUSCO of an Intervention
Brigade authorized to carry out peace enforcement
activities. We know that the Secretariat has begun
to implement additional security mechanisms for
Mission personnel, as described at the recent meeting
of the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations.
Nevertheless, we would like to hear the impressions of
the MONUSCO Force Commander on this topic.

The second question I would like to pose to the
Force Commanders is related to the use of unarmed
aerial vehicles (UAVs), or drones, whose deployment
is already planned for MONUSCO and has been
requested for UNOCI. Argentina supports the use of
such technology as long as it is done in adherence to
the principles of the Charter and of peacekeeping, on
an exceptional and controlled basis, and only with the
purpose of gathering information. In that regard, have
some lessons already been learned from this phase of
deployment of MONUSCO? What potential is there to
extend the use of UAVs to other existing Missions?

We view as important the topic of inter-mission
cooperation, including in terms of the use of new
technologies, as long as savings made through such
cooperation do not detract from the capacity of a
cooperating mission to fulfil its mandate or guarantee
the security of its personnel. On that point, I would like
to hear from the Force Commanders if any lessons have
been learned with regard to the command and control
exercised by a Force Commander of over personnel
of another mission who join his or her peacekeeping
operation.

With regard to the challenges posed by
predeployment evaluation, it is our understanding that
the generalization of predeployment courses through
which the United Nations can certify and insist on
minimum standards guaranteeing a universal level of
training could be crucial for attaining better results on
the ground.

In conclusion, Iwould like to pose a specific question
to one of the Missions to which my country contributes
a large contingent and which is the only Mission in
the Latin American and Caribbean region: the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Bearing in mind that it is among the Missions that have a
large number of engineering companies, I would like to
ask the MINUSTAH Force Commander, either directly
or through Mr. Ladsous, how he would describe, from
his experience and the results obtained, the strengths
and weaknesses of the use of such companies and their
impact on the humanitarian assistance being provided
to the Haitian people. At the same time, I would like
to hear his views on the use for the same functions of
military engineering companies and civilian companies
contracted by the United Nations.

