Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I congratulate Singapore on
assuming the presidency, and I congratulate the
Russian Federation on its efficient handling of business
last month.

The international community had a right to expect
that the fact-finding team would have been working on
the ground by now. Why that right? Why that
expectation? The international community based its
expectation on two facts primarily.

First of all, two Israeli Cabinet ministers -
Foreign Minister Peres and Defence Minister Ben-
Elizer - gave a clear commitment to the Secretary-
General that Israel would cooperate with the team. The
Secretary-General took that commitment in good faith,
and he acted on it in good faith, with our fullest
support.

Secondly, resolution 1405 (2002) provided
straightforward language that defines the mandate of
the fact-finding team in language that was provided by
the sponsor itself. We also heard clearly the assertions
made by Israeli ministers and spokespersons that Israel
had nothing to hide. If that were the case, then it was
reasonable to assume that Israel would only have
benefited from the presentation of accurate information
to the world.

The Government of Ireland was happy to
contribute to the fact-finding effort by allowing the
release of senior police officers with very extensive
counter-terrorism experience to participate in the fact-
finding team. This corresponded to, and responded
positively to, one major concern expressed to the
Secretary-General by the Government of Israel
regarding the composition of the team.

Ireland has fully supported the approach that
Secretary-General Annan had taken to this matter since
the adoption of resolution 1405 (2002) two weeks ago.
Consistent with this, we understand and support the
conclusion that both he and President Ahtisaari
reluctantly reached - as conveyed to the Council in
the Secretary-General's letter of 1 May - that, first,
due to the decision of the Government of Israel, it
proved impossible for the fact-finding team to travel to
the area to begin its work; and that secondly, and in
consequence, he was left with no option but to disband
the team.

Ireland believes that the Council should
collectively respond to the Secretary-General. It should
express its fullest support for the Secretary-General's
approach, for his efforts and for his judgment, and it
should condemn in forthright terms the decision of the
Government of Israel to prevent the fact-finding team
from proceeding to the area and beginning its mission,
and repudiate absolutely any impugning of the quality
and the composition of the team from sources at
various levels within Israel. We also attach the highest
importance to a unified response by all members of the
Council.

It will be very clear from successive statements
that Ireland has made in the Council that Ireland shares
with the Palestinian people, with the family of Arab
States and with decent people everywhere a sense of
sadness and repugnance at the acts that have been
systematically perpetrated in Jenin and elsewhere in
recent weeks. It is deeply regrettable that we will now
not have professionally collated full and accurate
information on Jenin based on an impartial and
balanced investigation on the ground, due to the
decision of the Government of Israel. Israel will be the
loser from this decision, and Ireland regrets this very
much.

Ireland greatly welcomes the outcome of the
meeting of the "quartet" held in Washington yesterday
and the fact that the members reinforced their
determination to continue working as a group with the
parties and others in the region to bring about a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace. We greatly welcome
the prospect of negotiations based on resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002) and the Saudi
proposal, as endorsed by the League of Arab States at
its summit in Beirut. We welcome with undisguised
relief the lifting of the siege of the headquarters at
Ramallah and we commend those who worked hard on
the arrangements that led to the peaceful resolution. We
hope that the situation at the Church of the Nativity
will also be brought rapidly to a peaceful conclusion
without any further bloodshed.

It is evident that the way forward is through
parallel progress on the security, economic and
political fronts towards a solution that will provide
Israel with the peace and security to which it has every
right and satisfy the legitimate national aspirations of
the Palestinian people, which have remained unfulfilled
for far too long.

