Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia keenly
appreciates the Council's continued attention to the
situation in Timor-Leste and the opportunity to speak
in the debate. We are very pleased to see you presiding
over this meeting, Sir.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2010/522) and his Special Representative,
Ms. Ameerah Haq, for her briefing this morning. We
equally welcome the statement by the Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste, Ambassador Borges.
We recognize the continuing importance of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT),
very well led by Special Representative Haq. I would,
of course, also like to convey our condolences on the
death of Deputy Special Representative for Security
Sector Support and Rule of Law, Mr. Kawakami.

As the Secretary-General's report outlines, the
Timorese Government has made very real progress in
addressing the many security and development
challenges that the country faces and - in particular -
in further consolidating the vital legislative and
institutional elements of the State. The level of
political maturity that has emerged is very welcome
and will continue, of course, to be decisive. In the past
year, poverty has decreased by 9 per cent and the
non-oil sector of the economy has averaged strong
annual growth since 2008.

Despite those improvements, however, as we
know difficult challenges inevitably remain. Poverty is
high, the health of women and children is poor, and
there are limited jobs for a growing population. In
particular, youth unemployment is rising, risking
violence and social instability. As we said to the
Council in February (see S/PV.6276), youth
unemployment is a decisive issue. Also rising is the
level of urbanization, which is equally a potential
factor for social instability.

For these and other reasons, it remains critical, of
course, that the international community continue to
support capacity-building in Timor-Leste's institutions,
particularly in the security sector and in regard to
governance. National elections, scheduled for 2012,
will be a key milestone, but may also prove to be a
challenge, as we know, for the developing institutions
in Timor-Leste. It is important, therefore, that UNMIT
drawdowns be conditions-based and take into account
prevailing capacities. It is also important to take a
long-term view of any proposals to change the UNMIT
mandate or budget. Planning for the long-term viability
of Timor-Leste should take precedence over short-term
budget considerations.

We welcome greater Timorese responsibility and
control over policing. The resumption of primary
policing responsibility by the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) in most districts and units
indicates that the PNTL is moving very much in the
right direction. Australia encourages the continued
handover of policing responsibility once the remaining
districts meet the agreed conditions.

The Secretary-General's report also highlights
that the certification process for the PNTL is still not
concluded and needs to be addressed to enable the
handover process to be completed. We also join the call
for the Timorese Government to take into account
seriously, in its budgetary and planning processes, the
PNTL's logistical needs.

Australia welcomes the United Nations efforts to
ensure that the skills of the United Nations police
deployed in Timor-Leste fit with the new
post-handover role, and also welcomes the additional
19 civilian posts that will help strengthen the PNTL as
an institution. We hope these positions will soon be
filled and on the ground, doing the job they have been
mandated to do. Likewise, it is important that the
United Nations police continue a mentoring role,
particularly to enhance the community policing aspect
of the PNTL. Any drawdown in United Nations police
numbers needs to reflect the security environment at
the time. Further reductions will reinforce the need for
United Nations personnel to have the necessary
technical and training skills for effective and
sustainable capacity-building.

Australia, through the International Stabilisation
Force (ISF) and our contribution to the United Nations
police, will of course continue to support the Timorese
Government and UNMIT in maintaining security. We
note that, since February 2008, there have been no
serious security incidents in Timor-Leste requiring
intervention by the ISF. With the support of the
Timorese Government, Australia and New Zealand
have drawn down their contributions to the ISF to
approximately 460 personnel. Australia continues to
review its contribution to the ISF, consistent with the
security environment. Future personnel reductions will
be made only in close consultation with the Timorese
Government, the United Nations and other
international partners.

Australia recognizes the importance of building
Timor-Leste's capacity to provide for its future
security. We are working directly with Timor-Leste to
improve the capacity of its security forces through
substantial bilateral programmes to train the PNTL and
the F alintil-Forcas de Defesa de Timor-Leste.

Aside from continued security, it is of course
vital to ensure continued economic development and
improvement occurs in the lives of ordinary Timorese.
Australia has heard the Timorese Government's clear
message that the people of Timor-Leste must drive
their own development agenda. To this end, we
acknowledge and welcome the release of the draft
Strategic Development Plan. We especially recognize
the impressive process of consultation undertaken
personally by Prime Minister Gusmao in its
development.

As the largest donor in Timor-Leste, we stand
ready to support the Government's efforts to secure a
stable and prosperous future. This year, we will deliver
over $100 million in aid to Timor-Leste. Our support
will help create employment by assisting Timor-Leste
to improve agricultural productivity, infrastructure,
vocational education, private sector development, and,
importantly, such labour intensive works as road
maintenance, which give jobs to young people. It will
also support the delivery of health and education
services, and the Government's efforts to improve its
own accountability.

Australia welcomes Timor-Leste's strengthening
of its regional relationships. Timor-Leste chaired the
recent Australia-Indonesia-Timor-Leste trilateral
meeting of foreign ministers during leaders' week in
New York last month. Australia values highly the
regular trilateral dialogue, which reflects the strength
of our shared history and achievements and provides a
very genuine opportunity for strengthening our joint
cooperation.

We particularly welcome the proposed visit of the
Security Council to Timor-Leste. We are confident that
the Council and all of us will benefit from a
contemporary on-the-ground assessment. We also look
forward to updates from the Secretary-General on
UNMIT's transition planning, and to working very
closely in its development with the Timorese
Government. The 2012 elections must be a key element
in our thinking about transition.

In conclusion, progress has been made and
continues to be made. More needs to be done, both for
economic development and security sector reform. As
we know, the elections in 2012 will be a crucial
marker. As the Secretary-General's report notes, further
efforts are required to overcome the political,
institutional and socio-economic weaknesses that
contributed to the events of 2006. For its part, Australia
remains irrevocably committed to working for a
successful future for Timor-Leste and to our
partnership with the Government and people of Timor-
Leste to achieve this historic purpose.

