Mr. Al Zayani (spoke in Arabic): Let me at the outset
thank you, Madam President, for having organized this
important meeting on developments in the situation
within the Republic of Yemen. I am pleased to take part
in this meeting. We at the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) are pleased to do so because we are closely tied
to Yemen, its people, its future security, its evolution
and its development.

The Security Council's ongoing interest in Yemen
with respect to the political and security situation in
the country, as well as the implementation of the GCC
initiative and in addressing challenges and obstacles,
gives us hope that Yemen will be able to get through
this critical period in its history. The Security Council
charged with maintaining international peace, stability
and security. It enjoys international respect, and its
mandate under Chapters VI and VII of the United
Nations Charter gives it a role in the maintenance of
international peace and security, settling disputes,
preventing aggression and maintaining its important
role on economic and security questions. The Security
Council, given its responsibilities, mandate and
credibility, is the international body whose role it is
to protect the political process under way in Yemen.
As a regional organization that is dealing with the
Yemeni crisis and wants to ensure the success of the
peaceful settlement to help the process move forward
successfully, the Gulf Cooperation Council would like
to rely on the Security Council and the international
legality it represents.

I would like to commend the resolutions,
declarations and statements on Yemen and the visit of
Council members last January, which was an important
symbol for the security, stability and unity of Yemen.
The Council's support for the Government and its
leaders and the Council's backing ofthe expectations of
the Yemeni people to be able to implement the political
and economic reforms are key. The Council's mission
expressed its support and wish to continue to follow up
on the Gulf Cooperation Council's initiatives regarding
the implementation mechanisms available to meet the
challenges, deal with impediments and support the
national dialogue during this critical period for the
future of Yemen.

In the Gulf Cooperation Council we understand the
importance of implementing our initiative. We expect
very much from the Security Council, particularly as
there are external forces, including the Yemeni side
and terrorist groups, that despite admonitions from
the Council, are working to impede national dialogue
and the political and peaceful processes. Some of those
forces seek to undermine Yemen's stability. The role of
the Council will be important in terms of supporting the
national dialogue throughout in order to reassure the
people of Yemen and give it confidence in a prosperous
and secure future.

The efforts of the Gulf Cooperation Council will
not be successful without the initiative seeking to
prevent a civil war in Yemen, which was done thanks
to the wisdom of the Yemenis themselves. They sought
to bring about peace and find a peaceful solution to
the crisis. Confidence in the Gulf Cooperation Council
member States, which had good intentions and close
historical, political, social, economic and cultural ties
with Yemen, all helped to bring us forward.
Mediation by the Gulf Cooperation Council has
also played an important role in providing confidence
to the people of Yemen and the political forces there.
We maintain a certain equidistance in relation to all the
parties, and our goal is clear and well defined, namely,
to avert a civil war, preserve the security, stability and
unity of Yemen and meet the expectations of the people
and its aspirations.

Here, I would like to commend the President of
the Republic of Yemen, Mr. Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour, and his wise decisions and leadership during
the transition period, as well as with respect to the
National Dialogue Conference overall. Thanks to his
wise leadership and his determination, he has been
able to bring Yemen out of the crisis and meet the
expectations of the people, despite the impediments and
challenges of this period. I would also like to commend
the role of the Friends of Yemen and their support for
the initiative through their ambassadors in Sana'a.

Our cooperation in Yemen has been an outstanding
example of regional and international cooperation
for the settling of disputes that threaten international
peace and security. The sponsors of the initiative need
to speak with one voice and coordinate their efforts to
support the Yemeni parties in this difficult period. That
cooperation reaffirms for the Yemenis the commitment
of the international community and its support for their
cause. In that regard, let me here commend Mr. Jamal
Benomar, the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General
on Yemen, and his efforts and support for the initiative
of the Gulf Cooperation Council and its implementation
mechanism. His work and commitment with respect to
the mission of the Gulf Cooperation Council in Sana'a
has been key.

The States of the Gulf Cooperation Council want
peace. They are open to the world. They enjoy transparent
relations with other States and organizations. We share
the same peaceful principles, which govern our policies.
We reject violence. We call for dialogue and for respect
for the sovereignty and independence of States. The
States of the Gulf Cooperation Council are bedrocks
of stability and security in a region that is experiencing
one of the most difficult and complex periods of its
history. Our States would like to ensure cooperation
and meet regional and international expectations.

The principles of our foreign policies give us
great credibility and international prestige. That is
clear. Our regional role has become an active one and
contributes to settling the various issues. We support
the role of the United Nations in the maintenance of
peace and security, in particular under Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter, which reaffirms the role
of international organizations in settling disputes as a
complementary role to the United Nations.

We in the Gulf Cooperation Council are fully
available and prepared to assist Yemen. Our relationship
with that brother country will continue, and we will
pursue our efforts to provide support to development
in all spheres during this economically difficult period,
which includes humanitarian problems and challenges
resulting from piracy, illegal migration, terrorism and
worsening poverty. The efforts of the Gulf Cooperation
Council member States are coordinated with the
Friends of Yemen, presided over by the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom and the Republic of
Yemen.

Together with the donors conference, we are all
working to meet the pledges totalling $8 billion for
Yemen, with most of the funds coming from Gulf
Cooperation Council countries. Although Yemen still
needs further financial support, it is most important
to ensure that the pledges already made are realized
and to begin to implement programmes and projects
impacting the daily lives of the Yemeni people. That
would increase their confidence in the political period
that lies ahead, particularly as they will judge political
changes underway based on the effects on their living
conditions. In addition, supporting Yemen economically
and rapid reconstruction and development efforts are
essential to security and stability.

From the outset, the Security Council has been
playing an important role in supporting the mediation
and the implementation of the initiative. The Council's
support continues to be necessary for a peaceful
solution in Yemen, to ensure a peaceful settlement to
the dispute and to help the Yemenis with the support of
their friends.

Finally, let me thank you, Madam President, for
letting me address the Council. Our hope is that we will
be able to help establish a new Yemen able to meet the
expectations of its own people and its hopes for a better
life.

