Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Allow
me to start by thanking Bolivia for its stewardship of
the Security Council during the month of October. I
wish you, Mr. President, and your team all the best for
the month of November; you can count on the support
of the entire Dutch delegation.

On behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
I would like to express my sincere thanks to the
Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her sixteenth
report and comprehensive briefing on the situation in
Libya. The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains a firm
supporter of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Please allow me to focus on three important aspects:
the Rome Statute system, international cooperation
and accountability.

As noted by others, this year marks the twentieth
anniversary of the Rome Statute. Not only did we
establish the first permanent International Criminal
Court 20 years ago, we introduced the Rome Statute
system. States parties have taken on the responsibility
to end impunity and prosecute international crimes at
the national level. Only when States were unable, or
unwilling, would the ICC come into play.

The Council acted unanimously in 2011 in
referring the situation in Libya to the ICC so as to
ensure accountability for the most serious crimes. We
commend Prosecutor Bensouda for her unwavering
commitment to bringing justice to the victims of
atrocities in Libya since 2011.

Even today, the volatile security and human rights
situation in Libya is extremely worrisome. Civilians
continue to bear the brunt ofthe fighting and the ongoing
conflict. The situation of internally displaced persons
and migrants is a particular cause for concern. The
Prosecutor is often the only hope that the victims have
for ensuring accountability for the crimes committed.
But she cannot do it alone.

That brings me to my second point, which is on
international cooperation. The full cooperation and
assistance of the Council's member States is essential
for the Office of the Prosecutor to fulfil its mandate.
We welcome the successful cooperation between the
Libyan Prosecutor-General's Office and the Office of
the Prosecutor, and we urge all States, including the
Libyan authorities, to cooperate with the Court and
to arrest and surrender all those against whom an
arrest warrant has been issued. We also encourage the
Libyan authorities to ensure that the domestic case
against Abdullah Al-Senussi continues without undue
delay. In that regard, we applaud the statement of the
representative of Libya on Monday in the General
Assembly (see A/73/PV.27) in which he said that Libya
is committed to the fight against impunity.

However, because of the security situation, justice
at the national level is often delayed. Until the Libyan
authorities can prosecute all international crimes at
the national level, the ICC must ensure accountability
for the international crimes committed in Libya. That
was the mandate that the Council entrusted to the ICC
many years ago, and that the Council must help the ICC
to achieve. I hear criticisms that the investigation is
not advancing quickly enough. But when the Council
makes referrals, we should continue to work together to
follow up on their implementation and should help the
ICC to achieve its goals.

With regard to my third point, which is about
accountability, we welcome the ICC's efforts to
investigate whether crimes against migrants fall within
its jurisdiction, and we are keen to see progress in that
area. We deeply regret that Mr. Al-Werfalli and other
suspects have not been arrested and brought to The
Hague, especially considering the recent murders that
Mr. Al-Werfalli has allegedly committed, showing that
a lack of accountability encourages the repetition of
crimes. Without fear of punishment, perpetrators will
feel free to commit further offences. We find it even
more alarming that Mr. Al-Werfalli was reportedly
released after just one day in custody. The fact that he
remains at large constitutes complete disregard of the
Council and the international community as a whole.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands stands firmly by
Prosecutor Bensouda in her fight, and ours, against
impunity. But only if we are all fully committed to that
goal can we make accountability a reality in Libya and
around the world.

