Mr. Gonzato (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir, for

giving me the floor in this debate on Haiti. The European
Union (EU) has always had the honour of participating
in meetings on this item. The candidate countries the
Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania, and the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova align themselves with this statement.

First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, for his
briefing and the Permanent Representative of Haiti for
his intervention.

Since July 2018, Haiti has been in a deep
multidimensional crisis at the institutional, economic,
social, financial and security levels. The European
Union is concerned about the overall situation in the
country, which, faced with major urgent challenges,
has been waiting for almost seven months for the new
Government to be ratified. While the positions of
political actors are becoming more radical, the country
and its institutions are breaking down. At the political
level, the opposition and civil society have exerted
strong pressure since July 2018 in an attempt to force
President Moise to resign. Other political, civil society
and business actors have demanded a genuine national
dialogue that, unfortunately, after several unsuccessful
attempts, has yet to take place. In recent weeks, the
country's economy has stalled and the security situation
has deteriorated significantly.

The President's recent proposal to respond to
political violence through dialogue has been rejected
by demonstrators who no longer trust the discredited
Government. For several weeks now, the President's
public appearances have been extremely rare. His
statement on 25 September, calling for dialogue,
and his proposal on how to resolve the crisis had no
positive effect. In the light of the repeated failure of the
executive's attempts at dialogue, since early this year
the European Union has initiated meetings with several
parliamentarians from both the moderate and the more
radical opposition. The objective was to try to identify
the bottlenecks, expectations and scope for discussion
that the opposition would be open to in order to break
the deadlock. The EU also actively participated in the
meetings of the core group on Haiti, together with the
Ambassadors of Germany, Spain and France.

As stated in the benchmarks for an exit strategy
set by the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), a consensual and far-reaching
reform of the electoral system is a key element not only
in preventing further institutional crises, but also in
rebuilding a strong link between elected officials and
voters and thereby regaining the trust of the population.
The elections scheduled for 27 October have been
postponed indefinitely owing to the continued lack of
an electoral law and budget and to the current climate of
tension. Without elections, the terms of one-third of the
Senate, the entire Lower Chamber and all local elected
officials will expire in January 2020. The European
Union remains a loyal partner of the Republic of Haiti
and resolve to support the country in this period of deep
crisis, in coordination with the other partners.

The European Union appreciates and backs the
work of MINUJUSTH in support of the development of
the Haitian National Police (HNP), the justice system,
the rule of law and the defence and promotion of human
rights. Any State based on the rule of law that hopes
to be at least minimally effective in upholding the law
needs an effective law enforcement system that respects
human rights.

In that context, during the 15 years of United
Nations presence in Haiti - first through the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, then
MINUJUSTH - much attention has been devoted to
the development and training of the Haitian National
Police. Although it is one of the few remaining
stable institutions amid a widespread institutional
crisis, the force's size - 15,000 staff for 11 million
inhabitants, in other words three times fewer than
in Europe - equipment and intervention capacity
remain grossly insufficient. Of particular concern is
the Haitian National Police and national authorities'
continued inability, amid allegations of collusion and
other shortcomings, to control gang violence. We
therefore consider it essential to complete the work
of strengthening and professionalizing the Haitian
National Police while preserving its autonomy and
political neutrality. At the same time, we must continue
to stress the importance of reforming and strengthening
justice and the prison system, as well as of upholding
human rights. The EU is monitoring the legal follow-
up to the extreme violence that took place in La Saline
last year.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the European
Union's appreciation for MINUJUSTH's contribution
to security, conflict prevention and consolidating
democracy and the rule of law in Haiti. The real
challenge now lies in the Haitian National Police's
lack of resources. It is essential that the police and
the Haitian judicial system be prepared and equipped
to assume all tasks currently being carried out by the
United Nations mission. It is important that the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti have the necessary
staff and resources to help the Government to confront
the multiple security issues, including the possibility
of reviewing its mandate if the situation continues
to deteriorate.

Together with the United Nations and the
international community, the EU will support the
country in its efforts to secure a better future of peace,
democracy, stability and well-being for the entire
Haitian population.

The meeting rose at 12.10p.m.
