Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I should like to
thank the French presidency of the Security Council
for having organized this timely debate. I should like
also to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Minister Tshibanda for their comprehensive briefings.
The issues that they raised and the approach they
suggested should guide us in today's deliberations. We
hope that today's debate will determine the contours of
the international community's approach to sustaining
the progress made so far in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

I would like to join others in expressing our
deepest regret over the tragic crash of an airplane
contracted to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) on 4 April in Kinshasa, which
resulted in the loss of 33 passengers and crew
members, including United Nations staff. We express
our heartfelt condolences to those who lost their loved
ones, colleagues and friends.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is
witnessing a critical period in its history. The progress
achieved so far in restoring peace and stability needs to
be consolidated by entrenching democratic values,
focusing on improving security and the rule of law, and
adopting policies conducive to the overall economic
development of the country. The challenges are indeed
difficult, but not insurmountable.

The holding of credible elections this year would
go a long way towards sustaining stability in the
country. We hope that the elections will be held
according to the timetable in a free and fair manner.
The National Independent Electoral Commission has
already started work on voter registration,
consultations with opposition parties and a code of
conduct. Civil society, the media and
non-governmental organizations should support the
Commission in creating awareness among the
population.

India, as the largest democracy in the world,
strongly believes in the importance of creating
effective, representative, democratic institutions to
address the problems of society. The international
community, including the United Nations and
MONUSCO, should help the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in conducting the
elections.

Long-term peace and stability cannot be sustained
without security, which can be ensured only by the
effective enforcement of the rule of law. Today, most
parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo except
the eastern region are free of the conflict that the
country endured during the civil war. The presence of
armed groups in the eastern provinces of the Kivus,
Maniema and Katanga pose a serious threat to the
existence of State authorities and their capacity to
protect civilians. Unabated acts of violence by
elements of armed groups, such as the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda, the Forces
nationales de liberation and the Mayi-Mayi
Yakutumba, are a matter of serious concern. The
situation has been further aggravated by human rights
violations and sexual violence committed by elements
of the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo. The involvement of various armed groups,
including some elements of the security forces, in
illegal mining is also worrisome. Furthermore, the
menace of the Lord's Resistance Army is not limited to
Orientale province, but is affecting the entire region.
We are also gravely concerned over the precarious
humanitarian situation.
The focus should therefore be on the effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of various armed groups. The success achieved so far
in the DDR process should be sustained, and issues of
impunity dealt with. We are glad to note that the
reforms in the security, police and justice sectors -
starting with training and sensitization to human rights
issues, effective prosecution and expeditious judicial
process - are indeed priorities for the Government.

Security and law-and-order issues are
intrinsically linked to economic development. It is now
time for the international community to look beyond
peacekeeping and to help the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in their
peacebuilding efforts, including investments in
agriculture, infrastructure and industry, towards overall
economic development.

MONUSCO peacekeepers have been doing
commendable work in the most difficult circumstances.
The soldier-to-population and soldier-to-land-area
ratios are extremely low in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where MONUSCO is largely
deployed. There is an urgent need for the Council to
address the issue of resource gaps for MONUSCO,
because security, the rule of law, institution-building
and effective governance are processes that will have
to be pursued simultaneously by the Mission. An
integrated approach incorporating these objectives
requires the cooperation of all stakeholders and the
provision of adequate resources by the international
community.

India has had a long association with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as one of the major
troop-contributing countries over the past five decades.
Our first presence in the country dates as far back as
March 1961 during the crisis in Katanga province.
Currently, our contribution to MONUSCO stands at
4,318 troops. Keeping in mind the resource gap in
MONUSCO, we extended the service of our six utility
helicopters until April this year. We continue to extend
the services of four combat helicopters beyond the
commitment period.

The Indian contingent has made significant
contributions to the humanitarian and development
activities in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including building and rehabilitating
community centres and vocational training schools, as
well as setting up laboratories for information
technology training and building markets. In the course
of India's involvement in peacekeeping operations in
the Congo, 36 of our soldiers have made the supreme
sacrifice.

In addition to its contribution to MONUSCO,
India has also cooperated with the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in development
programmes. We have lines of credit worth $318
million for such projects as power generation, railways,
rural water supply and the supply of buses. We have
also offered to set up an information technology centre
of excellence and three learning stations under the
Hole-in-the-Wall computer education project in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. India offers 70
training slots for short- and medium-term technical
courses, and 10 slots for longer-term professional
courses. The two countries are cooperating in building
low-cost housing.

India remains committed to playing its part in
supporting the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in strengthening and building the
capacities of its national institutions in the security and
civilian areas.

