Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we convey our most sincere condolences to the
people of Haiti and to the personnel of international
organizations at this time of tragedy.

I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important discussion and for this opportunity to engage
in an exchange of views with representatives of
regional and subregional organizations on cooperation
between the United Nations and such organizations in
maintaining international peace and security. We thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his participation in
this meeting and for his valuable contribution. We
welcome the representatives of regional organizations;
we appreciate their presence at today's meeting.

The authors of the Charter of the United Nations
devoted an entire chapter 4 Chapter VIII 4 to
regional organizations and indicated their role in the
maintenance of international peace and security, noting
that this role was complementary to that of the United
Nations. Hence the importance of this cooperation and
of the added value these organizations bring. A number
of examples may be drawn from current international
relations, the most recent among them on the African
continent. These examples show the importance of
regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, whether in terms of
deploying peacekeeping forces or of dispatching
representatives to the field to participate in political
processes and serve as mediators in conflict situations.

The success of these efforts is based on the fact
that these organizations are in close proximity to the
conflicts taking place in their respective regions. Their
historical, geographic, social and cultural ties enable
them to understand the background of a conflict and to
find the best path to a peaceful resolution. Moreover,
such organizations have special motivations to address
conflicts on the ground.

Regional and subregional organizations play a
role during three phases: prior to the outbreak of a
conflict, to engage in preventive diplomacy; during a
conflict, to lessen and contain its effects and bring
about a peaceful settlement; and following a conflict,
to participate in peacebuilding. We believe it very
important that additional memorandums of
understanding and other arrangements be signed
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, taking into account the
capacities and responsibilities of each, with a view to
setting out a clear, effective framework for cooperation
and coordination mechanisms for promoting dialogue
and exchanges of expertise. It is also necessary to
broaden the framework of cooperation to encompass
disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, along with economic and social,
cultural and environmental issues. Such efforts are
extremely valuable in addressing the root causes of
crises.

We welcome the efforts that have been made in
this area. In our view, there should be an annual
meeting between the Security Council and
representatives of regional and subregional
organizations in order to assess cooperation, identify
lessons learned and formulate future policies.
Multilateral cooperation requires the exchange of
expertise, information and lessons learned both with
respect to peacekeeping operations and to a variety of
newer tasks such as election monitoring.

Lebanon encourages the provision of material
support for regional organizations. They deserve such
resources to enable them to carry out their missions.
Also needed is greater interest in technical training and
human resource development for those organizations.
There must be coordination meetings between the
United Nations and the secretariats of regional
organizations, and among the latter.

Lebanon calls for greater coordination and
cooperation between the League of Arab States and the
United Nations. The League covers a broad area of the
world, encompassing more than 22 States ranging from
West Africa to the Atlantic Ocean. That region
continues to be the theatre of many conflicts and great
suffering. The most salient is the Israeli-Arab conflict,
which has been on the agenda of the Security Council
for a very long time. Promoting cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States could
help realize the Organization's goals of the
maintenance of international peace and security,
through the implementation of international law and of
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions, in
particular with respect to bringing an end to occupation
and ensuring the right of self-determination.

There is little need to recall that the Arab Peace
Initiative offered by the League of Arab States during
its 2002 summit in Beirut, aimed at achieving a just
and comprehensive settlement of the Middle East
conflict, is an essential initiative. There is little need to
recall that, in the context of the issue of Israel's nuclear
weapons and the prevention of a nuclear arms race in
the Middle East, the League of Arab States was among
the first organizations to call for a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East.

Lebanon continues also to be committed to
enhancing cooperation and coordination with the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, which
encompasses more than 1.4 billion Muslims
worldwide, given the growing urgency of dialogue
between cultures and religions. Such a dialogue is even
more urgent today than in the past.

Finally, we thank the Chinese delegation for
having prepared a draft presidential statement for
adoption by the Security Council; we endorse that text.

