Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his statement and commend
his personal commitment to disarmament and
non-proliferation.

I would also like to thank you, Madam President,
for organizing this debate. Three years after the
Council's groundbreaking summit on nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation of September 2009
(see S/PV.6191) and the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1887 (2009), it is important that the Council
address once again the issue of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their delivery
systems, which continues to be one of the chief threats
to international peace and security.

Three years ago, along with the other heads of
State and Government at the Council summit on
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, the
President of France reiterated our commitment to
seeking a safer world for all and to working with all
States to establish the conditions necessary for a
nuclear-weapon-free world, in accordance with the
aims of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). Various successes and initiatives
testify to the new momentum that the international
community has demonstrated since then. I am thinking,
first of all, of the success of the NPT Review
Conference held in May 2010. The adoption by
consensus of a concrete, balanced Action Plan based on
the three pillars of the Treaty - disarmament,
non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear
power - and on the Middle East, was a result of major
importance. It demonstrated the shared commitment of

the international community to strengthening the
international non-proliferation regime, and is testament
to its deep appreciation for the NPT, an irreplaceable
instrument of our collective security.

That Action Plan is our shared road map for the
years ahead; its implementation is the responsibility of
all of us. It is up to each State party to fulfil its part of
that contract so that we can move towards a safer
world. France, together with its partners, the other four
permanent members of the Council, is ready to
shoulder its responsibilities.

We have made significant efforts with regard to
nuclear disarmament, including quantitative
reductions, irreversible steps, transparency and
confidence-building measures, and having to do with
doctrine.

Our willingness to work with other nuclear-
weapon States is also quite clear. In July 2011 in Paris,
France organized the first meeting of the five
permanent members of the Security Council (P-5) to
follow up the Review Conference of the States Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. That successful meeting made it possible
once again to underscore the determination of the five
nuclear-weapon States to pursue the implementation of
concrete efforts aimed at ensuring full respect for the
commitments undertaken with regard to the Treaty.

I also welcome the progress made during the
discussions among the P-5 and the member countries
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations with
regard to the Protocol to the Bangkok Treaty on the
creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South-East
Asia. We hope that the Protocol will be signed very
soon.

Moreover, I welcome the fact that the United
States and the Russian Federation, the two countries
whose arsenals constitute almost 95 per cent of the
world's nuclear weapons, agreed on important steps
with the signing and entry into force of the New
START agreement. We also welcome the recent
ratifications of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty, in particular by Indonesia, which is an annex 2
State, as well as by Guatemala.

Additional success in other disarmament areas
should also be underscored, such as the entry into force
of the Oslo Convention on Cluster Munitions and the
positive outcome last December of the Review
Conference of the Biological Weapons Convention.

Some progress was also possible with regard to
non-proliferation, including new ratifications of the
Additional Protocol, the 10-year extension of the
mandate of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) by resolution 1977 (2011), and
developments in the Nuclear Suppliers Group. And, of
course, we welcome the fact that, a few days following
the Seoul Summit, meaningful efforts were made at the
highest level to improve nuclear security and to better
understand the threat posed by nuclear terrorism and
the need to secure the most vulnerable sources. Those
efforts must be pursued in the run-up to the third
Summit, to be held in the Netherlands in 2014.

With regard to the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, many initiatives have been launched to
promote nuclear safety following the accident at
Fukushima. In that regard, I have in mind the adoption
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
Action Plan on Nuclear Security. France actively
contributed to the Plan, in particular by organizing, in
June 2011 in Paris, an international seminar on nuclear
safety.

Lastly, with regard to the implementation of the
1995 resolution on the Middle East, the preparatory
process led by the facilitator, Ambassador Jaakko
Laajava, is moving in the right direction. We should all
work together on conditions conducive to the holding
of the Conference this year with all the stakeholders
concerned.

All those efforts will be in vain if we do not
respond to the current challenges facing the
non-proliferation regime, and especially if we do not
firmly address the serious proliferation crises before
the Council. The number one priority is combating
proliferation. Let us be clear: nuclear proliferation
threatens the security of all. By undermining mutual
confidence, it poses an obstacle to the development of
civil nuclear cooperation. It also slows down progress
on nuclear disarmament.

In order that the right of the vast majority of
States to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy not be put
into question, the international community must deal
firmly with those who violate the common rules.
Above all, that means responding to the major
proliferation crises before the Council. The situation
since September 2009 has not improved - far from it.
In November 2010, a secret enrichment
programme was uncovered in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, in violation of resolutions 1718
(2006) and 1874 (2009). As we know, with the
launching of a missile in recent days, the Council was
faced a new violation of those resolutions.

With regard to Iran, last Saturday in Istanbul the
E3+3 resumed discussions with that country on its
nuclear programme. The E3+3 were once again united
in its determination to carry out a serious dialogue with
Iran, with the goal of ensuring that the country
responds to the concerns of the international
community with regard to the nature of its programme
and that it fully respects its international obligations.
Future discussions will be important. Iran must take
concrete steps to restore confidence, in accordance
with the resolutions of the Council and of the IAEA
Board of Governors.

More generally speaking, strengthening the
non-proliferation regime is also a priority, including
universalizing the IAEA safeguards system, in
particular by general acceptance of the additional
protocol. Lastly, we must take concrete steps to halt the
spread of proliferation and continue our efforts to
combat the threat posed by nuclear and radiological
terrorism.

Secondly, we should also pursue disarmament
efforts in every area. I should recall that France fully
meets its responsibilities under article VI of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
We are prepared to continue those efforts but, as
recalled in resolution 1887 (2009), all of us should
make progress together. Every State, whether it has
nuclear weapons or not and whether or not it is a party
to the NPT, should contribute to disarmament by
creating the necessary security environment and
making progress in all areas of disarmament.

With regard to nuclear disarmament in particular,
there is indeed a need for reductions but, first of all,
there is a need to stop arming. In addition to halting
nuclear tests, that entails that all States concerned put
an end to the production of fissile material for nuclear
weapons and to dismantle the relevant facilities, as
France has already done. That also requires that we
step up our efforts to ensure that all States that have
not yet done so ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty and that the Disarmament Commission
immediately start negotiations on a treaty banning the
production of fissile material for nuclear weapons.

Thirdly, and lastly, we must ensure the
responsible and sustainable development of civil
nuclear energy. In order to overcome the challenges of
climate change, we cannot deprive ourselves of the
contribution of nuclear energy. However, the
Fukushima accident has reminded us that it is not
possible to use nuclear energy without public
confidence. It also shows the degree to which we need
to strengthen safety rules throughout the world, as well
as to put in place national and international capabilities
to respond in the event of an accident. That is the
reason that we should apply the most rigorous
standards in the areas of non-proliferation, nuclear
safety and security, and environmental protection, all
the while promoting universal adherence to the
conventions in force on nuclear responsibility.

Those are all things we can do, not in the distant
future but in the months and years to come, in order to
together create a safer world.

