Ms. Honore Braithwaite (spoke in French): I would
like to thank France for convening today's meeting on
the situation in Haiti in its capacity as President of the
Security Council,

I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the presence in the Council of the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Haiti.

(spoke in English)

I would like to thank all Council members for their
unwavering support to Haiti's stabilization process and
the work of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in

Haiti (MINUSTAH) since the Mission's establishment
by resolution 1542 (2004), adopted in April 2004.

When MINUSTAH was established, Haiti was in
a profound state of instability and widespread political
violence, and a climate of lawlessness and impunity had
affected the everyday life of millions of Haitians. State
authority was weak and limited to parts of the capital,
Port-au-Prince, with the three branches of power either
non-functional or non-existent and a national police
that was overwhelmed by the multiple threats to public
order and the rule of law.

Today, 13 and a half years later, on the eve of
MINUSTAH's closure and transition to a smaller
peacekeeping Mission, the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), on
15 October, Haiti has a very different outlook,
despite the many challenges still facing the country.
The Haitian people enjoy a considerable degree of
security and greater stability; political violence has
diminished considerably; and armed gangs no longer
hold the population hostage, also thanks to the work
of the National Police, now 14,000 strong, which has
grown significantly in numbers and capacity. All three
branches of power are in place, with the executive and
legislative branches restored to full functioning, while
the Superior Council of the Judiciary, created for the
first time in 2012, remains in need of long-term fixes
to allow it to fully play its role as the guardian of an
independent and impartial judicial system.

These democratic institutions are complemented
by the directly elected officials now in place at all
levels of governance, for the first time in 10 years,
denoting real progress in the implementation of the
constitutional governance system. At the heart of these
achievements stood the creation of stable political
conditions, without which none of the aforementioned
would have been possible.

There is no doubt that those achievements, and many
others that I have not mentioned, while significant, are
only initial steps. Tireless efforts will be required not
only by the Haitian authorities but by all Haitian actors
to consolidate these gains, ensure continued political
stability, sustain and reinforce the functioning of the
democratic institutions and further improve their
delivery in the interest of the Haitian people, with
the continued support of Haiti's international friends
and partners.

It is against this background that I am encouraged
by the overall direction that the current Administration
has adopted. President Jovenel Moise has reiterated his
determination to transform and modernize the State to
better serve the people and has taken initial steps to
translate this overarching objective into deliverables,
especially through the launch and expansion of the
Government's flagship development programme, the
Caravan of Change, which aims to enhance State delivery
and revitalize the economy by increasing agricultural
production and improving living conditions, especially
in rural areas. In the same spirit, since his inauguration,
the President has initiated steps towards financial
austerity, spoken out against corruption and presented
the contours of an institutional reform agenda aimed at
enhancing political stability, while outlining ideas for a
nationwide dialogue on Haiti's future.

Immediate improvements, however, have yet to be
felt by the vast majority of the population, particularly
in poor urban areas, and the political situation
remains fragile. A little more than eight months into
the presidential term, the widely contested 2017/2018
budget, stalled indirect elections and disagreements
over the re-establishment of the armed forces, coupled
with the known weaknesses in State institutions, as
well as the absence of significant improvement in the
difficult living conditions of much of the population,
have reopened some divisions between the executive
and some segments of the political opposition.

The reform agenda presented by the Government
and its continued collaborative relations with the
Legislature, which are necessary for the adoption of
a package of key legislation, are promising signs for
further progress. However, amid a climate of widespread
economic grievances and strained relations between
the executive branch and the political opposition, the
maintenance of stability in the longer run may depend
on the ability and commitment of the Administration
to move more swiftly in undertaking concrete action
and implementing the promised reforms on the basis of
dialogue with different sectors of society and under a
unified national vision.

In this context, and with a view to consolidating
political stability, a steady pace of concrete steps
towards a broad institutional reform process is key.
Such a reform process has to aim at the strengthening
of the country's democratic structures and should
be based on a dialogue that adds the voices of other
national sectors, including political parties, both pro-
Government and opposition. But these voices also need
to be open to political consensus, which is vital for any
reform process.

I am convinced that the country can still make full
use of the current window of opportunity created by
the stabilization efforts of the past decade, including
with the support provided through MINUSTAH and
the near-completion of the 2015-2017 electoral process.
It is, however, of utmost importance that the divisions
that have re-emerged be addressed so as to prevent
any relapse into political instability. The most urgent
task confronting Haiti today consists of ensuring the
conditions for continued stability, thereby enabling
long-term socioeconomic development. It would be
difficult to meet these conditions without the rule of
law and human rights for all Haitian citizens; without
a fully functioning and independent judiciary and a
non-politicized Haitian National Police; and without
the independent management of other governance
institutions provided for by the Constitution, including a
Constitutional Council, a Permanent Electoral Council
and councils established through indirect elections,
from which all Haitians can benefit.

MINUJUSTH becomes operational four days
from now and stands ready to play an effective
role, alongside the United Nations country team, in
supporting the consolidation of the country's stability,
including through support for the implementation
of institutional reforms to bolster the rule of law and
human rights and enhance governance. I trust that,
as was the case for MINUSTAH, the Haitian people
and Government will extend their cooperation and
partnership to MINUJUSTH in the next two years.
The timely adoption of a legal framework regulating
MINUJUSTH's status will be an important step in
that regard. The coordinated support that the United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes can provide,
alongside the Special Envoy for Haiti, appointed by the
Secretary-General on 20 June to assist Haiti in achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals, including in the
area of health, as well as in water and sanitation, to
eliminate the transmission of cholera, will also be key in
supporting the country on its path towards sustainable
development. The United Nations will continue to make
every effort to assist the Government in alleviating the
suffering caused by the cholera epidemic.

This being my last meeting as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of MINUSTAH,
please allow me to thank the Secretary-General for the
trust that he placed in me, and the Security Council
and all Member States and international partners,
including police- and troop-contributing countries,
the Group of Friends, and the diplomatic corps and the
Core Group on Haiti, for the guidance and support that
they have provided throughout my tenure and that of
my predecessors.

The achievements of the United Nations in Haiti
would not have been possible without my colleagues in
MINUSTAH and in the United Nations country team.
I am deeply indebted to them and thank them for their
dedication to the work in Haiti, their robust counsel and
genuine commitment. It has been an honour to serve
under the flag of the United Nations and to support Haiti
and the Haitian people in the creation of conditions
that have ultimately allowed the Council to decide on
the closure on 15 October of MINUSTAH and on the
transition to MINUJUSTH.

(spoke in French)

My most heartfelt thanks go to the Haitian people
and Government for their continued cooperation and
confidence. It has been an honour to support this
beautiful country and its entire population in the fully
Haitian process of consolidating peace and democracy.

(spoke in English)

Looking ahead, I have no doubt that, under the
leadership of the Haitian authorities and guided by the
aspirations of the Haitian people for political stability,
the rule of law and prosperity, the continued partnership
between Haiti, the international community and the
United Nations will contribute to the sustainability of
the progress achieved during the past 13 years in Haiti's
stabilization and democratization process.

