Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We, too, are pleased to welcome to this
meeting today in the Security Council Mr. Steiner and
Mr. Covie. Their participation in our debate makes it
constructive and business-like, as it always is when
they participate.

The Secretary-General's report on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) gives a full picture of the situation in that
part of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We agree
with the report's main assessments and conclusions. At
the same time, however, we feel that the situation in
Kosovo is more complex and problematic. We agree
that we can be pleased today about certain progress
made in implementing Security Council resolution
1244 (1999), and we welcome the normalization of life
in Kosovo. There are grounds for saying the Mission
has been successful, as can be seen most of all in
further dialogue with Belgrade, in movement towards
resolving the problem of Mitrovica and in the
increasingly practical participation by the Serbian
communities in the upcoming municipal elections. It is
important to settle the matter of how Serbs can

participate in the Kosovo Police Service in the northern
area.

Another step in the right direction was UNMIK
efforts to encourage Kosovars with legal expertise to
join the judiciary being set up in Kosovo. In that
connection, we greatly appreciate the efforts made by
Mr. Steiner, the Special Representative, in moving
these positive trends further forward. We can also say
generally that UNMIK has moved ahead in establishing
the provisional institutions of self-government. The
Government has been formed and is functioning; the
Serbian ministries, the President and the Assembly are
also functioning.

At the same time, despite statements about being
committed to multi-ethnicity, in practice those
institutions often disregard the interests of the
minorities. The latest example of that was the
exclusion - due to the position taken by the Albanian
majority - of any reference to the University of
Northern Kosovo in the law on higher education
adopted by the Assembly on 25 July. The Coalition for
Return, on recommendations made by UNMIK, has set
up a mechanism to protect minorities, in accordance
with the Constitutional Framework. In the interest of
seeking a proper settlement, the Albanian parties
should be more respectful of the rights of other
communities. That is particularly important in the light
of the upcoming elections.

We welcome more regular contacts between the
Special Representative and the leadership of the
Coalition for Return in order to discuss the problems of
the Serbian community in Kosovo. We believe that the
dialogue between Mr. Steiner and the leader of the
Yugoslav Coordination Centre in Kosovo, Mr. Covic', is
yielding results. They are close to completing work on
an agreement that will include recognition by the
Yugoslav authorities of UNMIK car license plates. The
parties have also begun to discuss the question of
decentralizing the local self-government system in
Kosovo.

It is important that UNMIK is taking measures to
strengthen law and order. A positive development was
the arrest of former members of the Kosovo Liberation
Army (KLA). Since the beginning of this year three
cases have been opened, which involve 17 persons,
including members of the Kosovo Protection Corps
(KPC) and the Kosovo Police Service. At the same
time, a matter of concern is the fact that there has been
a critical response to what the KPC is doing to the
international presence. Attempts were made to discredit
the work of the international presence. It is no secret to
anyone that the KPC is still a paramilitary organization
that is simply an offshoot of the KLA.

Therefore, we find incomprehensible the position
of KFOR, which virtually supports the status of the
KPC. Otherwise, how can it be explained that in June,
with KFOR leadership present, there was a ceremony
to award military rank to KPC members, which
included the rank of General? I must say that that
ceremony was hardly suggestive of a civilian
undertaking.

We must also refer to continuing problems in
other areas of the settlement process. Local self-
government matters are still proving difficult. The
status of local organs must be resolved in a way that
facilitates respect for minorities' rights.

Regarding refugees - Mr. Steiner and Mr. Covie
both drew attention to that situation - the statistics on
the return of refugees and displaced persons to Kosovo
suggest that about 1,000 people returned to the
province in the first six months of this year. Serbs
accounted for less than one half of the returnees. It is
typical of the situation that there was an outflow of
persons from the province at the same time. So at this
point we cannot talk about any substantial progress
having been made in this regard. It is simply not
possible to discuss establishing a multinational
democratic Kosovo unless the refugee problem is
resolved.

The main reason for the lack of movement is the
absence of real and equal security for all national
communities. There are also serious problems
regarding freedom of movement for non-Albanians.
The Secretary-General's report mentions - and this is
not coincidental - specific cases, which are far from
being isolated cases, in which stones were thrown at
the cars of Kosovar Serbs. There are other, similar
examples of this kind of thing.

In the context of a Kosovo settlement, we must
look at external factors also. For example, one of the
tasks before the Special Representative is preventive
political work with representatives of Kosovar
Albanians regarding the confirmed demarcation of the
Yugoslav-Macedonian border. We believe generally
that external relations of the provisional institutions of
self-government of Kosovo must proceed in strict
accordance with the provisional Constitutional
Framework and must fully respect the principle of
respect for the sovereignty and the territorial integrity
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Preventive
action in this regard and closer monitoring of the
activities of the institutions of the province and its
representatives by UNMIK and Mr. Steiner personally
are needed.

We believe this recent overall positive dynamic in
the situation in the Balkans must be reinforced. There
has been a constructive dialogue between Serbia and
Montenegro, gradual movement towards a settlement in
Macedonia, further normalization of relations between
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Croatia, and
progress in other processes as well. We are convinced
that all of that can and must become a powerful
impetus for an overall settlement in Kosovo, in
conformity with Council resolution 1244 (1999).

