I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons and Mr. Saad Mohseni for their briefings, and the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Raz, for her statement. I also thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/809). The volatile security situation in Afghanistan remains alarming. The continuing violence has devastating repercussions for all Afghans, in particular for vulnerable groups, which have already suffered immensely for decades. The Secretary-General reports that the security situation in the country puts the lives of children at risk more than those of any other group. The United Nations verified more than 600 child casualties during the second quarter of 2020 alone. The conflict also continues to take a heavy toll on women and girls. The deliberate targeting of civilians and humanitarian workers is a stark reminder that those who wish to derail the peace process have no scruples about violating even the most fundamental human values. We strongly condemn these attacks and reaffirm our full support for Afghanistan in its fight against terrorism. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has increased the vulnerability of the civilian population by deepening poverty and reducing access to essential services. The provision of sustained health services to those in need remains all the more critical, which requires collective effort and cooperation by the Afghan Government and the international community. The spread of the COVID-19 pandemic in Afghanistan serves to further underscore the urgency of reducing violence in the country. An effective fight against the pandemic and the stability of Afghanistan will depend on improved security. In the face of such enormous challenges, Afghanistan needs the international community's support more than ever. With this understanding, Turkey has delivered health-care assistance to Afghanistan as a solid display of its solidarity with the Afghan people and as another reflection of the deep-rooted relations between Turkey and Afghanistan, on the eve of their 100th anniversary next year. There is now a historic chance for peace in Afghanistan. The Afghan people urgently need a sustainable peace, and the opportunity presented by the current momentum must be seized. At this critical juncture, unity has become even more essential within Afghan political groups in order to master the challenging tasks ahead for the future of Afghanistan. We stress the importance of an inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process. We welcomed and supported the United States-Taliban agreement of 29 February, with a view to paving the way for the intra-Afghan negotiations aimed at achieving a just and lasting peace in the country. Peace should be built on the gains of the past 19 years. We should preserve and strengthen respect for fundamental rights. All our efforts towards the empowerment of women and girls should not be wasted. We fully embrace the international community's call for an immediate humanitarian ceasefire, which is essential to creating a conducive environment for the peace talks. Regional consensus is a must for an enduring peace. At the same time, we see a proliferation of initiatives and formats seeking to ensure regional and international support for an eventual peace. Existing platforms that enjoy a vast membership and great expertise, such as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, can be utilized as an umbrella platform at this critical time, as well as to assist post-peace stabilization efforts. Let me emphasize Turkey's readiness to contribute to peace efforts in its national capacity or through regional processes. In the run-up to the Geneva conference, we expect that donors will also consider the increasing needs on the ground in the face of the pandemic. For the years 2018 to 2020, Turkey has pledged $150 million for Afghanistan's development. From 2018 to date, we have conducted almost 300 projects throughout the country, focusing primarily on education, health, good governance, capacity-building and agriculture. We will continue to play our part in helping the Afghan people, particularly in terms of capacity-building, education for girls and developing health infrastructure. Let me also emphasize our strong support for the central role assumed by the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in assisting the Afghan people in various fields. We hope that the negotiations regarding the renewal of its mandate will be finalized successfully so as to enable UNAMA to continue with its critical activities. Finally, Turkey reaffirms its strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Afghanistan. We remain committed to Afghanistan's development on all fronts, and we will continue to support the Afghan people's aspirations to a peaceful, secure and stable future.
