Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
join my Security Council colleagues in welcoming the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Lamberto Zannier; the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremie; and the Foreign Minister
of Kosovo, Mr. Skander Hyseni. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report on recent
developments in Kosovo (S/2010/401) and to
commend the important work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in promoting stability and reconciliation in Kosovo. I
would also like to thank Mr. Zannier for his continued
leadership and hard work.

The United Kingdom's support for Kosovo's
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
remains as strong as ever. We welcome the recent
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,
which, in response to the question put to it by the
General Assembly, confirmed that Kosovo's
declaration of independence was in accordance with
international law. Our understanding of the opinion
differs from Serbia's. In particular, the opinion does
not create a precedent. Kosovo is a unique case. Its
independence is contingent on its particular facts. It
does not provide a template for secession elsewhere.

The legal process before the International Court
of Justice has now come to an end, and that must also
mean an end to debate about Kosovo's status. Kosovo
has now been functioning as an independent State for
over two and half years. It is increasingly recognized
as such. Sixty-nine United Nations Member States
have now recognized Kosovo. This progress is
irreversible. The world's youngest country is a viable,
independent State with a clear future in the European
Union - a future recently reaffirmed by all 27 States
members of the European Union. We believe that the
opinion of the International Court of Justice will
encourage States that have not yet done so to recognize
Kosovo.

Looking ahead, it is critically important, as
Mr. Zannier noted, that we enter a new phase in
relations between Kosovo and Serbia. We welcome
Kosovo's measured response to the Court's opinion
calling for new dialogue with Serbia. The future of
both countries lies in the European Union, but it is a
future that can be achieved only through reconciliation
and practical cooperation. Together, the two countries
must forge a new path built on the values and standards
of the European Union: democracy, the rule of law and
the peaceful coexistence of States. There must be early
and constructive dialogue between the two States, a
process that the European Union, through Baroness
Ashton, has offered to facilitate. This dialogue would
promote cooperation, achieve progress on the path to
European integration, and improve the lives of the
people of both Kosovo and Serbia. The process of
dialogue in itself would be a factor for peace, security
and stability in the region.

But we must be equally clear about what is not
possible. There can be no return to negotiations on
either Kosovo's status or its existing borders. Any
attempt to go down this path would look Serbia into
confrontation with those that have recognized Kosovo.
Any attempt to encourage the partition of Kosovo or
status talks would be against the long-term interests of
the citizens of both Kosovo and Serbia. It could trigger
wider instability in the region. The United Kingdom
will strongly resist any such attempt. Kosovo, as an
independent State within the territory defined by its
existing borders, is a positive force for stability in the
Western Balkans.

We look to Serbia to take up the European
Union's offer and proceed with a constructive period of
dialogue. We are, however, concerned by recent
Serbian statements and actions which imply that Serbia
is not considering engagement with the European
Union in this process. We very much regret that Serbia
did not allow more time for consultations with the
European Union before submitting its draft resolution
in the General Assembly. Serbia's draft resolution is
unacceptable because it will not promote the
development of a constructive relationship between
Serbia and Kosovo.

The last three months have seen further progress
in Kosovo. The violence in Mitrovica in early July was
regrettable, but we welcome the prompt response from
the Kosovo Police and the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). As the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/401) has highlighted, there
has been an overall decrease in the number of security
incidents. This reporting period has seen clear and
decisive action against organized crime and corruption
from EULEX in partnership with the Government of
Kosovo.

Serious challenges remain ahead for the rule of
law in Kosovo. Kosovo must remain committed to
driving through the necessary reforms, but steps such
as the recent inauguration of the anti-corruption task
force are encouraging. Both EULEX and the Kosovo
Force remain important for stability in Kosovo. We
continue to fully support the essential work that they
undertake. It is vital that both Serbia and Kosovo
cooperate closely with both missions. Stability,
security, the rule of law and governance are the
fundamental rights of all of Kosovo's communities.
With due regard to recent events, it is nevertheless
crucial that an agreement be reached on the opening of
the Mitrovica courthouse and customs arrangements in
the North.

Kosovo's and Serbia's futures both lie in their
independent statehood within the European Union. The
United Kingdom remains committed to ensuring that
this European Union perspective is used as a factor for
stability, security and economic progress for the entire
region.
