Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): It is indeed a pleasure to
welcome Ambassador Mahiga to the Security Council
and to listen to his inaugural briefing in his capacity as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for

10-5364]
Somalia. I should like to congratulate him on his
appointment and to wish him success in his new
assignment. We take this opportunity to offer him our
fullest support.

I also welcome the Foreign Minister of Kenya,
whose presentation was not only very frank, but also
most compelling. I thank the Permanent Representative
of Somalia for his very lucid statement.

The briefing that we have heard today once again
paints a mixed picture of Somalia. It is a picture of
hope and a picture of apprehension. On the positive
side, we note with satisfaction that, despite the tensions
within the transitional federal institutions, there was
considerable momentum generated by, among other
things, the high-level meetings of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union summit in Kampala, the appointment of
a new Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and the joint briefings three days ago by the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the United
Nations Support Office for AMISOM.

The formation of a new Cabinet by Prime
Minister Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, which
includes members of Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama'a,
demonstrates the ability of the Government to
accommodate other interests. The momentum, we
believe, could be appropriately utilized to galvanize
more action on the ground that will be beneficial to the
people of Somalia.

There is no way peace will last in Somalia if, as
the Secretary-General states in his report, volatility and
insecurity between the insurgents and Government
forces continue to adversely affect the civilian
population in Mogadishu. The terrorist attack on the
Muna Hotel during the month of Ramadan, which left
over 70 people dead, was both cowardly and
despicable. We deplore both the attack and its
perpetrators. We believe that when all parties commit
to peace and take practical steps to consolidate it, the
desired change will endure in the country. In that
connection, Nigeria welcomes the Secretary-General's
recommendations and believes that, if implemented,
they will have a significant impact in Somalia. The
responsibility for making progress and achieving
results in Somalia lies with all the major stakeholders,
including the Somali people, AMISOM, the Security
Council and all relevant partners.
On AMISOM, the briefing gave a clear indication
that the Mission is on the right track and that its
existing strategies are helping in no small measure to
deal with the challenges in Somalia. Without the
presence of AMISOM, the situation in Somalia would
indeed be hard to imagine. Given AMISOM's
commendable role, concerted efforts should be made to
provide support that is commensurate with the
operational mandates. It is a recipe for failure to
deploy troops without giving them the requisite
support, particularly when that support is available. It
is time, therefore, to rethink our support strategy.

We want to underline the need for AMISOM
forces to be paid the same rates of allowance as United
Nations peacekeepers. Furthermore, troop-contributing
countries should be refunded early for their contingent-
owned equipment. These countries are making
enormous sacrifices to deploy their troops and
equipment in a difficult environment. The Council
should find ways to encourage countries such as
Guinea and Djibouti that are planning to deploy. In this
regard, we strongly appeal to donors that have placed
caveats preventing the use of their contributions for
any expenditure related to the military component of
AMISOM. to remove those caveats in order to free
resources for the reimbursement of AMISOM. troop
contributors. We welcome in particular the Secretary-
General's recommendation that, in order to overcome
the resource gap, the support package for AMISOM
should be identical to the support provided to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We also support his
recommendation that parity be ensured between the
reimbursement rates for AMISOM. and United Nations
contingent personnel.

Nigeria reiterates its support for the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) and welcomes the progress
it has made, despite the difficulties and internal
disputes it faces. The TFG needs broad and all-
encompassing support to implement key transitional
tasks, fight piracy and insurgency, engage in political
dialogue and national reconciliation, and, indeed,
extend its authority within the country, beginning with
Mogadishu. It also requires support in order to engage
in genuine dialogue and sustained consultation.
Without adequate support, the TFG will be unable to
fulfil the transitional agenda, while extremists will be
emboldened to continue their attacks on both the TFG
and AMISOM.
The heinous attacks of 11 July in Kampala by
agents of Al-Shabaab are a grim reminder of how
easily the situation in Somalia could spill over into the
entire region, with dire consequences. This situation
gives rise to the need for concerted and purposeful
support for the TFG. A core aspect of this would be to
stabilize the security environment by reinforcing the
training, equipping and sustenance of the Somali police
force and the national security forces. This will not be
possible if efforts are not made to mobilize resources to
assist Somalia. As the Secretary-General notes in his
report (S/2010/447), the United Nations does not have
the resources to adequately pay the police and civil
servants or to reimburse countries contributing troops
to AMISOM. It is needless to add that the challenges in
Somalia must be able to benefit from the expertise and
efficiency of an integrated United Nations system. We
therefore underscore the need for the integration of the
United Nations system in Somalia.

Nigeria welcomes the strong and continuing
partnership between the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the African Union and the United
Nations in Somalia. Indeed, we owe a debt of gratitude
to the gallant men and women of the military forces of
Uganda and Burundi for their efforts and commitment
to the cause of peace in Somalia. We also take this
opportunity to salute the dedication of international aid
and humanitarian workers in that country.

