Mr. Wetland (Norway): Norway chairs the donor
support group for the Palestinian territory. We take the
floor today to draw attention to the dangers threatening
the foundations of a viable Palestinian State and to
point out that the removal of those dangers and
obstacles could clear the way for the Palestine State
without any further delay.

In recent years, we have witnessed unprecedented
progress in the quality and functioning of Palestinian
institutions, high levels of growth, improved living
conditions and security in the West Bank and the
revival of hope for the people. Those positive trends
were halted in 2011 and are now being reversed. Now,
early in 2012, reduced international financial support
and shrinking private-sector investment are increasing
the budget deficit and creating an acute liquidity crisis
for the Palestinian Authority. Furthermore, the Israeli
occupation undermines the potential for growth. In
particular, the Israeli restrictions of access for
Palestinians hamper economic activity in Area C of the
West Bank. Norway is gravely concerned about the
continued expansion of Israeli settlements in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. The settlement activity is
illegal under international law and a lethal threat to the
two-State solution. The parties have the opportunity to
prove their commitments to a two-State solution
through concrete actions on the ground. In continuing
settlement activities, Israel is doing the opposite. Israel
must stop all settlement construction. The deep
impasse between the parties cannot endure without
undermining the vision of the two-State solution. That
is also why the efforts of Jordan to facilitate talks
within the framework proposed by the Quartet are so
important and must be supported.

The donor support group will reconvene in
Brussels on 21 March. The meeting will discuss how
we can enhance the sustainability of the Palestinian
Authority, how private-sector-led growth can be
strengthened in the Palestinian economy and how the
situation in Gaza can be improved. The following four
points are essential.

First, Palestinian revenues must be increased by a
widening of the tax base and improved tax collection.
Two thirds of such revenues are collected by Israel and
subsequently transferred to the Palestinian Authority
each month. There is scope for improving the
efficiency, transparency and predictability of that
mechanism.

Secondly, Israel must take further steps to ease
restrictions on access and movement on development,
trade and exports in the West Bank and Gaza.
Restrictions, in particular those in Area C, including
East Jerusalem, reduce the space in which the
Palestinians can sustain their livelihoods. According to
the United Nations, today 43 per cent of the West Bank
is essentially off-limits for Palestinian use. Palestinians
must be able to utilize their natural, productive and
land resources in Area C, which are crucial for a viable
Palestinian economy.

Thirdly, donors must continue to provide
assistance for covering Palestinian recurrent costs for a
transitional period in the time ahead. Without such
assistance it will be difficult to ensure the long-term
viability of the Palestinian Authority and the readiness
of the Palestinian institutions for statehood.

Finally, on Gaza, resolution 1860 (2009) calls
upon Member States to support international efforts to
alleviate the humanitarian and economic situation in
Gaza. The resolution also condemns all violence and
hostilities directed against civilians and all acts of
terrorism. While important progress has been made
with regard to the import of goods and the
implementation of infrastructure projects, those
improvements are not sufficient to provide the
economic growth that would realize the full economic
and social potential for the population in Gaza. At their
next meeting, donors must take further steps to find a
solution within the framework of resolution 1860
(2009) that lifts the closure and ensures movement and
access through the legitimate crossing points, while
also taking security challenges into account.

