The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Rwanda and Serbia and Montenegro in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Loncar
(Serbia and Montenegro), Mr. Kusljugic (Bosnia and Herzegovina), Mr. Nimac (Croatia) and
Mr. Ngoga (Rwanda) took the seats reserved for
them at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Council, I warmly welcome Mr. Zoran Loncar,
Minister of Public Administration and Local Self-
Government of the Republic of Serbia, on behalf of
Serbia and Montenegro.

I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.

It is so decided.

I invite Judge Meron to take a seat at the Council
table.

I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Judge Erik Mose, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.

It is so decided.

I invite Judge Mose to take a seat at the Council
table.

I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Ms. Carla Del Ponte, Prosecutor
of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.

It is so decided.

I invite Prosecutor Del Ponte to take a seat at the
Council table.

I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994.

It is so decided.

I invite Prosecutor Jallow to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 25 May 2005 from the President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
document S/2005/343 and corrigendum 1.

Members of the Council also have before them a
letter dated 23 May 2005 from the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda addressed
to the President of the Security Council, document
S/2005/336.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the President and the Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, as
well as by the President and the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

Following those briefings, I shall give the floor to
Council members wishing to make comments or ask
questions.

As there is no list of speakers for the members of
the Council, I should like to invite those who intend to
speak to so indicate to the Secretariat.

I give the floor to Judge Theodor Meron,
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.


